5496
No. 363.
Wellcome Historical Medical Library
Accession Number
7584
Press Mark





4.7.2584





Aqua de mosqueta Muske-Rose water echarlas: Put them
en remaio. in soake
Aqua almisdada Musk water Molidua. {beaten or
{pounded
Ambar Ambargris majar. stamp
Almiscla Muske cebando. feeding
Algalia civet Blanda. pliant
benjuin Beniamin Masa. In Paste
estoraque storax Resquibrais. breake
?bando strewing Tengatar. hold stiff
Aqua de açatar Orenge flower water quedare. Remain
açucar sugar despues. after
linalou  lignum aloes Maxado. stamped
?iaras de çiera citron pills Tambien. likewise
?lquitira gome adragant Açucar. sucre
Aqua de murta Mirtle water Huelin. smell.
Aqua de Angeles coçinas. boiler
tres vezes. three times
?edoma A Phiole glasse
plena. full
Hinchirla fill iy vp
Tapenla Stop it
Pergamirro Parchment
Ponçon Bodkin
Agugeros holes with a bodkin
Tapador A stoppbte
lumbre   tr? fire coales
ceniça Ashes
?rgo a whole in ashes to season
a vessell
abaxo below
?nello neck of a Phiolle
cesta Basket
lana wool
estopas locks of Hemp or flax
?ededor about a thing
cuchillo a Knife
?sendilla a porrenger
quebrar breake
adreçar to dress
guantes gloves
Aceyte Oyle
tesatada dissolued
?itauen





2
wye





3
A number of blank pages follow and have
not been photographed.





7





8
3 Manuscript Receipts. "Mrs. Hughes, her Receipts of
her whole Booke, written in the yeare 1637, containeinge,
Medica, Chyrurgica, Condita, Culinaria," &c. in 1 vol.
half calf SAEC. XVII

LIBRO
de Recetas de Portugal
para hacer

Peutes y Pastillas
y
adreçar

Guantes perfumados





Receta para hacer Penetes

Tomar palos de salçe limpios y quimallos en una
chimenea limpia, y como se hiçiere brassa, matalla,
en vna vaveña bedriada que tenga aqua Rosada, y de
flor de naranja, y de murta, y poner lo an asecar,
donde no le de el sol; y despues de seco, molerlo an y
paseallo por un cedazo sutil, y para haçerlos penetes,
tomar an dos honças de alquitira muy blanca, y puesta
en vna olla nueba, con mucha aqua Rosada; tomaran
veinte onças deste carbon molido, y una libra de menguy,
y media de estoraque en poluo, y una conca de Ambar
con otra de Almisque, todo hecho en poluo, y amasarlo
an todo con alquitira, muy bien amaseado, y haran
los Penetes muy bien amassados del tamano que 6
quisieren, y puestos en una tabla limpia cubierta con
vna toalla dexarlo an secar en casea, y despues de muy
gvardarlos an, y quanto mais aneios, son menores, y
si quisieren que no Ardan tanto echaran no mas de
dies y seys honças de carbon, y vna de Algabia

Otra manera de haçer
Peuetes

Tomar dos libros de menjuy, y vna de estoraque
muy bien molido, y paseado por vn çedazo sutil,
y una onça de Ambar, y otra de algabia, y media
de Almiscle, y libra y media de carbon de salçe quimado
y molido de la manera que en la otra receta diçe, y
passado por el çedazo un chiran esta carbon y
meniuy, y estoraque, en vna Varena Vidriada, y 2
echaran alquitira asta quatro onças, loquat estara
en vemoio en agua rosada, y de murta, en vna
olla vidriada grande y al cauo di cineo o seys dias
que estubiere en remoxo cota lo an por vn panno o
çedaço algo ralo iuntar to an col aquillos polvos

La cantida





































































































































































































Pye crust, take it out by Parcels & make thereof (vpon
a sheete of ^cleane paper with a  little sugar sprinkeled thereon for
clinging)  a little coule & cut it into little peeces, of which
(between your fingers) you are to make the Pastillas;
which being made, must be layd on a sheet of clean paper
(note that as one is making the the Pastillas, another be 6
pounding & turning the paste; & if it shall at any tyme
happen grow somwhat hard, you may put therein a few
drops of sweet water) & soe put them where they may
drye & grow hard which willbe in 2 or 3 dayes.

Pomos de Olor para la
Lumbre of Iohn Moreno

Put the Pomo ouer the Fire, putting therein a good
quantity of sweet water; of ambar is the best but a any will
serue; when it is warme put therein soe much Beniamin
(which they call heer Menjuy) pounded as will fill the
Pomo somewhat more then halfe full; then take a quarter
of an ounce of storax, & pound it & put it into the Pomo
an ochaua of the best cloues & doe the like,; an ounce of
Poluillo de Mosqueta, half an ounce of ambargrees (black
may serue the turne) a quarter of an ounce of  Ciuet; these 96
are to be pounded euery thing by it selfe; & to be put
into the Pomo as it stands ouer the fire, you may
put therein some slices of the outermost rind of a lemmon ,
& heere they vse to put some slices of the skin of an
aple called the Camueça. You must obserue that the
Pomo must be put ouer a gentle fire; & aboue all that
it be neuer sent to the fire without good store of perfect
sweet water; for if it be put dry to the fire it will burne
& cling to the sides of the Pomo & consume presently,
but with water it will last many yeares.

Note that all all these ingredients must haue
their consideration according to the bignes of the Pomo
This is made with 12 ounces of Beniamin, according to
which proportion, you may gouern your selfs.

Note that the  ambar & ciuet must be put in 8
when the Beniamin is melted in the water, but the
water must be poured out, & the ambar & ciuet put
into the Beniamin, & there be suffred to incorporate
gently. Last of all must be put in the lemmon Pill;
& then returne the same water.

To make Pastillas





97 42
To make Pastillas de fuego of
Iohn Moreno's fashion

Because Benjamin is the substance thereof you must note that
it must be prepared, which is in the manner following: Take
Benjamin, & pound it small & sift it; then put it into an
earthen vessell, that is well glased within, & put thereto
so much Rose water, as shall plentifully couer it; & with
that proportion of water, you must allwayes keepe itt.
Then put it into ?? ??  the sunne in the heat of the yeare;
& there let it be as long as you can; for the more sunne it
hath the better; but 15 dayes is the least (according to the
heat of Spaine) This is the best manner of preparing and
therefore it is good to prepare in the sumer for all the yeare,
8 But in a necessity, they vse to put the Benjamin, as abouesaid,
into a Kettle; & with some Rose water let it dissolue
& then let it repose. Being thus prepared when you will
make your Pastilles; Take a pound thereof (or more if you
list but euer by weight) & put in a Kettle with some rose=
water & lett it soften, vntill it ^may be wrought  with the finger;
& then take out the water, & power therein a quarter of
an ounce of ambar, & 2 adarmes of ciuet (the adarme is
the 16th part of an ounce) which might be done in this
manner: Take a brass mortar & put it ouer the coales,
vntill it be soe warme as it will melt the ambar, which
being done (stirring it with the Pestle) you may put thereto
your ciuet; and all being melted together put it to the
paste of Benjamin (the water being out) and with
98 your Pestle worke it alltogether. Then returne to put
thereto the water you tooke from thence; & let it
stand ouer the fire, to keepe it in such a temper, as it
may be wrought into Pastillas, & noe otherwise. The
proportions heerein mentioned make soe good, as any
King need vse; yet you may adde thereto as you please.
& soe may you take from it./





A Aquas A 43

Recetas para hacer aguas de misturas fol.4
Para hacer aguas rossadas fol.36
Para hacer agua Almisilada fol. 36
Agua que huerte muy bien fol.37
Agua de Treuol muy olorossa fol.37
Agua Almiselada fol. 37
Otra agua Almisilada fol. 37
Agua que ensenna Donna Ysabella Centellas fol.38
Agua muy marauillosa fol.41
Agua de Angeles fol 41 vide infra
Agua de Clauos fol.41
Agua almisilada de fuego fol.51
Agua almisilada del sol se hace ni mas ni menos fol. 52
Agua almisilada fol 61
Otra manera de agua almiselada fol 61
Agua de Angeles fol.62
Receta del agua para postetas para} fol. 70
para haçen Pater=Nostres}
Agua para quitar manchas y pani del nostro fol.86
Otra agua marauillosa para el mismo efecto fol.87
Agua para lauar los dientes fol. 91
Otra agua para los dientes fol.93

Aceytes

Para hacer Aceyte de ambar fol 39
Para hacer Aceyte de ambar fol 67
Alcorças y manera para haçer las aliorcas fol.72
Almohadillas y Reçeta para haçer las} fol.9
Almohadillas de rossas}
Algabia muy marauillosa fol 33
Como se a de curar el gato de algalia. fol 21

C Caçoletas C

Receta para Caçolitas fol.4
Receta para Caçolitas muy burnas fol. 24
Otra memoria de Caçoltas fol. 25
Otra memoria de Caçolitas fol. 25
Sequese toda manera de Perfumes Caçolitas} fol.28
y Penetes, y Perfumis de Menjũy, de}
Doña Giomar de Mello}
Para hacer























47





48
Mrs Hughes her receipts of her whole
Booke written in the yeare 1637.
Containeinge

Medica
Chyrurgica
Condita
Culinaria





49
A Table
1. Aqua mirabilis
2. water Imperiall
3. A Restorative of Rosa Solis
4. Docter Stephens water
5. A water for the Eyes onely
6. A water for the Plague
7. A parfect way of distilling
of all sorts of waters simple
or Compounded
8. To distill all sorts of herbs
9. Cinamon water
10. Balme water
11. To make all sorts of waters
12. Carduus benedictus water
13. Besoar water
14. A water for the yellow Jaundis
or the stone.
15. A water for recouering of
the consumption
16. A soueraigne water for all
cures
17. A water for the stone in
the Kidneys
18. A water for wasting of
the Kidneys
19. An other for the same
20. A water for fainting
21. A water for wasting of the
Kidneys
22. A water for a bruse or a veine
broken in the bellie
23. An Excellent water to kill
any strong canker or wormes
24. A Syrop for opening of e lungs
25. A Syrop for the shortnes of
the breath
26. A Syrop of violets blewe
27. A Syrop of Centory
28. A Syrop of Elicampane
29. For the spleene
30. A Powder for the Cough of the
lungs
31. For the Cough of the lungs
32. For a Consumption
33. Docter Burges his medicin
for the Plague
34. A fume for the head
35. A medicine for the Ague
36. A Drinke for an Exstreame
hot ague
37. For a Joint ague
38. For the bloody flux
39. For the laske or bloody flux
40. For the laske
41. For staying of a loosenes
42. To stay vomiting or loosenes
43. A Remedy for the Colick & stone
44. Against the stone in the kidneys
45. Against the wind Collick
46. For the stone
47. For the stone & winde Colick
48. A drinke for the winde in the
stomake and spleen
49. To Purge Malancholy
50. An other for the same
51. Against malancholy
52. A Purgation broth for
malancholy fleame
53. For the shingles
54. For a burning
55. For a kind of burning with
gunpouder
56. An other for the burning
57. For a scalding
58. Against the Pleuresie
59. To breake the fleames and
comfort the stomack
60. A Drinke for those that fetch
theire breath like sighs






61. A note of the scuruy grasse
drinke
62. A medicine for the scuruy
63. A Bath for the same disease
64. A Drinke for the kings euill
65. For the obstruction of the liuer
66. A Receipt for lack of natuer
and how to restore it againe
67. For the Piles
68. For the biting of a mad dogg
69. For a wett Tetter
70. An other for a wett Tetter
71. A medicin for a Tetter
72. For the Rickets
73. To heale Children of the
Lunatick disease
74. An oyntment for the Rickets
75. A Plaister for the same
76. For a Pearle in the eye
77. For the hearing
78. For great bellies in man or
woman
79. A Glyster for the winde and
stone collick
80. A Purgatiue broth for
melancholy flegmes
81. For a bruise
82. For the falling of the
fundament
83. For the hearing
84. A leare cloth for running
sores
85. To make the yellow oyntment
for all kinde of diseases
86. An oyntment for an Ache
87. An oyntment for an Ache
in the Knees
88. An oyntment for a sore breast
89. An oyntement to make one sleepe
90. A Green oyle
91. To make oyle of Annisseeds
92. To make black salue
93. To make a Poultes for all
sweelings
94. To make a Poultes for a
whit or red taking
95. A leare cloth for the
healing a running sore
96. To make black salue to
heale all sores
97. To make a balsom to cure
all cuts
98. To write upon a plait of
Iron
99. Doctor Colatons scuruy
grasse drinke
100. For a Consumption Caugh .





50





51
Aqua Mirabilis
(1) Take Galingall, Cloves, quibibs, ginger, melitot, cardamome,
mace, nutmeggs, of each a dram, and if the Iuice of
Caelandine halfe a pinte, the Iuice of mints and balme
together halfe a pinte, and mingle all the said spices,
being beaten in powder, with the Iuice, and with a pinte
of good Aquauite, and 3 pintes of good white wine, and
put all these together into a pott and let it stand soe
all night, being close stopt, and on the morrow still it
with as soft a fire as can be, the still being close pasted
this water is of a secret nature, it dissolued the swelling
of the lunges without any grieuance, and the lunges being
wounded and perished it mightily helpeth and cherisheth
them, and suffereth not the bloode to putrifie, he shall
neuer need to be lett blood that vseth this water it suffereth
not the heart to be brent nor yet melencholy or fleagme
to be lifted vp or to haue dominion aboue Natuer : it allso
expelleth the Rheume and profiteth the stomack and
preserueth ^ youth in its one state it ingendireth a good culler keep keepeth & preserueth, the visage and memory, of all the waters
artificiall it is the best, and in the summer vse once a
weeke fasting the quantity of one spoone full, & in the
winter two a weeke;

2 To make the water
Imperiall
Take scabious, pimpernell, Betonie, of each foure handsfull,
Dragons burnets with the knobbs, foure handsfull, tormentill
with rootes also . 4 . handsfull, ditander . 3. handsfull, lay all
these vpon a board . 3 dayes then shred them together small
then steepe them in a gallon of white wine and soe let it
stand . 24 . houres close stopt, then distill it in a cold still,
then take the water and put to it two ounces of mythridate,
or good Treacle of venice, three penny worth of Turmerick, one
pound of suggar, fouer sticks of licorish, one handfull of
anisseed halfe a peck of Borrage or Bugclosse flowers and
soe distill it againe





3A Restoratiue made of
Rosasolis, to be gathered
in June and July
I warne you in any wise when you gather this flowers of
Rosasolis, that you touch not the herbe it selfe, for then
the vertue of it is gone, you must pluck it vp by the -
stalkes out of the ground, and lay it in a basket, Take
as much Rosasolis as will fill a pottle pott, and wash it
not in any wise, take a pottle of good Aquauite, and put
them both out into a vessell and let it stand hard stopt
for three dayes and three nights, and the fourthe daye
straine it through a cleane linnen cloth, into a glasse
or peuter pott, and put thereto a pound of suggar beaten
small, halfe a pound of licorish beaten into fine powder,
halfe a pounde of Dates and take out the states, and cutt
them in small peeces, mingle all these together and stop
the glasse or pott very close that noe ayre come to it, and
drinke of that to beadward halfe a spoone full of ale and
soe in the morning fasting

4To make Doctor Stephens
water
Take a gallon of Claret wine, a handfull of Rosemary,
a handfull of lauender, a handfull of Camamile, a -
handfull of Red Sage, a handfull of pellitory of the wall,
of wilde time, of garden time, of mints, of each a handfull,
two handfulls of red rose leaves, anisseeds, carraway
seeds, fennell seeds, ginger cloues, cinamon, nutmeggs,
galingall roots, graines, of each bruise all
the spice and seeds, seuerally, also bruise the herbes, and
steepe them alltogether in the claret wine, 24. houres -
and distill them with a sofft fier in a limbeck, keepe
the first pinte by it selfe, a little more will serue
to drinke the rest for washing water.

5To make an Excellent
water for the eyes onely
Take of Eye bright, of three leaued grasse with the specks
in it, of daysie leaves and rootes, of ground Iuice, of broun
fennell, of hearbe grasse, of wormwood of salendine





52
Crootsroots and all, of pimpernell, of each of these one
handfull, take all these and put them into an -
ordinary still, and with them a good handfull of
redrose leaves and an other of white, and after -
the water is distiled take a little of the purest
white Coper rose, and a little white sugger candy
put them in the water, and Let it stand in the sunne
for a time to clarifie, these herebs also if they be
put into a pott & put theseto a potte of water, and
stand macerating ouer warme embers . 2 . or 3 . nights
and stand and then let them steepe tenne or twelve
dayes, and then take the hearbes away from the water,
and put them c..iris to it and suggar candy, it is uery
good that way, but better stilled, .

6 A rare and Excellent water to
preserue one from the Plague in
time of infection, and if he be
infected to expell and driue the
same from the principall parts of
the heart and the head without
any danger, practised in London
by a ffrench man to his great gaine
and many a mans safety, haueing
had it taught me by one that was
his man
Take of the hearbe dragon, of Adders tongue of Agrimony
of scabious, of salendine, of pimpernell, or sage of Rosema ^ ry
of Rew, of wormwood of muggworth of baulme of each
a pound, lay them steeping in as much white wine as
will couer them, a day and a night, then still them
and drinke the distilled water first in the morning
and also afterwards in the day time as you shall thinke
good





7The right and perfect way
of distilling all sorts of waters
simple or compounded, with
their oyles and how to separate
the one from the other

Take of your best anisseed  . 2 pound being somewhat
bruised then adde thereunto of the best whit wine . 2 .
quarts, of muske in a peece of sarcenett to the value
of . 4 . grains, to be distilled with this water putting
all into the vessell, pasting the limbeck very close,
then paste your receiuer that no steeme or fume come
forth then with a soft and carefull fier, and in the
name of God still it, and from this potte you shall
haue a quart with an ounce of your oyle of anisseed
which will be when your water is forth within an houre,
separate the one from the other for it will congeale
to the liknesse of a peece of snow, this is most precious
to expell winde, and the water for e winde collick .

8To distill all sorts of hearbes
& to draw their oyle withall
Take fennell and cut it somewhat smale to the value
of halfe a peck and sett it in the vessell, then adde -
thereto of running water the purest you can gett
and fill the vessel therewith then lett ouer your
limbeck with past theron next your receiuer, that
no fume come forth thereat then with a souft fire
distill it, and there will come both water, & oyle, then
to separate the oyle from the water with a siluer
spoone take it from the top and reserue it for a precious
medicine against the menstru or termes, the water
will haue the smell taste and tincture of the fennell
and it is very good against sore eyes and to coole
feauers





53
9To make Cinamon water after the best manner

Take a gallon and a halfe of the best sack you can
gett or els the best and strongest madera wine and
a pinte of redrose water or halfe a pinte of damaske
rose water, put a pound of Cinamon broken into your
wine, into a pott very clos stopped, let it steepe soe .2.
nights and a day, then distill forth into your lymbeck
beeing close stopped, with a very souft fire, and keepe
the very first comming of it by it selfe, & soe let the
second and third, and this is the perfect making
of Cinamon water.

10To make Baulme water

Take 4 Gallons of the strongest Ale you can make,
5- or 6- handsfull of baulme anisseed three quarters
of a pound well bruised of licorish halfe a pound well
scraped and bruised, of ginger a quarter of a pound
and grossely Beaten, of fennell seed a quarter of a
pound grossely beaten of Alysanders grossely beaten
one ounce of Carrawaye seeds grossly beaten - 2. ounces
steepe all these together in the Ale in a vessel close
stopped 2. nights and 2 dayes then distill it, your
lymbeck being very close stopped with a souft fier
at the first & towards the latter ending the fire
somewhat quicker keepe each drawning by it selfe
11 Memorandum that after the order above said, you may make
all sorts of water as of Angelica spearemint wormewood,
or any other hearbes adding thereunto raisons of the
sunne stoned and figgs finely sliced if you please,
also if you will make Aquavite adde those hearbes to the
seeds and liquors above written wormewood, southern
wood spearmint, time, baulme, pennyriall, hysop, rosemary
tops and blossoms of each a good handfull, cut or
bruised.







12Cardus Benedictus water, vsually
called the holy Thistle
The proprotion afore named of seeds and ale, and a
pound of Cardus and betany together, to euery gallon
of Ale with raisons of the sunne stoned, and ginger -
and figgs sliced, makes an excellent comfortable
water

13To make Bezoar water, which
is called the water of life

Take good greeke wine or sack of the best you can gett
and pleasant, distill it in a lymbeck, or other still
3 times and after in a glasse still twice, which being
done, it will come to the spirit of wine which you must
preserue to your vse in thick glasses, of many gallons
you shall haue but a small quantity, being soe often
drawne, then take damaske rose water a quart, or a
pottle, and put into it great treacle of venice, a pretty
quantity, & still it in a glasse still, and keepe it close
and when you will make the water, take as much rose
water, as of the spirit of wine, put into euery pinte
half a pounde of white sugger candy fine beaten then
take a little quantity of Ambergris, muske Bezer
stone, white saunderes, and let them boyle in the
liquor and soe keepe it and when you will use it strain
it
14A water for the yellow Jaundis
And the stone
Take 12 gallons of as strong ale as you can gett, and a
peck of garden snailes 4 . or . 5 . ounces of harts horne
and as much cloues, you must take your snailes and
roaste them in charcole fire letting them lye till they
hisse or make a noise, then take them out and wipe them
and the shell also very cleane with a linnen cloth, beate
them in a morter, and lay them to steep in your ale
all night, likwise you must take 2 . handsfull of salendine
which you must put in the morning following into
your lymbeck with the harts horne and cloues above named





54
before you put these things into your lymbeck
brake your salendine betweene your hands and
strewe it in the bottom of your pot with half a hand
full of Angelica, and tso power on them all the other
things and still them with a sofft fire keeping the
first water by it selfe, when you put in those things,
you may put in a pint more of Ale, if you thinke good
take the first morning 4 . spoones full of it and . 3 .
of Ale, and the next morning . 3. of it and . 4. of Ale,
and the third . 2 spoones full and 3 . of Ale then take
it noe more till 3 . or 4 mornings be past

15A precious water to recouer
the Consumption
Take an old red cocke and hold the beake or bill
hard in your fingers till he be smothered, then
pull him quickly before he be cold head, and all,
and slit the cocke from the head all along the back
bone, through out, and quarter it and bruise the bones
and put it into a close earthen pot, well stopped
and put into a pot of water, ouer the fier . 3 or . 4 houres
then take it off and straine all the Juice out and
keepe it and put to the Cock a large mace and a
little rosewater, and what you thinke fitt to rellish
the pallate and stoppe the pot close, and stirre it
againe till all the substance be out then take all
the Juice out and put it to the other you had before
seasoning it with comfortable things, and give 4 .
spoones full in the morning, soe in the afternoone
and at night in the last stewing you must put in
white sugger candy and . 3 . little peeces of Cinamon

16A souueraigne water of an Ancient
Doctor of Physick, which he long
used and therewith did many
cures, he kept it very secret to
himselfe till he died, and then
he gaue it in writing to an Arch
bishop of Canterbury

Take a Gallon of good Gascon Claret wine, ginger, cinamon,
nutmeggs, graines, cloues, anisseed, fennell seeds, Carraway
seeds of each a dram, of sage, red mint, roses time





Pellitory, rosemary, wild time, Cammomill, lauender,
of each one handfull, then bray the spices, and bray the
hearbes, and put them into the wine, and let it stand
soe . 12 . houres stirring it often, then still it together
in a lymbeck, keepe the first water by it selfe and
the second by it selfe, for it is good though not soe good as the first

The vertue of this water is to comfort the stomack
and vitall parts it helpeth inward diseases that
come of cold, and the shaking palsey, it cureth the
contraction of sinnewes, helpeth the conception of
woman, it killeth wormes in the belly, cureth the cold
cough, helpeth the tooth Ache, cureth cold dropsies
dissolued stones in the bladder, and ?aimes, helpeth
shortly a stinking breath, and who useth it some times
and not too often, it preserueth in good liking, and
maketh him looke younge very long, comforteth nature
maruellous long, the old Docter herewith preserued
his life till extreame old age would neither suffer
him to goe or stand and after Physitians had giuen
him ouer, he continued fiue yeares, when they thought
he could not live two yeares, and before his death he
confessed, that when he was sicke at any time, he
used nothing but this water, the Archbishop used it
til he was 1010 yeares old, and said at his death
that nothing did him soe much good, as this water in
Sicknesse or otherwise M Rowe Sergeant of the Coife
used it all his time, and at his death left it in
writing wishing all men to use it
If it be sett in the sunne all the sommer it will be
the better

17 A water for the stone in
the Kidneys
Take a good handfull of pellitory of the wall saxifrage
garden parsley and wild time of each one handfull
3 . spoonsfull of fennel seed and three radish rootes
sliced, shred all these together and put them into
a gallon of new milke and let them stand and steepe
in a close pot one whole night then still them





55
This must be done in the latter end of June or
the beginning of July, for then the hearbes are
in theire best taste, you must put . 3 . or . 4 . spoons
full of this into as much white wine, with a little
sliced nutmegg, and soe take it two dayes before
the change of the moone, and 2 dayes after &
two dayes before and after the full, continuing
to take it soe all the yeare, and patient shall
undoubtedly finde great ease, voiding many
stones and much grauell without any paines at all,

18A water for wasting or Consumption
of the Kidneys

Take a gallon of new milke, and still it in a cold
still, but draw but one pinte of water out of it,
drinke of this in the morning, in the afternoone
and all night, and it will cure you,

19An other for the same

20A water for fainting

Take and still Isop, mints and rosemary a like
quantity of each, keepe the water thereof for that
use to drinke when need it

21A water for wasting of the
stone in the Kidneys

Take pennyriall and boile it in whit wine & drink
it, it prouoketh urine and also breaketh the stone,





22A water for a bruise or a vaine
broken in the bellie

potione 5Take sunacle, selfe heale, yarrow, comfrey, wrootes and hysop,
saniele of all a like quantitie, and soe still it in an ordinary
still, and giue it the patient to drinke .4. or .5. spoones
full all a time, with as much burnt claret wine
or posset drinke.

23An Excellent moauth water to kill
any strong Canker or worme

Take Costmary, rosemary, sauin, hearbgrace, redd sage
wormwood, Camomill, mallowes, muggworth, mercury
salendine, of each a good handfull, but most of womwood
a gallon or better of faire running water, boyle it ouer
a sofft fire, till the leaves be tender, and the liquor
become to the quantity of a quart, then put in a peece
of Allom as bigg as a pullets egg, & 3 good spoonesfull
of English honey, boyle this a whalme or two till the
Allome be melted and the honey incorporated into the
water, then put up your water and hearbes to your use

24An Excellent Syrop for the opening
of the Lunges and stopping of the
stomack and cleansing of the blood
and to cure consumption

Take a handfull of wormwood, one handfull of hearbegreace
a little time, halfe a handfull of organ, and soe of
marierom, one handfull of liuerworth, a little mugworth
a handfull of hysop, one handfull of Agrymonie, 3. or . 4 .
roots of parsely and soe of fennell rootes the pith taken
out of the midle of the roots, & a handfull of coltsfoot,
a pretty quantity of Elicampane roots them sliced, a
little sweet fennell seeds and asmuch aniseede, carraway
seeds and Coriander seed . one handfull of maidenhaire
as much of sydrake 8 . or . 9 . dates and as many figgs
2 handsfull of the best blew raisins of the sunne and
a pretty quantity of English licorish, a race or two of
ginger, cut in slices, take all these and put them into
a close earthen pott, put to them . 3. pintes or a pottle of
the strongest and stalest beere you can get, stop the
pott close and paste it round that no ayre come to it
put it into the ouen with your batch and let it stewe
there all the while your bread is in the ouen, and when you draw
your






56
your pot must stand to soake your hearbes Iuice into the licor,
then take the pot out of the ouen and straine it through
a cloth into a skillet very cleane all the Iuice of the hearbes
then put it ouer the fier, and put to it a pound of suger
candy and neare . 2 . pound of the best English honey &
soe boyle it to a syrop, scum it and then keepe it in a
close glasse, and lett the pary troubled take a spoone
full at night, and a nother in the morning when they
awake, or at any other time, when your syrop is boyled
enough put in as much saffron as will lye uppon a
3pence, very finely dried and bruised to a fine powder
soe giue it a whalme

25A Syrop for the shortnes of

Take . 3 . or . 4 . young fennell roots . 2 . roots of succory
4 roots of                 make them clean and pick out
the pith of them and cut them an inch long, then
put them into a quart of faire runing water, and
set them ouer the fier, and put thereto .4. crops of
hore hound . 4 . or . 5 crops of                   a quantitie of
the flowers of Isop or if there be noe flowers take
the leaves, also a quantity of penniriall, well washed
let them boyle till you see the colour of the hearbes
but let the rootes boile till you thinke the licor be
halfe boyled away and more, then take it of from
the fier straine the licor from the roots, and make
your vessel cleane, and put it on the fier againe,
then put to it six ounces of suger candy and a stick
of Cinnamon soe long as your finger breaking
it in peeces and soe let it seeth till it come to
a Syrop, and take thereof morning and euening

26To make syrop of violetts blue

Take of garden violets . 6 . ounces, more or lesse beat
them in a stone morter and take the Iuice thereof, put
it into a gelly pot of a pound sett the pott in a skillet of
water, that the Iuice may boile, and when it begins to growe
thick, put in 8 ounces of suger soe boyle it quick to a syrop
this syrop is good for the tissick to open the pipes





27To make a syrop of Centory, to
Expell Poyson from the heart
cleanse the blood, and is good for
diuers infirmities as the wormes &c

Take Centory when it is in the prime of greenesse, and distill
it in an ordinary still, take a gallon or . 3 quarts of water,
and keepe it till you gather the other Centory in its due
time, which will be in haruest betweene the two Lady dayes
soe if you distill the water, you may make the syrop at any
time of the winter.
Take a good quantity of Centory, Cut it very small, stalkes seeds
and all, keepe this Centory tenn dayes in the distilled water
and then boile it very well in a cleane skillet, then take it
of and straine it through a cleane cloath into an other
cleane skillet, then put in . 2 . or 3 . fennel mores and soe of
parseley mores and smallage mores, boile the mores and cast
away the pith of them then put into the same liquor a quart
of the purest English honey, one pound of the whitest sugar
Candy, and a pound of the best loafe suger, bile it gentle ouer
a sofft fire, skimming it as you see occasion and when it is
allmost come to a syrop, make a quick fire under it and
boill it vp to a syrop and put it vp in glasses, and
when you haue occasion to use it, take euery morning
a spoonefull in what stilled water you thinke fittest
for . 5 . mornings together, fasting one houre after, if
you can get no water of Centory, which is the purer
way, then take faire runing water, and steepe a
greater quantity of centory in the same quantity
of water . 10 . or 14 dayes, and when you haue halfe
boiled it take out your centory and bouilebruseit very
well, and put it into the liquor againe, that all the
Iuice of the Centory may boile out of it soe make
your syrop as aboue written.

28To make the syrop of Elicumpane
which is good for all the Inward
parts of the body, and against
extreame colds and to breake the
fleagmes for the stopping of
the stomake and against the
Consumption

Take a handfull of Celerach, one of hore hound soe of
maidenhaire soe of liuerworth, Coltsfoot half a handfull
a good handfull of pimpernell, 2. or .3. spriggs of wormwood
soe of hearbegrace half a handfull of marierom, soe of
time, Isop comomill flowers, burrage leaues and flowers
rosemary topps and flowers one handfull, soe of betony
one or two fennell roots, soe of perseley rootes, but cast
castaway





57
away the pith of them, and slice the rootes, take Elicampane
rootes, thinly sliced, a little handfull of aniseeds bruised
2 ounces, and 2 . ounces of licorish thinly sliced, 3 or 4 races
of giners, allmost a pound of raisins of the sunne halfe
a pound of figgs, soe of dates, slice them thinne, steepe
all these in . 3 quarts or a gallon of the strongest and
sweetest worte, stirre them all^well together, soe stopp the
earthen pot and let it steepe a night or two, then stope
your pot close and paste it round about that noe ayre come
to it nor out of it, and put your pot into the ouen when you
bake, and when you draw the bread leaue your pot in the ouen
all night, that the Iuice of the herbe may be well soaked
into the liquor, then straine it through a cleane cloath
into a cleane skillet then boile it .. sofftly ouer a soft
fire untill it be som what consumed, then put in a quart
of the best and purest honey, and a pound of best and
whitest suger candy, a pound of the best loafe suger, scume
it as you see occasion and gently boile it, till it be allmost
come to a full syrop, the put in as much saffron dried
and finely bruised as much as will lye uppon a threepence
then boile it ^one walme and put it upp in glasses, and use it when
you thinke fitt as you neede, a spoonefull at night and
a nother at morning, when you would haue it to cut
fleagmes, put a spoonefull of vineger to . 3 of this

29For the spleene

Take oyle of capers and half as much of oyle of vineger
of squille, melt them together and annoint the vaine of
the spleene warme, and dip clothes therein and crouch
it out gently and lay it to the spleene and continue
it all day. Also take the leaves of tamariske and bruse
not aboue one on two stalkes in ale or beare and
drinke thereof euery morning and euening strained

30An Excellent powder for the cough
of the lunges & Consumption

Take an ounce of foxe lunges, one ounce of Elicompane
first washed in whit wine, cut in round slices, then
put uppon a threed and dried then beaten to powder
a quantity of licorish and soe of anisseeds, as much
of ginger as of fox lunges and soe of suger candy beate
all these to a fine powder, mingel them together & at night
and at morning, take as much as will lye uppon a six pence
at any time when you feele your selfe troubled





31ffor the Cough of the Lungs
Take a gallon of faire running water, a handfull of
figgs, as much Coltsfoot, the like of maidenhaire a
handful of succory, as much of Endive, the like
quantity of perseley roots and 8 dates, boile all these
together till it come to 3 pintes, then straine the water
from them and boile a pound of suger with the said
water and put to it . 3 . or . 4 spoonsfull of vineger and
soe use it

32ffor a Consumption or burning
feauer

Take 40. or 50. house snailes, and pick them out of the
shell, scower them with water first, then once or twice
with white wine, drie them in a cleane cloth, and put
them into a pottle of milke of a cowe of one colour
and put it into a flagon or earthen pot & soe boile
it in a kettle of water on the fier, till it comes to
three pintes, or lesse, drinke of this morning and euening,
with a quantity of conserue of red roses, and as much
flowers of brimstone as will lye uppon a three pence, in
each draught if it be a feauer allone leaue out the
flowere of Brimstone

33Docter Burges his medicine
for the plague
Take .3 pintes of malmsey and boile therin one handfull
of sage, as much hRue, till a pinte be wasted, then straine it
and set it on the fire againe and put thereto a pennyworth
of long pepper, halfe an ounce of ginger, a quarter of an
ounce of nutmeggs, all beaten together, then let it boyle a
little and put thereto an ounce of mythridate, halfe an ounce
of Treacle, a quarter of a pinte of good Aquauitae, or hot
Angelica water, which is better, keepe this as your life aboue
all wordly treasure take it alwayes warme both morning and
euining a spoonefull or two if you be allreadie diseased sweat
thereupon, if not once a day a spoonefull is sufficient, in all
the plauge time, under God trust to this for certaine, for
there was neuer man, woman, nor childe, that this deceiued
if the hart be not quiet mortified & drowned with this
disease before, this is not onely good for the common
plague which is called the sicknes, but also for the small
pox measles, surfets, Agues and diuers other kindes of
diseases





58
34A fume for the head

Take Rosemary, sage and wormewood of each a good handfull
boile them in a pottle of redeowes milke till it come to a quart
then put in a handfull of Cummin seeds, bruised and stirre
it about, put it into a narrow mouthed pot, and hold the mouth
of the pot close to your Eare, an hower at night when you goe
to bead, use it 6 . or 7 nights together, the same liquor will serue

35An approued Medicine for
an Ague

Take a spoonefull of Baysalt, 2 spoonesfull of Sooth, one hand
full of wallflower leaues, beate the salt uery small so like
wise your leaves, then temper all these together with the
yolke of an egge, till it be like a salue, then lay it to the
patients wrest onely within the inside where the veines
lye, this must be applied euery night to his wrest while
the Ague lasteth

36For an Extreame hott Ague,
take this Drinke

Take the Juice of 6 . orenges and a little milke and make
a posset of the Juice, straine it & put in some fine sugar
soe much as the patient may drinke it, if the ague take
him in the morning this must be taken ouer night, the
last thing when he goeth to bed, if it takes him towards
the afternoone it must be drunke the first thing in the
morning, it is uery good

37A Medicine for the Joint Ague

Take . 2 . quarts of strong Ale, and 2 . good handsfull of
Ribworth boile these together untill it be boiled halfe then
straine it from the hearbes, and put to the liquor one good
spoonesfull of Bolearmonack finely beaten into powder and
4 spoonsfull of treacle of Jane or mythridatum, mingle
well all thes together, and halfe an hower before the fit
commeth take . 9 spoonsfull of the drinke being warmed &
within a quarter of an houre take 7 spoonsfull more and
at the end of the house after this drinke third part of the
houre . 5 spoonsfull, and at the end of the houre 3 spoonesfull
sweate an houre after this drinke taken, and then take some
warme broath, but beware of cold drinke, and soe in like manner
as before use the medicine untill it be all done, & take heaed
of cold all the time of drinking this medicine





38An approued medicine for the
bloudy flux

Take a pinte of red wheate and dust it uery well, and beate it
in a morter, and dust it no more, let it be but Grentelled, &
soe boyle it in new milke, as you doe use to doe in water, you
must allow a gallon or . 5 quarts of milke to a poundpint of
wheate or there abouts, and boyle it till it ...... to the thicknes
of a ferment, and when it is well boiled, put therein one
good sponefull of powder of pome granat pill or shell
and as much of Cinamon, stirre it well together and
eate it as your stomack will serue you and this I hope
shall helpe you

39A uery good Medicine for the
Laske or Bloudy flux

Take Red wine in one pott, and new milke in an other, then
take two stiff strawes, and put one in the said milke, &
the other in the wine, cut them of an euen length, and
put the other end of them in your mouth, suck of the wine
and milke in this manner soe often as you shall thinke
good, untill you finde to Begin to staye, and then drink
not soe often as before for feare of staying it too soudenly

40 For the Lask

Take a pinte of malmesey, halfe a pinte of red rose
water, and a quarter of a pint of Cardus water, a
nutmegg cut in quarters and a large mace, boyle
all these together, and when they are well beaten
mingle them with the foresaid stuffe, and make
thereof a Cawdle & when it is taken off the fire, sweeten
it with as much suger as will please the tast &
drinke thereof a good draught morning & euening

41For the staying of the
Loosenesse
Take the shell of an Acorne dried and Cinamon &
pome granat pill of each a little quantity beat all
these together uery small and take of that powder
a spoonfull a put it into a draught of redwine
and drinke it





59
42To stay a uomiting or Loosenes

Take a pinte of Malmsey, halfe a pinte of redrose water
a quarter of a pinte of Cardus water a nutmegg, a
large mace boile all these together ouer a soft fire
then beate 2 eggs uery well with the white and all
and dresse it as you doe an other Cawdle, and giue
it the party grieued, a quarter of a pinte at a time
cold or hot as the patient like it,

.3A Remedy for the Collick and
Stone

Take one handfull of Hawes and pound them to powder
and 4 bay berries a quart of whit wine boile all these
together till the third part be boiled away then
straine it and sweeten it with suger

44For the stone and winde
Collick

Take fennel seed, spikenard, anisseed, mace, nettle seed,
saffron, ginger, licorish of each of . 6 . weight, halfe
an ounce of seene, mingle all these together and make
a powder therof finely beaten and then serce it
when you use it take a spoonefull thereof, and put it
into a bowle full of broth or posset Ale

45Against the stone in the kidneys

Take pennyriall and boile it in white wine and
drinke it, it prouoketh urine and also breaketh the
stone

46Against the wind though it
be uery great

Take one ounce of Cinamon water, one ounce of
aniseed water, one of minte water and drinke this
a little at night, and in the morning or att any
time when the winde troubles you






47For the stone a uery good
receipt

The flowers of Elder, the shells of Eggs that haue hatcht
chickens, newly after the henne hath hatched them, and
drie them soe you must the Elder flowers, then beate
them seuerally, and take halfe an ounce of the Elder
powder ^ . a quarter of an ounce of the pouder of the Eggshells, and of powder of pearles as much
as of the Eggshells mingele these together, and keepe
them close in a paper bagge, and soe giue of that as
much in quantity as will lye uppon a six pence
at a time in white wine, with sugger and nutmegg,
or in broth or posset, morning and euening for
5 . or 7 dayes, when you are most pained, or in the
weane of the moone, and as you finde your selfe
better by the taking of it, use it the oftener

48A Drinke for the winde of the
stomake and spleene

Take a handfull of mother of time, which is the large
time, bruise it a little in wringing it betweene your
hands, steepe it all night in a draught of whit wine
well sweetened with suger in a siluer pott, and couer
it, and put thereto . 5. or 6. slices of ginger, and in the
morning fasting drinke a draught thereof, and
walke after it halfe an houre and more take this
drinke . 4 . or 5 . mornings together, and twice or thrice
a weeke you must take your purgation broth of
polipody

49To purge Malancoly
Take Aloes the purest in powder, diagridion of each
of them the weight of fower pence put it in conserue
of roses thi weight of six pence, take it in the
morning fasting and abstaine from meate . 2. howers,
then take a little warme broth, keeping the Chamver
for that day

50An other for the same

Take Rhubarbe the purest the weight of a shilling
in fine powder with Conserue of roses the weight
of six pence .





60
51A gainst Malancoly

Take wallflowers . 6 . handfull, Rosemary flowers
6 handsfull, and as much of damask rose leaues
of Burrage and buglos flowers . 4 handsfull, of
Baulme leaues . 22 handfull, of Cinamon grossly
beaten . 2 ounces, 4 nutmeggs, 2 ounces of aniseeds
grossely beaten, of English saffron the weight of
six pence of pinke flowers . 6 . handsfull, putt all
these into two gealleons of sack and let it stand
soe . 2 dayes, now and then turning them afterwards
distill them in a faire lymbeck uery clossly pasted
hauing 4 grames of muske in a fine cloth, that the
distilled licor may runne through it into the glasse
that standeth under the nose of the still to receiue
the water you shall put 12 ounces of whit suggar
Candy beaten to powder to it, that it may incorporate
with the said liquor when all is distiled then let
the glasse that conteineth the water in hot water for
an houre that the suggar may be incorporated with it
of this take 3 . times in a weeke fasting . 2 . poones
full at a time also if you finde your selfe heauie
spirited lett your fire be as sofft as may be, else
will the drinke be the lesse.

52The manner how to make your
purgation broth which purgeth
malancoly fleagme, it easeth
the Colick, hepeth the winde
& cureth the spleene

Take polypody of the oake, or the ash which is better
pick it cleane and bruise it, put it in water & oatmeale
as you were wont to doe or if you put to it as much
whit wine as water, and 3 . or 4 good slices of ginger
and a few small raisins, and when your broth is boiled
straine it and put to a draught the ..of 2 or 3 spoons
full of syrop of roses and drinke it fasting, and wth in
halfe an houre after walke to make it worke the better, this
will giue you . 3 or 4 . stooles at a time if your body be easily
moued, this purgation is uery gentle, it may be taken att
all times, when you feare to take Glysters or other strong
purgations which could be dangerous in a weake body, wth out
the aduice of some Physition





53

54For a Burning

Take the rinde of an Elder tree, seeth it halfe a day
in faire water, then let it coole and gather the thick
of the water with a feather and euery day with a
feather oint the sore euening and morning

55For a kinde of Burning with
Gunpowder or other wise

Take the whites of Eggs and beate them till they foame then
scume it off cleane, and put to the whites of Eggs as much
oyle of Roses and beate them together, and oint the burning
therewith, and if it be not on the face, lay woodbine leaues
or bay leaues thereon

56An other for a Burning

Take snow water and the white of Eggss & the Juice of
house leeke, of all a like quantity, and beat them together
till they come to an oyle, and then dresse the sore with
it twice or thrice a day, and it will helpe it, making it
fresh now and then lay this cooling seare cloth following uppon it,
and though it be grieuiously burned yet it will helpe it

57For a scalding

Take fresh Goose dung and frye it with butter, and sheeps
suet, straine it through a fine cloth, and lay it one the
sore, and it will helpe

58Against the Pleuresie

Take the rootes of nettles cleane washed and seeth
them in milke, or for want of that in drinke, then
putt pepper to it, and drinke it hott, and it will helpe
you





61
59To brake the fleagmes and
Comfort the Stomack

Take a quart of stale strong beere, and boile in it a hand
full of organ, of spearemint . 2 . or 3 branches, Isop 5 .
branches, licorish one ounce scraped and sliced . 6 . figgs
cut in peeces, halfe an ounce of anisseeds, raisins of the
sunne . halfe a handfull pickt and stoned, a large mace
boile all these together till it come to a pinte ouer a gentle
fire, then straine it and boile with hony loafe sugger
till it come to a syrop, giue of it 2 . or . 3 spoonsfull
at a time

60An Excellent Drinke to be taken
of those, that fetch their breath
like sighes, with heuines of
the hart

Take . 2 . grains of muske, as much of saffron as will lye
upon . 3 pence, uery well dried and finely bruised, and
suger, these three finely bruised together, then mixe
them well with an ounce of Conserue of Damaske roses
4. or . 5 spoonsfull of Damaske rose water, and as much
Claret wine, and if you haue noe Claret wine, take white
wine, and warme this and drinke it in the morning
fasting, and sleepe an houre upon the left side, & fast
an houre more, and it shall giue  your spirirts a great
reuiuing

61The Note of the Scuruygrasse
drinke

Take sassafrasse thin sliced, fennell rootes, parseley
rootes of each . 2 . or . 3 ounces, of the barke of Tamariske
one ounce and a halfe, of the inner rindes of the Ash of
Elder, of each one ounce of Ashen heyes 2 handsfull all
these ayred, and beaten to a gross powder, with anisseeds
and Grommell seed bruised, of each . 2 . spoonesfull, keepe
these powders to hange in a uessel of Drinke made as
followeth also of nutmeggs an ounce

Take scuruy grasse well picked 6 . handsfull, of Brooke lime
and water Cresses of each . 2 handsfull, of sweete pippins
sliced . 20 in number, boile these hearbes and apples with
a few hoppes in 4 hallons of midling worth, till allmost
halfe be consumed, then worke it up, being strained from
the hearbes with barme, and when it is ripe, tunne it up into your
uessell wherein your bagge is, with a lead or stone to keepe it downe
in





in . 6 . dayes after you may drinke thereof, first in the
morning, and att 4 . in the afternoone and late at night
and that what quantity you please

62A Medicine for the scuruy or for
an Ache in the bones

Take the wood of sassafras cut into thin slices of the
thicknes of 3 pence or a groate, the weight of 6. drammes
or of 3 . shillings . 4 pence, of licorish bruised halfe an
ounce french barly . 2 spoonsfull, agrimony and spoone wort
called garden scuruy grasse or Cochlearia, and of water
Cresses, and water pursline or brookelime, of each halfe
a handfull bruised, of aniseeds a spoonefull seeth all
these in 3 quarter of faire water till pBut one pottle
remaine, straine it and let it setle in an earthen panne
till it be cold, then powre the clearest thereof into a glasse
uiall . drinke a good draught of this euery morning . 3 .
houres before dinner, and likewise an other att 3 a clock
in the afternoone, continue this . 14 or 20 dayes, the pot
wherein you seeth this things, must be close stopped

63A Bath for the same disease

Take halfe a peck of Elder buds, and as much of ground
Iuie, primroses, Isop, featherfew Camomill and nettles
a lapp full together all being a bushell, seeth them
in . 4 . gallons of runing water, and 2 gallons of wine leese
& a pint of wine vinager & put them into a great tub & lay a block in it set ^
your feet on the block, and wrappe you warme that noe
ayre come to you, and annoint you first with this
oyntment naked, whereof the receipt hereafter doth
follow, and wrappe you in a sheete and goe into the
tubbe, then couer you ouer with a couerled, that you
take no cold or ayre, but onely to breath, use this . 4
dayes together and sweat 2 houres euery day. the
same licor will serue uery well if it be throughly
boiled euery day when you use it.





62
64A Drinke for those that haue
the kinges euill

The name of the herbe is called redseges and it is like
sampier, but it is red. this herbe must be drunke . 2. or three
dayes both morning and euening you may drinke this drinke
a yeare euery time when the moone is in the new, or from
the spring till midsummer be past, and euery good fryday
soe long as the party is grieued, you must drinke this
on that daye, and 3 dayes after, at what time the moone
serueth best, you must take the quantity of a handfull
and pick it cleane and wash it, shred it on a trencher and
pound it uery small, & put it into a pinte of beere or ale
in a stone Jugge and set it in the Celler, and let the
party drinke it as it is before prescribed, you must gather
this hearbe att the begining of Aprill, And keep it dry to
use in winter as is aforesaid, you must gather that which
growth upon walls and beareth a white flower, for that
is best

65For the obstructions of
the Liuer

Take of fennell parseley and succory rootes of each
two rootes, scrape them and take the pitch out, then take
polypodium and grasse rootes of each . 2 ounces, boile the
rootes in . 4 pintes of water untol . 3 . then adde of Endiue
succory, scabious, uiolets hartes tongue, maidenhaire
burrage, and buglosse of each half a handfull
2 ounces boile these a while on the fire
then infuse of one ounce, anisseeds and
corinader of each 2 drames, infuse these all night
then straine them in the morning and adde to
tbhis decoction 4 ounces of salendine, let him drinke
twice a day halfe a pinte at a draight






66A Receipt for lack of nature
and to restore it againe

Take a peck of snailes that be in gardens, hiuses & all
sprinckle them with salt and put them in water 2 or . 3
houres, then wash them cleane and set them ouer the
fier, and perboile them scumme them and then doe
soe againe in an other water, soe take 5 quarts of
faire water, and boile them ouer a soft fire, untill
you thinke there be a pottle boiled away, then power
the rest of the water into a cleane bason, and pick
out the snailes out of the shells and with a quart
of hasellnut kernels out of the shells, and blanched
beat the snailes, and soe lett the liquor that they
were last boiled in ouer the fire and put therein
the beaten nuts and snailes with a pound of raisons
of the sunne and a pound of Corrance and boile all
these together with a pound of sugar untill you thinke
the third part be consumed away then straine it
and drinke it warme some 8 spoonsfull at a time
in the morning fasting

67A Medecine for the Piles

Take 2. or . 3 good handsfull of Elder leaues, one of
uiolet leaues, a little rosemary slit, one handfull of
summer sauory, the blades of 2 or 3 heads of house
leeke, . 2 or . 3 branches of orpine, bruise them in a
morter together, and then boile them in 2 or 3 pounds
of fresh butter together untill all the strength of
the same herbes be boiled into the butter, then straine
them as hot as you can through a new canuas cloth
then put it ouer the fier and seath it, scumme it as
you scumme a pot and put therin a good peece of
unwrought waxe, and after it is scummed againe boile it
a while and then sett it in a platter till it be cold and
soe it will be an ointment then take the quantity of
an haselnut and cut it long like a suppositer & put
it in the fundament, and lay a red cloth unto it, and
in soe doing it will ware away





63
68For the biting of a mand
Dogge

Take pennyriall, plantine, Isop, primrose Rootes, and
box, of each a handfull, then take of mustard seed
2 spoonsfull, stampe them together and straine it
forth, with a pinte of new milke from the Cowe and
let the patient drinke it fasting and fast . 24
houres, and then apply the sam hearbes to the sore
adding thereunto a little night shade .
This medicine will cure any beast of the murraine
and many other diseses

69An approued Medicine for
a wett Tetter

Take maiden leekes and hony and wheat flower
and beate them all till they come to an oyle, or thick
like an oyntment or salue, then spread it on a cloath
and warme the wronge side of the cloth or plaister, and
soe lay it on the place griued changing the plaister
twice a day for 3 dayes, and God willing it shall helpe

70A Medicine for a Tetter

Put in the bottom of a brasse Candlestick or other
brasse uessell a little white wine uiniger, and let it
stand . 9 . or . 10 dayes till the brasse rust then put into
it fine powder of bole armeniack and stirre it together
till it come to an oyntment and soe anoint the Tetter
with the same,

71For the RicketsAn other approued medicine for a Tetter

72For the Rickets

Take broune fennell, veruaine chickweed, whit Arch Angell
Betony of each a handfull, boile them in faire water, and
bath the childes ribbes and side as hot as he can suffer
it, and doe this once in two dayes, let fluellin be boiled
in all his brothes whereof he must take often





73To heale Children of the lunatique
disease, which happeneth to them
by reason of the worme with 2 heads
that breedeth in their bodies, the
which worme comming to their heart
causeth such a passion in the chil-
dern soe that oft times it killeth them

Take the tender stalkes of a wildingtree, and drie them in
the shadow then stampe them well and sift them, and
take of the powder thereof and roots of Fentian and of
long pyonie of each of them a quarter of an ounce, as
much of myrrhe, all these well beaten to powder, you must
put into a dish or some other uessell and moisten them
with a little water, then take of it with your 2 fingers
and wett the mouth and lips of the child, doe this 3 . or
4 times and you shall see wormes uoided with the Excre-
ment

74An oyntment for the Rickets,

Take Camomill, Time, readsage, Bay leaues, Rue, ueruaine,
white wort, organ mett, wormewood, of each a like quantitie,
powre and boyle them in Butter neuer washed and straine
it, annoint the ribbes and sides of the child with this
This infirmitie is called the welch disease, & whosoeuer
hath had it shall neuer be infected with the plague

75A plaister for the same

Take three quarters of an ounce of English honey, a
quarter of an ounce of mythridate 3 graines of
muske codd, one ounce of oyle of Capers, an ounce of
st Johns wort mixed together, where with you must
first annoint the belly and the thighes and then
lay on a plaister of the same from the bottome
of the belly to the Pitt of the stomack and soe to
the ends of the ribbes

76For a pearle in the Eye

Take a handfull of Pimpernell, of ground Juice of Dasie
roots, of red fennell, of marygolde leaues, of all a like
quantity, stampe and straine them into good ale, and
let the party drinke a good draught, in the morning
fasting, or two houres after meate, and halfe an houre
lye upon his face, after he hath taken it.





64
77For the Hearing

Take a great onion, peale off the red skinne, cutt of the top
of it, the  take out the inner part, and make a hole in it
and fill it with anisseed, putt on the top close, and wrap it
round with wett broune paper binding it with a threed, and
soe rost it till it be sofft, then straine out the licor and put
a drop into the eare, and stop it with black wooll,

78For great Bellies in man
or woman

Take uiolet leaues, strawberry leaues, browne fennell and
burrage of each a good handfull, licorish and anisseeds of
each an ounce, bruise the anisseed and bruise and slice the
licorish, and then boile all these together in . 2 quartes of
faire water till halfe be consumed, this must be long a
doing on a soft fire then put in an ounce of sene and
let it be couered close together and stand all night by
the fire, then straine it, and put to it an ounce of syrop
of Damaske roses, this quantity being about halfe a pinte
at a time, will serue to be drunke warme, euery morning
for 4 . or . 5 mornings, into uery draught put as much
puluis sanctus as will lye up a 2 for a woman, and as
much as will lye uppon a groate for a man, drinke spring
and fall, or otherwise as there shall be occasion, you may
make this of the rootes if you cannot get the herbs

79A glyster for the stone &
wind Collick

Make a decoction of the seed and leaues of flaxe foenu-
greeke, and mallowe leaues, Althea, Dill, fennell, flowers
of Camomill, Lineseed oyle, Cassia & suger of each an ounce
with . 2 yolkes of egges, and make a glister and iniect
it warme, and hold it 3 . quarter of an houre

80The manner to make your purgation broth
which purgeth malancholly fleagmes
it easeth the collick helpeth therumde
cureth the spleene

Take polypodium of the oake or the Ash which is better, pick
it cleane and bruise it, put it into your water & oatemeale
as you were wont to doe, or if you put to it as much white
wine as water, and . 3 . or . 4 good slices of ginger a few small
raisins, and when your broth is boiled, straine and put to a
draught thereof 2 . or . 3 spoonsfull of syrop of roses and drinke
it fasting and within half an houre after walke to make
it





it worke the better, this will giue you 3 . or 4 stooles at a time,
when you feare to take glister or other strong purgations
which could be dangerous in a weake body without the
aduice of physitions

81For a Bruise

Take of Costmary, parseley, Cherwell of an equall quantity
thred them and stampe them together, with a conuenient
quantity of may butter, and fresh butter and soe being made
into a poultes, apply it to the place hurt

82For falling of the fundament,
bruising, fall, or straine

Take Iowe or flaxe cut it a quarter of a yard in length,
and in breadth as broade as your hand and a pretty thicknes,
annoint the one side thin with a little honey, then strewe
it thick with the powder of whit frankincense, then . 2 whites
of eggs uery well beaten put in that, then let the place
soe grieued be annointed from the fundament upwards
soe broad and so longe as the plaister, with ordinary
Turpentine before the fire a quarter of an houre together
then strewe more powder of frankincense upon the plaister
and so lay it on a double cloth well warmed upon it
and lay it on, and downe upon the back and keepe you
soe warme 4 houres and stirre not nor remove the plaister
before it fall off of it selfe, and if the party haue beene
long grieued use it twice or 3 times in the same manner

83For the hearing

Take Cloues of Garlick and peele of all the filmes, then
steepe them in oyle of bitter allmonds by the space of a
night or a day, then take one out of the oyle, and putting a
threed through the greater end therof, thrust the little
end thereof as farre as you can into your care, then stop
your eare with a little black wooll, and when you take it
out giue it a soudaine twich and immediatly put in an
other, after this manner doe this euery euening and
morning for 9 dayes together, the 9 dayes past put in a
little ciuet in black wooll and stop your Eare with it
A





65
84A Precious Seare cloath for the
healing of a running sore

Take oyle of roses . x . ounces of uirgins waxe . 8 ounces
Cerus beaten small . 7 ounces Camfire  smale beaten 3 drams
melt the oyle and waxe together then put in the Cerusse
till it change colour and then  put in the Camfire, so
take it off from the fire dipe the cloth in it

85An oyntment for the Rickets

Take Camomill, time, red sage, bay leaues, Rue ueruaine with
worte . orgamet, wormwood of each a like quantity, powre
and boile them in butter neuer washed, straine it, annoint
the ribbes and sides of the child with this oyntment

86To make yellow oyntment for
all kinde of diseases of the
stomack causes of cold, coughs
or stopings both for old and
younge

Take 4 pounde of fresh butte uery well clariefied,
halfe a peck of broome flowers, as much of the
uppermost leaues or tops of brambles that runne
along the ground, 2 . handfulls of the flowers &
topes of rosemary stampe these in a morter and
boile them uery well together with the butter on a
sofft fire, one houre, and then take it of, and let
it stand in your brasse kettle close couered x dayes
or a fortnight from the dust, then boile it uery
well ouer your sofft fire, untill you see the hearbes
uery well boiled, then straine it and put in a quarter
of an ounce of large mace well beaten, then boile it
softly againe in some other cleane uessell, and put
therto a wuarter of a pinte of aqua Composita melt
2 ounces of unwrought wax therein stirring it till it
be melted, and till such time as nothing appeareth either
of the Juice of the herbes allone, or butter allone but
let it be all one parfect oyntment, then put up as
you please uery close, it will keepe and be good many
yeares, with good usage -
If any haue lack of digestion being with childe or other
wise let them take nuttmegg grated and vinegar and
some of this oyntment melted all together in a saw-
cer, then anoint their stomack with it before the
fire a little while, and when you have used that
which





which is in this sawcer, you must take a peece of cloth
to wipe the nutmegg out of the sawcer and put it
upon the stomack with other hott clothes, using this
for a time, it is uery good to strenghten the stomack

87An oyntment for an Ache .

Take a pinte of neaths foot oyle, halfe a pound of
unwrought waxe, and halfe a pound of whit lead
beate it and searce it uery fine, take 2 penny worth
of white turpentine and 2  worth of camphire, before
you put in your Camphire, you must let the other
boile till it be black

88An Excellent good oyntment
for an Ache in the knees or
any other place of the body

Take . 2 . pound of unsalted butter, a quarter of a pound of
rosemary slipped downewards, a quarter of a pound of
sage, as much of bayleaues, beate these in a stone morter
then boile them together with a soft fire, till all the
Juice be out of them soe straine them through a course
cloth, and sett it ouer the fire againe, put therein an ounce
of each of these following nutmeggs cloues, mace, and
Saffron the weight of 3  dried and finely grounded
to a powder, and a quarter of a pinte of Aqua Composita,
boile all these together and take part of this ointment
and boile with one or two ounces of yellow waxe, soe put
it up, and as occasion serues, spread it as a searecloth
this oyntment is most precious for cold aches, first
to annoint the place grieued with the oyntment, and
then use this seare cloth to it as you see occasion,
sometimes sweating before you apply it, rubbing it uery
well, and drinking in the sweating a pinte of white
wine boiled with a prettie quantity or a handfull of
the tops, of Rosemary, and a good stick of Cinamon,
and some suger with a little saffron dried and
finely bruised





66
89A uery good oyntment for a sore
breast, bruise, or swelling

Take of southernwood, selfheale, smallage, sage, of
head Bennet, plaintaine, rubbwort, rue, orpin, housleeke
parseley, marygold, mercury, wormwood, Betoney,
scabious, uelaciam, knitwort or Cumphrey, lions
tooth, Buckhorne, of each a handfull, wash them
uery well and put them into a siue to runne dry
when they are uery dry, choppe them uery small
and put thereto a pinte of may butter unwashed
then boile them alltogether untill one part be
boiled away, then strane one part of it to make
ointment salue and put it into a pott, then put
in the other part that is left as much rosen
and waxe, as the quantity of 2 eggs to make it
somewhat stiffe and let them boile together a
good while then straine it and keep it.

90 An Excellent ointment to
make one sleepe

Take halfe a pinte of the best muskadine you can
gett, slice into it an ounce of nuttmeggs then
let it boile or simper till it come to an oyntment
then straine it and spread it upon leather and
lay it on both sides of your forehead upon your
temples, you may use as often as you see cause

91 A uery souueraigne greene
oyle

Take . 2 handfull of henne bane and of hounds tongue
or doggs tongue, Anatampane seu Elicampaine night
shade plaintaine tutson, selfheale and ualerian of
each of them as much as you can take upon yor hand
wipe them in cleane clothes, and seeth them on a
soft fire, in a pottle of sallet oyle, when it is allmost
sudden, put it in halfe a pinte of awuauite, and a
quarter of a pound of unwrought waxe, soe let it
seeth untill it bee greene, then straine it through a
new course cloth, and you may keepe it in a pott close
stopped seauen yeares, this oyle is good for a green
wound to be used for . 2 . or 3 dressings because it is
an





an opener and a cleanser, but for any old ulcer it is
good to be used twice a day, and you shall neuer need
to tent any wound wherein this oyle is put; it is also
good for any other that come with cold, and if any
wound or sore be stopt, scrape some lint and wett it
in the oyle and it will open it againe, the uertue of
this oyle is, when any one take a bruise by falling
or otherwise then to annoint the bruised place
with it warmed, and then lay a thin cloth next
unto it, which must not be remoued from morning
till night, you must keepe the place bruised uery
warme with clothes

92To make oyle of anisseed

Take . 2 poun d of anisseed, bruise it in a morter, then
put it in 4 . hallons of water, and put it in a pot
under the lymbbeck, as you doe for aqua uite, pasting
your pot uery close, and keeping a hotter fire under
it then you doe for Aqua uita, being sure to keepe
the head of your Limbeck cold, the first that comes
out will be strongest, put your water into broad
mouthed glasses, or uessels and let it stand all night
and in the morning with a spoone made for the
purpose take off your oyle, and put it into little
glasses for the use

93To make Black salue

Take a pennyworth of rosin, as much of stone pitch,
turpentine, and hony as much 2  worth of Beese
waxe, melt all these together with some sheepes
or deere suet, this salue is good for any greene
wound or old ulcerated sore whatsoeuer, if there bee
any proud of dead flesh, take the powder of mercury
precipitate, otherwise calld red mercury, and put it into
the wound to cleare it as occasion shall serue, then
dresse it, you may also use Ægyptiacum to cleare
the wound as you see occasion





67
94To make a poultis for
all swellings

Take . 2 . or . 3 . handsfull of salendine and cut it
small with a knife then boile it in grounds
of ale or beare, and put thereto a good quantity
of sheeps suet with as much wheate branne as will
make it spreade upon a plaster but if it
be for a cold, cause then to bee put in a handfull
of cammomill.

95To make a poultis for all
a white swellings or red
taking

Take grounds of ale or beare, and hollihock
leaues and flowers if you can get them - shred
and boile them in the said licor, put in a good
quantity of sheeps suet shred, while they are
boiling, thicken it with wheaten branne, also
put in the boiling thereof a little urine of a
childe, you must obserue if it be a red taking
that your holihocks be white, and if it be a
white taking that your holihacks be red, spreade
all these upon a plaister and apply it so warme
as the patient is able to endure

96A precious seare cloth for the
healing of a runing sore

Take oyle of Roses . x . ounces uirgins waxe . 8 .
ounces. Cerus small beaten ^ 7 ounces camfere smale .elen 3. drames, melt the
oyle and waxe together, then put in the cerus,
till it can change colour, and then put in the
Camphire, then take it off the fire, and dipe the
cloth therein .

97To make Black salue to heale
old sores, Aches & wounds

Take a quarter of a pound of unwrought waxe
2 ounces of ordinary pitch . 2 . ounces of rosen
2 worth of olibanum, halfe a pinte of sallet
oyle, as much of turpentine, melt all these
together in a little deepe kettle, then take one
handfull





handfull of Jutston leaues one handfull of
Plantin, one handfull of rosemary topes, then
bruise all these herbes in a morter, then put
them in the fore said stuffe . and let all boile
together ouer a sofft fire, with oft stirring
in the seething of it, till it be allmost halfe
sodden away, then straine it through a new
course cloth, soe keepe it good 2 yeares, you must
take it off the fire as it riseth, and when it is
fallen set it on againe, or else it will rune all
ouer the panne, and there will be nothing left
this plaister will not heale the sore thoroughly
till it hath drawne out the dead flesh and all the
corruption, then it will heale throughly without
any other salue

98A Balsom to cure any cult
greene wound or ulcer

Take the leaues of Plantin, Angelica, Rosemary saint
Johns wort, of each a handfull boile all these in . 3 .
pints of running water, untill the halfe of the water
be consumed then put in halfe a pinte of oyle of
greene unripe oliues, called oyle Omphacium, of cleare
and bright Turpentine . 4 ounces . of Frankincense
finely beaten one ounce of yellow waxe one ounce and
a halfe boile all these together a small space with
a soft fire, then straine out the liquor, and when it
is cold, put it up in gelly potts, and keepe it as a frend
at need
This Balsom will most speedily and safely cure any
cutt, greene wounde how deepe soeuer, or any ulcer being
first cleansed.

99To write upon a plate of
Iron or knife .

Take of Aquafortis one ounce, dissolue in it a quarter of
an ounce of mercury sublimate, then take uirgins waxe,
and melt a little on the Iron plate or knife, and being
cold write or draw on it with a needle what you please,
then with a pencill brush, first dipped in that water
rubb ouer the plate or knife, and let it stand . 2 houres, or
a night, if you will haue it deepe.





68
100To make the Scuruy grasse
drinke, according to Doctor
Colaton his Prescription

Take the roots of munkes Rhubarb the roots of redd madder
of each halfe a pound, Agrymony, scabious, of each . 4 hands
full, anisseed and licorish of each . 3 ounces, sere half
a pound slice the rootes, breake the hearbes with your hands
and bruise the seeds; and put all these in a bagg in a
uessell of 4 gallons of Ale and beare together that it
may not lye att the bottom thereof, soe let it steepe
4 or . 5 dayes, before you drinke it, a good pinte in the
morning, will purge uery well, and if it should faile
in any, let them take halfe as much more in the after
noone,

Finis





A Table
---- | ----------------------------------- | --- | ------------------------------------

  1. |           To make Harts hore Gellie | 41. |          To pre^serue cherries white
  2. |        To make China broth or Gelly | 42. |            To preserue cherries red
  3. |              To make second pottage | 43. |           To preserue Quinces white
  4. |    To make a fine Northfolk Dumplin | 44. |             To preserue Quinces Red
  5. |                    To make a Tansey | 45. |     To make red marmeled of Quinces
  6. |              To make a dish Custard | 46. |   To make white marmeled of Quinces
  7. |                  To make dyet bread | 47. |        To make marmelade of orenges
  8. |                   To make puff past | 48. |        To preserue plumes and other
     |                                     |     |                        greene fruit
  9. |       To make little fryed puddings | 49. |           To make greene fruit past
 10. |        To make Hoggs puddings white | 50. |      To preserue Apricockes, peaches
     |                                     |     |                    and peare plumes
 11. |                   To make bloudings | 51. |   To dry apricockes, peares  plumms
 12. |          To make cordiall conserues | 52. |                To dry them naturall
 13. |              To make cordiall cakes |  53 |   To make paste of orenges  lemons
 14. |       To make conserue of red Roses | 54. |      To Candy the Cleare rock Candy
 15. |                        An other way |  55 |               To Candy Ringo rootes
 16. |       To make conserue of Berberies |  56 |                    To Candy Suckets
 17. |  An other approued way of the same. |  57 |          To Candy the spanish Candy
 18. |   To keepe Berberies like preserued |  58 |     To Candy all sorts of uarieties
     |                  ones all the yeare |     |
 19. |      To keepe Berberies setting out | 59. |                 To preserue Damsons
     |                           of dishes | 60. | The best way to preserue all manner
 20. |        To Candy flowers for sallets |     |     of fruit, dry or wett And first
 21. |   To keepe Cowcombers all the yeare |     |     cleare Cakes of Gooseberries or
 22. | To keepe Gooseberries all the yeare |     |                       other plumes.
 23. |                      To make Cakes. | 61. |   To preserue pome citrons. My Lady
 24. |              To make Almond Butter. |     |                       Hayes fashion
 25. |                  To make marchpain
 26. |  To make Conceits of to print with
     |                             moulds
 27. |          To make Consaits to print
 27. |            To make Italian Biskets
 28. |              To make prime Biskets
 29. | To make Collops of postelyke bacon
 30. |       To make Eggs to your Collops
 31. |                  To make Diastoma.
 32. |               To mak Italian Chips
 33. |                   To make Jumbolle
 34. |                 To make macaroones
 35. |                 To make macaroones
 36. |                 To make puff paste
 37. |             To make marrow pudding
 38. |               To make refine suger
 39. | To boile suger to cast into moulds
 40. |           To preserue Gooseberries








69
1To make Harts horne Gelly an
appoued good way

Take some 4 . ounces of scraped Harts horne, and lay it a steepe in
ale quart of faire running water 24 houres, then put in a pipin
cut in pices, and if the party be cold, you may put in neare a pinte
of shery sack, a large mace, half a nutmegg;  4 or 5 cloues, and
a few Coliander seeds, these tye in a little linnen ragg and a
slice of leom with it, and you must put in neere halfe a pinte
of red rose water, this must be boiled softly, with a soberfire
untill it be halfe consumed then put in halfe a pound of the
best loofe suger, or 3 quarters, as the party likes it or as the
substance of the gelly requireth. when it is boiled enough,
which you shall know, by setting some a cooling in a spoone
for you must not boile it soe long till it button on the side
of a dish, for then it will be tough, when you thinke it enoigh
put in a branch of rosemary into your cotten Gelly bagg, and let
it runne into your gelly pot or glasse, This will keepe as well as
Conserue, and one spoonefull will nourish as much as a
whole Cock it is good in Consumption & against the wormes
it Carrieth many euills from the stomack and the heart
you may eate of it att any time or take it in broth, you may
make it of Bugglasse watter the more to comfort the heart if
one be to hot take Endiue water, if ouer stufft take hysop
water or fennell water

2To make China Broth

Take an ounce of the best china, slice it thin, of yellow sanders
sliced, the weight of 4, steep this in 3. quarts of Barley
water, for 26. houres, then with an old Cock drest and the
bones broken, of Burrage, sidrach, Coltsfoot and harts tongue
leaues of each a handfull, of Rosemary, Maidenhaire and
time, of each halfe a handfull, Raisins of the sunne stoned,
a large handfull, 6. figgs sliced, as many dates, a large mace,
half a handfull of white poppie seed, and att the latter end
of boiling, put in a quarter of a pinte of muscadine, boile all
to the consumption, of halfe the licor or better, either for
broth or Gelly.

3To make Second Pottage.

Take a quart of the thickest and sweetest rawe creame, then sweeten
it uery well with sugar, and put in . 6 spoonesfull of rose water
then take . 6 Eggs, and put away 4 of the whites then beat them
well together, when the creame is well boiled with the sugar and
rose water, put them in and stirre them together, when it is a little
more boiled, take it off and powre it into a cleane cloth, that is not
too fine, and tie it together and hang it upm and when it is throughly
cold and drained, dish it but first beate it a little together ere you
serue it





4To make a fine Northfolk
dumplin

Take 3 . Eggs, half a pint of good milke . 3 great spoonsfull of
flower, and a little salt, stirre them well together, and take as
thick a cloth as you can get, fil tie it up quickly and put it in a
seething pot, when it is sodd, take butter, a spoonefull of rosewater
and a little suger, & melt it together, to powre ouer your Dumplin

5To make a Custard

Take a pint of good Creame and boile it leasurely a little while,
putting therein Carrawaye seeds if you like it, then take the yolkes
of 7 Eggs, and beat them well, then put in your Eggs with a spoone
full or two of rosewater, Cinamon, ginger, cloues, and mace pounded
sweetening it with suger, and soe put it in to a pewter dish
ouer a pot of water, letting it stand the space of an houre
couering it with an other dish, and wiping the steeme from that
dish now and then

6To make a Tansy

Take . 5 or . 6 Eggs, and take out the white of one Egge, put therto
halfe a pinte of Creame and better, and a spoonefull of
flower, the Juice of tansy, sorrell, uiolet leaues, straweberry
leaues, beat all these well together and straine them, put to
it cloues & mace soe fry it with sweet butterm not forgetting salt.

7To make Dyet bread

Take a pound of your finest flower, sersed, a pound of the finest sugar
beaten, and well searsed, one ounce of carway seed, a nounce of aniseed, an
ounce of sweet fenell seed, your seeds must be well dryed and rubbed
betweene your hands, and searsed, x Eggs beaten together with the
sugar and seeds, after that take the flower aboue named, and let
one uery softly shake it into the Egges, suger and seeds, and other
still stirring till all the flower be in them, the batter must be
presently put into the coffins, and the Coffins into the ouen
and soe the bread shall be soone baked the coffins must
be made of oake, and the bottoms of plate, and before the batter
be put in your must butter the coffins

8To make Puffe Paste

Take a quart of fine flower finely fitted . 2 eggs, whit and all
halfe a pounde of batter, halfe a spoonefull of rosewater, and
as much sugar, first mingle the flower & the eggs with a little
peece of butter, and make it uery stiff, then slice it in thin slices
and lay a piece of butter betwene each of them and role them
with a rolling pinne, soe let them lie a while before you put
them in fashion





70
8To make little fried puddings.

Grate a penie white loafe, take a quarter of a pound of currants
3 egges and a pretty quantity of suet, a little spoonefull of
sugar, a little spice, salt, make it a little wtt with milke, soe
that it may be taken up with a spoone and laid in the panne
by spoonsfull, soe fry them with sweet butter.

9To make Hoggs puddings white

Take . 6 . pennyworth of manchet and grate it, and put to it 3.
of hoggs suet, cut uery small, but first season it with a little
pepper some cloues and mace, one ounce of nutmeggs, grated
and a little fennell bruised . xu . Eggs and but 4 of the whits
a little rosewater sprinckled upon it, 3  of Currants washed
then boile half a hoggs liuer readie and while it is hot
stamp it and straine it with warame milke, and put it
in with a little salt, and stirre all well together, and wett
it with more warme milke till it be uery lithey, & fill
them with a fillbowle and boile them somewhat fast.

11To make Bloudinges

Take greate whole oatmeale and bruise it uery little, steepe
it all night in scalding milke then mingle it with a
little bloud not to much and put in a little beffe broth
and some hoggs suet cut in great peeces, cloues & mace
pepper and fennell seed a little

12To make all sorts of
cordiall Conserues

Take the flowers of Burrage, or Buglosse, succory or Endife
in quantity 4 ounces, and adde thereto of rose water one
pinte boile this on a soft fire of charcoals till halfe
of the water be consumed then add thereto of the purest
loafe sugar 12 ounces, and boile it to the forme of a gelly
reseruing it for cooling conserues and cordiall to the heart

13To make Cordiall in
weakenes

Take of Eringo rootes . 2 ounces, of orenge pitts & citrons
pitts of each 2 ounces, of Coliander comfits, and anisseeds
comfits, of Each . 2 1/2 ounces, of the powder of Ploriser
centicon a quarter of an ounce of pearle prepared as
much, of amber greece 20 graines of fine sugar . 6 ouces
of red rose water as much as will boile the sugar to the
hight of manus christi, you must first boile your rosewater
and sugar to that height and then put in your roots and pitts
being maruellous finely sliced, and softly boile it and then
gently shake in your other powders, and giue it a gentle whalme
and soe make them into Cakes





14 The best way to make Conserue
of Red roses

Take 3 pintes of runing water to halfe a pinte of roses & . 2 pounds
of suger the boile the water and let it coole againe, then put
in your roses unbeaten but the white cut away as you pull them
from the budd before you use them, soe let them boile till you
perceiue the leaues to be tender and come to there colour, then put
in your sugar and boile them up, and soe pot them for your use

15An other way

Take Roses before they be too much blowne and cut off the whites of them
and to euery ounce of roses, put . 2 . ounces of sugar and soe beate
them together in a morter till they be uery small, then put them
in a glasse, closely couering them, and set them in the sunne when
it is uery hot 4 or 5 dayes

16How to make conserue of Barberies

Take an earthen pott and put your barberies in it and let them stewe
ouer the fire, the pott being closely sopt, then straine them out, puting
to euery pound thereof a pound of sugar and mingel well alltogether
and let it boile till it be thick

17An other approued way of the
same

18To keepe Barberies like perserued
ones all the yeare

Take your Barberies well growne and stone them laying a rowe of
Barberies, cast sugar on them and then a row of Barberies and sugar
againe, to pott them up in your gelly potts for the whole yeares use

19To keepe Barberies for garnishing
of Dishes

Make a brie of water and salt, and let it stand till it be cold, and
put in your barberies and they will keepe good

20For to Candy flowers for sallets

Take your flowers and their weight in sugar boile your sugar to a Candy
height, then put in the flowers as it boileth, then dry them in the
dish and keepe them to your use





71
21To keepe Cowcombers all the yeare

Take vinegar and a little water and salt, make a pickle thereof, &
let it stand till it be cold, and then put in your cowcombers and
soe keepe them all the yeare

22To keepe Gooseberries all the yeare

Take vinegar and a little salt and stirre it and then put in your
Gooseberies wel growne and greene, and soe keepe them

23To make Cakes

Take a peck of flower, 4  of butter 4  of currants, one pinte of
water to the butter, as soone as it is melted, use it, for it must not
be too hot, one pinte of strong ale barme, halfe a pound of sugar
of mace and cloues two pennyworth, 2 nutmeggs, an ounce of
ginger, 3 pennyworth of saffran, wett the saffron in 6 spoones
full of rosewater, take heed you season your ouen well, and if
they take lay paper

To make Almond Butter

Take one pound of Jordain allmonds the best and blanch them, then
beate them in a stone morter, with some fair conduit water, then
when they are well beaten straine them out and beat them
and straine them out 3 or 4 times with other faire water til
the water and beating hath drawne out all the substance : then
set the milke ouer the fire, in a skillet or panne, and when it
begins to rise up in the boiling, take the Juice of a lemmon
cleane from the kernels and powre it into the milke stirring
it together, when it beginneth to rise againe take it up, and
let some hold a broad & faire holland cloth, and power it abroad
upon that cloth, with a spoone or a ladle to the end that
the whey may runne cleane from it, then let them hold
hard, and scrape all the whey from the underside of the cloth
then put all the substance that is upon the cloth together
with the edge of a spoone, then put the cloth together and
tye it close together with a string and let it hang up all
night by that string to draine, then in the morning take some
uery fine sugar a quarter of a pound, and . 6 spoonesfull of
rosewater, and soe sweeten it for your use

To make marchpaine to Ice it guilt it, and
garnish it, according to the arte of a Confit
maker

Take allmonds and put them into seething water, then blanch them
upon a dry cloth and beate them in a morter, now and then
dropping in a drop or two of rosewater, to keepe them from oyling
now and then throwing in a handfull of searsed sugar, and when
you have brought it to a perfect paste, then rowling it abroade,
cut it round by a dish or a plate, as bigg as you will haue it, then
set an edge about it as high as about a Tarte, soe set it into the
ouen as hot as for manchet, and when it is halfe baked and more
then take rosewater & sugar, & a little of the white of an egge &
beate it together with a spoone, spreade this upon it with a feather, when
it is well Iced, take it out of the ouen, & garnish it with whatsoeuer you will
the conceipts must be made first stick it full with long Comfits strew biskets
& carawayes upon it, & when it is cold guilt it and serue it.





26To make Conceipts to print with
mouldes

Take some of your marchpaine paste and roule it something thinne, &
take wooden mouldes without brimmes and a little rub the sugar ouer
the paste, but strew none into the moulde

27To make Italian Bisket

Tak searsed sugar and beate it in an Allabaster morter with Gume
Traganth and the white of an egge, a little muske, a little ambergreese
then moulde it up with a little anisseed being cleane dusted then mould
it in the bignes of a crab, cut it about like a manchet, & prick it quite
through in the top, then set them in a reaosnable quick ouen, and
when they are rison somewhat high, take them out and remoue them
not till they be cold, you must take them upon a pie plate

28To make prime Bisket

Take sugar finely searsed one pound, and a pound of fine flower
8 . Eggs whereof two you must take out the yolkes, & beate them an
houre together, then take coffins of tinne, & rub them with butter,
then heate the ouen as for manchet, when you are readie to fill
the coffins halfe full and better, & set them into the ouen

29To make Collips of paste like
Bacon

Take some of your marchpaine paste, & mould it in saunders finely
searsed untill it be red, then rowle out 3 . cakes of red and . 4 of white
and lay them one upon another, a white and a red then cut them
ouerfwart in slices like Collips of Bacon then m rowle them
a little not uery thinne, then lay them on a warme stone &
dry them

30 To make Eggs to your Collips

Take sugar finely searsed, worke it up to paste with a gumme
traganth being steept in rose water staine some of this paste
yellow with saffron, then rowle it up round like the yolkes
of Eggs & fashion the whites with your hands like an Egge
then cut it in 4 quarters and with a little gumme traganth
wett a quarter & set it on the yellow which will look like
a Egge cut in 4 quarters

31To make Diastoma, which are
otherwise called cleare cakes

Take Rasberries and put them in a stone Jugge, & set the
Jugge into a pot of seething water and euer as they doe dis-
solue powre the liquor through a strainer into a Bason,
then take a pinte of the liquor & a pound of sugar, &
put the said liquor into a posnet, & the sugar into an
other and put as much water to the sugar as will melt
it, then boile it till it come to a candy height and boile
the liquor as long in the other posnet, then put them seething
hot together, and boile them a little while then powre it
hot





72
hot into glasses being made like marmelet Boxes,
so set them in a warme ouen or stoue, and let
them stand one weeke, then turne them and set
them in againe an other weeke, till they be drye,
allways keeping them with a gentle heate, &
they will looke as cleare as Quidinee, and a
hard fee candid on the other side of them, that
a Gentilwoman may carrie it in her pocket
this you may make of any tender plume or
berry





73
32To make Italia Chips

Take fine sugar finely searsed and uiolet sugar & rose sugar
finely searsed, and make them up to paste, euery one of them
seuerally with Gumme traganth steept in rosewater, then
towle them uery thinne and lay them one upon an other
then rowle them up like a quier of paper & cut them
ouerthwart in clices and rowle them uery thinne

33To make Jumbolles

Take a pound of the finest flower, & a pound of hard
sugar uery small beatten and beate them together
then take an ounce of anisseed well dusted and
bruised in a morter and halfe an ounce of Carraways
seeds, halfe an ounce of Colliander seedes prepared,
by laying them an houre into whitewine uinegar, take
the uineger cleane from the seeds and dry it by
the fier then take all these seeds, and strew them
amongst the flower, then take 8 Eggs putting
away . 4 . of the whites and mingle them together,
then worke them in rowles and knott them and
set them upon papors and prick them, and set
them in the ouen heate as before, and when these
are well baked put them up

34To make mackmacharoones

Take a pound of Jordaine Allmondes & a pint of fine
allmonds like sugar then lay them in faire water
and blanch them, and beate them in an Allabaster
morter or other stone morter, and as you beate them put
in now and then some rosewater, soe continuing till they
be uery finely beaten and strewe in amongst the Almonds
now and then your sugar apound of it, which must be
uery small and fine, beaten together till they bee well
sprigs incorporated, then put all out into a dish, and take the
butchers whites of 2 eggs, and beate them with . 3 . or . 4 butchers spriggs
broome and as the froth ariseth stirre it in amongst the allmonds
then sett the dish upon a chaffing dish with coales,
stirring the ALmmonds continually for feare of burning, then
when it is throughly hot, take it from the coales, then
hauing wafers cut long or round as you please, put
your stuffe upon them, and set them in the ouen on
paper after household bread, or uery well warmed with a
couple of small fagotts, leauing the ouens mouth open
and when they are sufficiently drye, take them out, and
if you loue muske you may put in a little in the beating
of them with the rose water.
An





35An other way to make Mackaroones

Take one pound of sugar fine beaten, one pound of Allmonds blanched
as you blanch them put them into cold water, when they be throughly
cold, drye them in a linnen cloth and as you beat them sprinkle
now and then a sponefull of rosewater into them you may if you
please, steepe a graine of muske or Ambergrees in rosewater, six
spoonesfull will be enough to moisten the whole pound, when the
Allmonds are throughly beaten mingel your suger, then take 3 .
Eggs . 2 . of the yolkes being taken away, mingle it all well together
then ley them out thick upon marchpaine sheetes, and bake
them upon pie plates

36To make Puffe Paste.

37To make marrow pudding .

Take a penny white loafe and slice it round & thinn,
annoint the dish with butter and strew a few currants,
then rubbe cinamon and sugar, in both sides of the bread
and couer the dish with the bread then lay marrow on the
bread in pretty bigg pieces all ouer, then quarter 4 dates
and lay them upon the marrow, & strewe currants, cinamon
and sugar upon the bread and dates, and doe so till your
dish bee full, but lay bread uppermost and strewe currants
uery thick upon it, then take 3 yelkes of Eggs and halfe
a pint of creame and a little rosewater sweeten it with sugar
and power upon it till the dish be full, then let it bale
uery gently and serue it in with sugar ouer it

38To refine sugar

Take a poud of sugar & halfe a pint of water & boile them
together till all the sugar be melted, then take the white
of an Egge and faire water . 12 . spoonesfull, and beate
them together with a brushing rod till they come to froth
then put to it the hard sugar, and set it on the fire againe,
and uer as it riseth, drop in a drop of cold water, then
let it boile, till you see the froth of the sugar rise as
whit as an Egge and then take it by the fire & scumme it





74
39To boile sugaer to a Candy
hight to Cast into moulds

Boile your sugar till it will fly as fine as the
haire of your head

40To preserue Gooseberries

Take them being full growne and greene, then open
the topes of them, and take out some of the kernells
with a bodkine, then make your syrop weight for
weight, putting . 5 . or 6 . spoonesfull of water unto one
pound of sugar, diuiding your pound of gooseberries
into . 3 parts, and boile them gently, till they
begin to be cleare shaking them in the panne or
skillet without a spoone, then boile them up
quick and soe put them forth into a dish till they
be cold, then put them up.

41To preserue Cherries white

Make the Syrop Candy height, then take your
Cherries being full ripe, and pill them and dip
them into that Syrop scolding hot, as you pill them
and lay them into a cleane dish one by one, and
when you haue boiled as many as you thinke fitt
boile them up quick with more sugar

42To preserue Cherries red

Take your fairest cherries and stone them leauing
on them part of the stalke, then weigh them weight
for weight with beaten sugar, then put in about
a dozen cherries in a pound ouer and about your
weight, then strow some sugar in your panne &
set your cherries one by one in that sugar, and soe
a laying of cherries and one of sugar, then put into
it about . 3 spoonesfull of faire water and set them
upon a gentle fire, and take heed of burning them
and soe let them boile till the sugar hath purchased
the colour of the cherries and come to their owne
colour againe, then boile them up as fast as you
can till you see them buble up with broade bubles
so take them off and set them to coole, till, you
pot them.

43To preserue Quinces Red

Weight your Quinces with your sugar weight for
weight and take a pinte of water to them, that is
to euery pound of sugar, then coare and [are them
and boile them together till they come red close
and turne them often, for feare of spotting, let
them boile till they be uery tender, then take
them up, if your syrop be not thick enough to pearle
stiffe upon a plate, let it boile longer & soe powre
them together
to





44To presereue Quinces white

Take a pound of Quinces, as much sugar, then cut
out a pound peece in the top, and coare them, &
stope them close with theire own stopple,
boile them in conduit water uncouered, till
they be halfe boiled, then take them up, and
tope them - and pare them, soe put them
into a pale of faire conduit water, in the meane
time make your syrop with one pinte of runing
water to a pound of sugar, then wipe the water
off with a cleane cloth, and your syrop being
halfe boiled, put them in and boile them up as
fast as you can uncouered till they bee uery
tender turning them sometimes for feare
of breaking, when they are sufficiently boiled
let them stand in a basin till they be throughly
cold, then put them up and stop them close.

45To make Red Marmelet

Take Quinces and bake them, and stope the pot
you put them in, then pare them and scrape all
the pappe from the coare, then take the pappe
and beate it in a morter with a back of a spoone
then take as much sugar, as it will weigh, and
boile it to a candy height with as much water as
will melt it, then put the papper into the hot sugar
and boile it, still stirring it till it will come cleane
from the bottome of the panne then put it in your
boxes or glasses, smoothing it ouer, and soe set it
on a warme stone to dry it, soe you may keepe it all
the yeare

46To make Marmelet of Quinces
White

Take Quinces and boile them in there owne skinne
and when they be cold pare them, and scrape all
the pappe from the coare, then take as much
sugar as the papper will weigh, but your papper
must be strained through a peece of Caskon Canvas
then boile your sugar to a Candy height, then put
your papper into your hot sugar and boile it with
stirring till it will come cleane from the bottome
of the panne, and soe box it & keepe it all the yeare

47To Make Marmelet of oranges
and Lemons

Take orenges and boile them tender shifting them
8. or . 9 times in the boiling then beate them in a
wodden bowle and straine them through a piece of
thine canvas, soe boile them with stirring till it
come cleane from the panne, and soe box it ...
the first water you boile them in you must put in
a handfull of white salt and it will preserue theire
colour.
To





75
48To preserue Plummes or any other
growne fruit

Take white plumes when they are uery greene and
scald them moderatly till they doe peele, then
boile them soberly, in cold water againe till they
waxe greene, take one pound and a quarter of sugar
to a pound of plumes then make your syrop as
you doe for other plummes, and let them boile in
it leisuarly till they be readie, and after the same
manner you may use greene Apples or other greene
fruite

49To make greene fruit
paste

You must take the greene outside of the fruit after
it is peeled and scalded, then beate it uery fine
and put it in your syrop made Candy height, then
boile them softly till they will stand then put
them into a warme ouen or stoue, & dry them lesurly

50To preserue Apricockes
Peaches & pare plummes

Take your plummes now gathered, and as much sugar
as they way weigh, and as much water as to make a
syrop to couer them when your sugar is boiled let
it stand & coole a while, then put in your plummes
for if it be hot they will cracke, soe let them stand in
that syrop all the night keeping it allways warme
and noe more, and on the morrow set your balson
uppon a pot of seething water and soe proserue
them uery leisurely, putting in a little more
dry sugar then they has at first and when they
are uery tender & sweat then take them out and
boile the syrop till it will button uppon a dish side
and when they are both coold put them up together
this way wee preserue all plumes and berries as
Redberries, Gooseberries or currantes

51To drye Apricockes, peares
or plumes, either naturall
or artificiall

Take your Aprickocks or peare plumes & presarue
them first, stone your Apprcockes but doe not presarue
them soe tenderly in Syrop as to keepe them, wash
all the Syrop off of the one side with warme water
then strewe searsed sugar on them, till you couer them
ouer, then lay them uppon paper and set them upon
a fine bottome in a warme ouen, and euery day
turning of them now and then strewe searsed
sugar on them, till they be dry then boxe them
To





52To drye them naturall

Take the Plumes, and lay them all night in sweet wort
and on the morrow lay them on a pie plate, and halfe
bake them, and then set them into the ouer with a
gentle heate, soe day by day till they be dry, soe you
may boile them and keepe them all the yeare, in this
like sorte you may pippins or peares, your Apricockes
will looke as, cleare as amber.

53To make Paste of Orenges
and Lemons

Take orenges and lemons and boile them in spring
water, shift them a dozen times in the boiling out
of boiling water into boiling water, to the first water
put in a handfull of salt, to . 2 . or . 3 orenges that
will preserue the colour and keepe them from
shrinking, take as much sugar as they doe weigh
refine it & scume it cleane then straine the papper
of an orenge or lemon in a thin caskon canuas,
then put the papper into the hot sugar, being
boiled of a candy height, then boile it with stirring
and fashion it as you please

54To Candy Cleare Rock Candy
roots, fruites spices or flowers

Take fruit or rootes and preserue them & dry
them againe, take spices and flowers and boile them
in a syrop of sugar, till it be sugar againe then take
them and spread them upon a sheate of paper then
lay them uppon round wiers, in an earthen panne
then take as much sugar as will fill your panne
and refine it, and boile it to a Candy height then
powre it into your panne amongest your fruits and
flowers, then spot it in a Chemney corner upon
a Cushion and couer it with a blancket foure
double, and soe let it stand warme to dry an houre
after the Syrop is out of it, then picke by the wyers
and take off the fruits and lay them uppon a
paper, then set . 2 or . 3 houres before the fire
to drie, then box it and keepe it all the yeare

55To Candy Aringoe rootes.

Take Aringoe rootes, new gathered smooth
without Jointes and boile them in spring water
the water boyling before you put then in, then
boile them as a parsenep, then slit them off
the way cleane throughout, and take the pith out
of them, & peele them then wash them in many
waters milke warme then dry them uppon a
linnen cloth and playte them 3 . and 3 together
tyed with a threed together, att both endes, then
take as much sugar as they weigh, and as much water
as will make a Syrop to couer them, halfe of it Rose
water and the other, cleane water, then refine the sugar
and.





76
and soe put the water into your hot sugar boiling it together
stiring it till they haue drunke up all the sugar then laye
them uppon paper, and drie them, and box them & they will
keepe all the yeare,

56To Candy the Spanish Candy

Take the blossomes of flowers and bruise them not, but
boile them in sugar till it be soe thick that it will scarce
drope frome the spoone, then powre some of it uppon a
wett trencher and with a wette knife spreade it resionable
thine when it is cold, cut it square like Diamonds, that which
you leaue in the posenet and the Cuttings off, stirr and bruise
with the back of a spoone, and vuery leafe will part from the
other

57
To Sucket Candy, which is Called
the Smooth Candy

Take





59 To Preserue Damsons
Take of the bruised and least damsons and put them into
a skillett of faire water, and boile them till they come
to their colour, then weigh of the fairest allmost weight
for weight with sugar: then lay a laying of sugar and a
laying of damsons in the skillett and power into them
a quarter of a pint of the liquor, and soe set them
ouer the fier and let them simper very tenderly, till
they purchasse their colour and be very tender, then
set them away all night in their liquor, and next morning
boile them vp till the syrop will button vpon the side of
a dish still being carefull to take out those that be
tender and ready, then putting all those that you haue
taken out giue them a gentle whalme together & when
they be cold pott them

60 The best way to presarue all sorts
of fruit dry or wett
ffirst to make Cleare Cakes of
Gooseberries or any fruites or
Plumes
Take your fruit and put them into a stone pot and couer it
and put the said stone pot into a pot of seething water and
as the fruit doth boile tender power away the liquid substance
from them into a siluer dish, or fro Rasberries or English
Currants if uoy you will you may put them into a posnet
and soe boile them and stirre them till they be boiled all
to pices and put them into a strainer and let the liquor
runne into a siluer dish or gelly pot, being in hot water
whereby the liquor may be keept warme while it is a dropping
then the colour will be the better, then hauing an other dish
iust of the same weight of that which hath the liquor of your
fruit, weigh that liquor in the one dish and the sugar
in the other, and take Iust the weight of the liquor in fine
sugar, then brake the said sugar into small peeces and boile
it to a Candy height, then take the liquor of the fruit being
made seething hot and put it into your hot sugar and stirre it
togeather and soe let it stand from the fire, for it must
not boile in any case after the liquor is in the sugar, and
betweene hot and cold powre it into your moulds or glasses
made like marmalet boxes, and set them into a warme
stoue and soe let it stand till it be canded on the top, then
turne it on a peece of glasse & set them into the
worme stoue againe & soe let them stand there till
they be dryed throughly, and then burne them and set
them vp./
To






77
To presarue Pome Citrons after
  ?1 My Lady Hayes fashion, after
Christmasse
Take those that are pale and smooth rinded, quarter them them
cut that out where the Iuice lyes, then take your preseruing
panne full of cleane water sett it ouer the fier, and assoone
as it beginneth to boile, put in your quarters of fruit, make them
boile softly & doppe them downe with a silver spoone or stick
in the time thats boiling take on other panne of water and set
it ouer the fier, and assoone as it begins to boile, take your
fruit out of the first water, and put them into that pan
let them boile leissurely till they be tender take them out
and spreade them vpon a Cleane Cloath to drye when they
are cold weigh them and to euery pound of them weigh a
pound of loafe sugar, and a pinte and a halfe of water
or more, then put your sugar and water together in a clean
pan ouer the fier, and let it boile about a quarter of an houre
when it is well scumed put in your fruit, boile them softly a
little while, then take off your pan, and let it stand a little
set it ouer the fire againe, and make them boile a quarter
of an houre or more take them out and put them into gelly
pots syrop and all, so when they are cold Couer them with
papers and let them stand .3. dayes, after that put your
syrup in the pan, and add to it, and as much sugar as you put att
the first, boile it a quarte rof an houre, then take off your
panne, and let it stand as long, doe soe 3 times till the s
syrop be pretty thick, put them into your potts as before,
when they be cold couer them let them stand 8 dayes, power
them into the panne boile them a little while. take them off
one 3 times as before and pott them, when they are cold couer them.

62 Maniere de faire tante sorte de  Confiture tant
seche que liquide a la façon de Monsir Letard
Pour faire framboise
Il faut premierement bien criller vos Framboises mettant a part
toutes les belles et entiers dans vn plat ou basin, pour les autres vous les
metres dans la poille sur le feu, les remnant  tonsiour auec vn spatula de
bois iusques a ce qu'elles sy soyent tontes emarmelees puis vous les
passeres par vn linge tant qui tonte las substances soit dehors puis
perceres le Ius la, et sur chasqui liure de la dite liqueur vous mettres
trois quarterns de sucre de cassonade et faires bouillir Iusques a ce
qu'il ne ?itts ne iette pas nit plus d'escurie puis vous mettres   vos bettes
framboises estan peses et la mesme proportion de sucre qui pour le
syrop, vous versirez les Framboises tant vellement dans las paile de pren
de les compre, puis ietterer de sucre deseus, et les faire bruillier a
bon sen iusques a ce que vous le verrez quelles seron cuites, puis vous
les osterez














79






80





81





I haue exactly translated this spanish coppy; & perused it
ouer; so that there is nothing wanting in it in e En=
glish, sauing theese word ffollowing; which I could
not ffinde in the Dictionaries; but I haue here ????? sett
them downe; & left a space in their proper places;
Zitauen; Pag 6: - Peregre; Pag 3i;
Mozella; 6; - Cupatorio; 3i;
Descarasco; 11; - Cacoro; 3i;
Rupe; ii7i; Enelado; 31;
Lasena; 20; Ebulos; 3i;
Trapiso; 20; Castion; 3i;
Aragontia; 29; Alciono 3i; 32;
Nueza; 30; ffranle; 33:
Pentafilon 30; Esquinqnte; 33:
Enjundia; de Galina; 30;
Mata; her^b;sul Gu 30;
Brudano; 30;
Danco;=Tostado; 30;
Esparajo; 31;
it is to bee noted that, the spanish Coppy is very ill
poynted, or distinguished; & it hath Diuers ffalse
orthographies; & thus my bee a cause that thees
names may not so easily appeare in the Dictionary:
An ad uertisement:./
1: Note that all which is in the spanish expressed (by the
way of speaking vnto) in the third person; I haue put
& translated in the second; it beeing more vsuall,
& familiar in our Idiom: - ;
2 all marginall notes & wordes, & sentences vnderli
ned with a line in this manner _____________ &c
and are added, for  the better explanation; for that e
Spanish translated in euery particle verbatim wou
ld sound harsh in English, & not bee so well, or all
to geather intelligible:





+ 82 1
1
The manner how to make Muskeballs, of Roses
Take a pound of Roses; pickt', & cut small as if prepa=
red for Conserue of Roses; & put them in soake in sweete
Muske=rose water; & the third day straine them from this
water, & put them in muske water, so that they may sok=
en well. & let them bee therein, eight, or nine dayes, &
then take them from this water very well squis'de:
weigh twelfe Ounces of these Roses, & prepare two
or + three quar= Ounces of Ambar=Greece well bruised; & + three forth parts
ters of an ounce: of an ounce of Muske; & seuen Ounces of ssweete=Gumm,
+ Menicus; in En= (called on spanish Menicus +, or Benius) neither mor nor
glishe Benia= less, then is spoken of in the receipts before: & incorpo=
min:  rate the ambar=Greece, & the Muske in it a little,
& a little; & stampe the Roses, ffeeding them, as it were
with this pouder, & with Ciuet; or other wise strewing
it vppon them: & stamp the Roses, & the Ciuet; & put
there in, about an ounce, & a half there of, & keepe
a little for to make them vpp; & after all this is
+ or well;  incorporated, stampe it much +, till the past bee  growe pli=

ant, & that it breake not, but only holde stiffe to
geather; & make the Musk=balls, as others, that haue
binn fformerly spoken of: & of the Roses, that remain=
ed ffrom the pound, yw mas may make other Musk=
balls, vsing a quarter of an ounce of Ambar=Greece
half an Ounce of Muske, & as much of Ciuet; & theese
will bee very good: -
2
an other manner of Roses






2
likewise, after this manner, yw may vse, the Roses, & sweet
Gumm; & a quarter of an Ounce of Amber=Greece; & half
an Ounce of Musk, & half an ounce of Ciuet: -
Likewise those Musk=Balls, are of lest Cost, & very
good; which haue in them seuen Ounces of sweete=Gumm;
& half an ounce of Ambar=Greece; & a quarter of an
of Musk; & half an ounce of Ciuet: -
Likewise those are good, which haue a quarter of an
Ounce of Ambar=Greece, & half an ounce of Musk,
& half a quarter of an Ounce of Ciuet; used neither
more, nor less, then those ffirst spoken of; & ^in all a
little sugar, according to the quantity of what yw make;
but it must nee very little: -
All the sweet+Gumm for Musk=balls is much better
Keepingit certaine dayes in soke, it beeing halfe
bruised or pounded before: & those Musk=balls, which
haue no Roses, are very good; the sweete Gumm bee-
+  ing ????????????? ^+ steeped in in??ce of Roses; & when yw make them
steeped in iuyce not in time of Roses, they are very good made of this
of Roses; is ver-
 sweet=Gumm; thus ordered: -
batim; accord-
Likewise, I was wonte, to put in the Musk=balls
ing to t span-
 of Dragagant, (or Dragant half the quantity of sto-
ish, en carno rax, & they smell very well: -
de Rosas; - but The Ambar=Greece that yw put amongst all yr
whether hee mea-
 Musk=balls, yow must put the half with pouder of
nt Rose water, sweete Gumm, & of Muske; & the other half, after that
or no; I know all things are half stampt togeather; & after that
not: - yw must goe on strewing them with Ciuet, & they
Manicule must pound them strongly: -
4
The manner how to make
boyled, Or sodden Musk=balls: -
+ Beniamin; Take a pound of sweete Gumm+, half a pound of storax
& put them in soake, in water of the Musk=rose; &
other rose=water; & in water of Oreng=fflowers: they
must bee there twenty dayes: & after that bee dry, pound
them a little, & a little togeather; because the storax
will neuer pound well alone: then sifte them in a
sears of silke three times: then put into into this pou-
+ I beleeue der one ounce of Ambar=Greece pounded; & halfe an ou-
it should bee nce of sugar pounded; & half an ounce of Muske, &
rather, un Mu-
 an ounce of Ciuet; yw are to put half the Ambar=
sk water, the Greece, & the sugar beaten to pouder + & boyle them in
in mingled all the three afore sayd waters ^mingled togeather; ??????????
waters: &c
Colado, is = if yw haue it) and let there bee a good part of rose wa-
ter, & of water of fflowr of Orenges; & after that
+it is accomodated +, take the Muske well bruis-
verbatim, ed, & boyle it in a little vessell of plate, or siluer
strained & when it hath boyled a little while; put it ? water





83
3  with its water, amongst the muske=balls; & that half
of the Ambar that remaines: - & after that yw haue
boyled it a little, put in the Ciuet a little, & a little
& when the ????, or dowe, is blacke, & not tawny, or of
a Lions=color; make yr Muske=balls ouer a little
ffi?e, & with a little water, ffore ffeare they should
burnde; & after that they are made, Annoynt them
(as it were) about with a little Ciuet; neither more
+ I beleeue hee nor less then all the residewe+
meant some  likewise those Muske=Balls are very good; with the
other spoken same quantity of storax, & sweete=Gumme; & but
of before; which half the quantity of Amber=Greece, Muske & Ciuet
are not in this likewise, with a quarter of an Ounce of Amber=
writing: - Greece, & half an Ounce of Muske, & half an Ounce
of Ciuet; + & ^to this quantity, at all times that yr  High-
ness will command it: - they may, if they will
+ Hisp? put sometimes a little +lignu Aloes;; & a little of
linaloli; or the flowers of Orenges; & a little Musk=water, &
lynaloy: accomodate them with this other receipt: - & this yw
must vnderstand of some Muske balls, made apart, &
+ of some skinns, or peelings of + Citrons, beeing annoyn-
Cascaras de ci-
 ted with Ciuet: - yr Highness may command to mak
dra; - may bee
taken likew-
triall, by putting in some of thoese, I likewise of
ise for barr-

eles of Ciderbut I take not some perfumes of Roses, very well dressed: -
this to bee the
meaning: -
5
The manner that they
make ^small  long perfumes: - called by the
spanish; Panetas; somewhat like a Cloue

Take ffour Ounces of Sweete pouder, & half an ounce
of storax, & put the a soaking in Musk=rosewater;
& after that they haue binn there 15 ffifeteene,  or
sixteene dayes; & then dried pound them & sift the
as ffor to make Muske=balls; & put in an ounce, &
an half, of Amber=Greece pounded; & three quarters
of an ounce of Muske, likewise well pounded; & a lit-
tle of sugar; & put it all to geather; & incorporate it,
+ & put it in a Morter; & there put in a little Coale
this Coale, is prepared in manner ffollowing shall bee sayd; & goe
not meant of putting in the Dragagant (or Dragant)^a little, & a lit-
very coale, tle, as much as will serue turne to empast it; & soe
but of a thing if yw haue occasion of more of the Coale, because the
named coale: past must bee very black: & yow must goe strewing,
pounding of this heape past, with an ounce of Ciuet;
& this past (if it can bee) must bee wrought to-
geather, as for sweet=balls; because the small
+ perfumes must make them vppon a table of +Ebony; & rolle
Tablero; in e them euery day (ffor ffeare they stick too)  till they bee
Spanish sigi-
 dry; & then put them in to a box;  - it will bee
ffies, a Chess= better to make them vppon a smoothe perfuming stone
table, or e like





4+ Such an one, stone, & so let them dry uppon it. 6
 as Paynters, The Carbon, or Coale, they make after this
& Perfumers manner following
use Muske water I make after two seuerall wayes, the o
on the fire. & the other in the sun: that which is made
made uppon the fire is made in this manner; take the ..
parts, or me. parts of rose water, that is uery good, & other three parts of
stir as musk rose water, & two parts of myrtle water; & a other
Trifo.l..in Eng two parts of water of the flour of Oranges, & four
 dropps of water of Trlieol; & an four dropps of white wi-
ne, that is very good, & an part of water of Angells
& put it all together in an Glass violl, of an bigg
quantity; & put therein an ounce of Ambar=Greece brui-
sed, & half an ounce of Civet, & some perfumes that
shall bee every good; about one forth part of them; &
as much sweete Gumm as  the bigness of an hazell
nut (& if y have of that, which is called of flowers, or ..
flores, tis better) & if the violl bee not full, fill it
with rose water; & stopp it, with an new peece of par-
chment; & make with an bodkin, three, or four hooles,
in the parchment; & that the stopper bee vvell tied
fast: & prepare an harth (or an great brass pan) with
fire; & ashes; so that it may bee betweene hottembers,
& fire; & make an hole in the middle, & put therein
the violl, & cover it with that kinde of fire; & put
an little more quick fire about it, & towards the top
thereof, untill it bee covered till within two fingers
beneath the neck; & so let it boyle: & as the fire decaies
put more forthwith; & let it boyle till it bee an hadfu
beneath the neck: take it away, then; & put it an
basket that hath either woll, or hures of Hemp, or
flax, about it (or rather within it) & place it awhile
on the ground: now when it boyles, & goes out by
those hooles made in the parchment; y must put it
with an knife into an porringer; & put it in againe
& so y must doe euer, when it runns ouer, or goes out
& you must haue prepared, an ounce of muske pounded
with in four, or fiue howres, that the violl bee
taken of, of the fire; then put them in; but not
before that time; because y must not meddle with
nor stirr the violl, for feare it breake: & when y
put in the musk, stirr it very quietly with an lit-
tle stick, that it may incorporate it self with the rest
& put it againe into the Basket, aftert that you have
put in the muske; & put the wooll about it; & lett it
stand theere, & stay two, or three dayes to coole: &
this must bee donne with an greate; & euery day (for the
space of two, or three dayes) take it out of the basket;





5 84
&  stirr it very quickly, as before, & stopp it with
an other parchment an topp of it:
That water which is made in the sun; they is made after
the same manner, save that y must put in the muske by
and by, with all the sweet Gumm, or Benuiny; & the parch-
ment must h... bee cloose fast; & yu must put into the
sum fifteene, or twenty dayes, & all wayes take thee
violl hott from the sun; & put it into an Basket with
hurds of flax, or hemp; till such time, as you put it into
the sun the next day
7
Small Perfumes, are likewise thus
made, after an other manner
After that the Amber Greece, & musk, is brought to
geather to an part; have the confection, or Receipt ready,
& put it in; & turne, or commenc to compose it, & min-
gle them togeather
8
An Memoriall how to draw
Gloves
Yu are to take the Gloves, & wash them with rose wa-
ter, till such time, as the water part cleere away from
them; after that let them dry; yu are to put to every
pare of gloves, an quarter of an Ounce of Muske diss-
olved in rose water; & so let them remaine and lay &
after that, take half an ounc of Ambar Greece; &
as little Civet as may bee; and about an thimble full
what thisof Oyle of .... Zitaven; & of rose water; that shall co-
 should bee ver over all this; & dissolve it at, or before an gen-
I conceivetle fire, & dress yr gloves
not
9
For to dress gloves, to remaine
white
Yu are to take an quartar of an Ounce of Ambar
Greece; the whitect yu can gett; & pound it in an
Zitaven morter; & put no muske to it; but dissolve it with
Oyle of Zitaven, & rose water; & y are
to use so much of it, till such time; as it commence
to bee white; & to this yu are to put an quarter qu-
antity of Oyle, & of Civet (then in the former rec-

ceipt) y and yu are not to approach to the fire
with them
10
How to make Little
muske balls
Ben; amini; To three pound of sweete Gumm; you must put, half an poud
of storax; three ounces of Amber greece, & two of
Musk: all this beeing very well beaten, & bruised, yu are to
incorporate with it about half an ounce of Civet;
& having made an end of boyling them, yu are
to make little Musk Balls; & let them dry; ..h in a





6
+ reade; an place, where neither sun, nor Ayre+, may comme to the
winde: & when an little Civet, & then put them in the sun
11
Come, make small perfumes
after this manner:
Benjam-
in;















































when they are well soaked, they are to stand in the
sayde vessell, rovered  with an other vessell ; you are to let
them stand ffrom the evening or night, till the morn-
ing ffollowing ; & after that, you are to take them out,
& put them a^ driing in the shade ; & after they bee dry,
you are to soake them, in the same water two other
times ; then you are to take a^ greate pot, which may
holde, or containe, eighteene pounds of rose water ; & you
must take a pound, & an half of Beniamin ; & four
ounces of storax , & an ounce of Amber=Greece ; & three
quarters of an ounce of muske ; & ffour quarters of an ounce
of civet ; of rupe  six ; of liquur Aloe two ; all
that this is
can of ffin=
; unless hee
eare, Ruia ;
Rue ; -
theese things you are to take beeing very well pound=
ed ; & put them in the sayde pot with the sayd twelve
pound of rose water (hee spake before but of six
pound of rose water ; & of a^ pot to containe eighteene
pond) the pot is to bee of copper tinn'd within, &
covered very close ; so beeing shutt you are to put it
on the ffire ; & make it boyle, so that it boyle away a^
third part ; & then beeing so hott, or reasonable hott ;
viz:-
whole
ighte;
you must put it uppon the roses ; which you must soake
well, & let them stand till morning, & after that put
to dry before the ffire : --
The water that remaines you are to put in a^ Glasse
& that which is remaining in the bottome will serve
to make little parts ; & thus after thereof bee dry
you are to soake them other two times with the same
water ; & after that you are to take Cypress=pouder ;
of the ffinest you can gett, a^ pound thereof ;
an ounce of Amber=Greece ; half an ounce of muske ;
half an quarter of an ounce of Civer ; very well po=
nded ; to make the composition upp. you must take two
ounces of Amber=Greece , & three of muske very well
pounded , & after that they must bee tempered with Civ=


















x because it take no bad smell; X must stir them Xone part to another; so that it dry very well; X these you are to commence to boil in X water, till such time as it grow thick. as before; and then put it again in the sun and this you have to do until such time , as they become  yellow; putting them ever in the sun; and in the air; and them; after they one day; the cakes bee yellow, and dry put them again in the said pan; or glazed or galley pot; and in the water of lowers of oranges; and of roses; and other sweet waters, if you have them; and let them soak in the said water; till such time  as they dissolved; and when the X (or lump) is made; let them boil in manner that they become thick, so that you may make little cakes of them; and out the little cakes within the perfumed water, uppon a griddian;

















27 95
of Cinomout, of harte horne a^ quarter of an ounce; of
feed = pacepearle a quarter of an ounce; -
all theese pouders yu are to sifte throughe a^ soarte;  to
half of this quantity put four ounces of  syropp of myr-
tle; so that, the syrop bee made, or put into a Gally pot;
 then put it ouer a^ gentle fire to boyle;  as it grow=
eth thick; put into .....the pouders;  stir it with
a^ little stick up, and downe, till such time as it incorpo=
rate;  then take it away; -  cleane  toothe there=
with euery morning;  euening tis good likewise to use it at
night; to put it in a little poole, within the toothe;  to
rubb them with a^ growe, or course cloath; - white thing
beeing thus coutinued, will make them incarnate, or take
flosh; -  make them whithwhite;  without filthe;-
rilla; is in
spanish a^
ttle poore
f flosh;
hather. gee
e and if so
know not:
62
A' memoriall for to dress the
musk Gloues for the coun=
tess of miranda;
To a^ paire, or for a^ paire, of Gloues and drammund of
elerue hee
eaues rose
ater;-Muske ; pounded,  dissolued;  stir it water, in the
quantity of three ounces;  dressing the quantity gloues as
they ought to bee dresst; yu are to annoynt them te fill
such time as the haue taken upp all the quantity; spoke-
of;   while the one is drying; annoynt the other;   neede
not put them to dry I thinke hee meanes in yr sun or Ba-
de) But yu may preserue them forth=with:-
+
conteiue,
e ticle is
ore wan=
ing;-
To two pound of sugar, put a^ dram of Amber=greece; the
sugar must bee so ordered, as that it stick not to the sides of
the morter;   yu must pound the sugar in a^ stone morter;
 put it in the water, to quarter with the Amber=greece;
in a^ Porcellan, or Chinay=dish; yu are not to put much
water; because not to put it in all to quarter; because it
will dissolue suddenly; likewise yu are to keepe a^ little
sugar in case it should have to much water in it; yu are
to pound it much;  hee that doth it, is to bee ax Areug
person;  when it bee timne to hardon, wett the handes of
the morter in the water which is in the Porcellan, with e
Ambar=greece;  if they sugar bee two ouer soft;
But put in to it of the sugar that yu have left, a kept
apart; - the signe that yu may beginn to make it upp;
is when it leaues to cleaue to the morter;  though it
beginns to doe so; yu must ... not leaue off to pound
it; the first time that yu are to turne it, must bee
bee donne, with a knife; for that it brake not, after
that yu may turne it with yr hand; the signe that e
sugar (or two pound of  sugar) is dry, is when it is white;-
A' memoriall how yu are (or how to dress) to
dress the Gloues for the countess of
Miranda:
Take, halfe a^ quarter of an ounce of Amber=Greece; a^







a Dramme of nucke; half a dramme of cuiat; this
enouofh for one payre of qlouds; -
y are to wak them within in many waters till far tier
as the water remains cleare from them; by right y are to wet






























































































































































































































































70
A: Medicine to Cure a face
that is red and full of Pimples

Take 2lb of quick silver put it in a little glass and there to so much fasteing so ittle as mill









































































































































A: Salve for an old Sore
Take valerian. red sage. settwell. adders tongue. whitewort rock
et. leaves. spearemints. water betony. hearbe robert. of each a
handefull. stampe them alltogether. then take hoggs liquor
and yellow waxe. and rosen of each of these halfe a pounde
then put them tathe hearbes and sett them on a soft fire
and lett them boyle a reason able time some halfe howre
then take halfe an ounce of vnwashed turpentine and put
it in. when you are readye to take it of the fire let it stande
till it be colde. and make it vp in rowles. as you se cause
The powder that must be vsed with itt
Take of the finest white sugar. burnt allom. rosen beaten
to powder. of each a quantity alike. when the wound is cleansed
from the Coruption strew this vppon it and then lay in the salve
Spreade on a playster. If the wounde be not deepe. If it
be deepe mingle the salve with lint and soe put it in/
The Salve: H
Take a good quantity of wormewood soe much as will make
the Salve to looke Green stampe it very small. then
take a pound of bores grease that hath been melted and
Strayned. and soe much sheeps suett (as being well shred
and beaten small in a morter and then melted) will serve
some what to stiffen the salve and when the sheepes sewet
is Melted. put the wormewood vnto it. and lett it seeth for
a little space. and then put in the bores grease. lett all these
Seeth very well together. and when it is well boyled
put it in a strong course Nen Canvis & strayne and crush
it very hard. till all the liquor or Inice comes out into a
pot. then put in it a little sallet oyle and Stirr and mingle
it all together till it comes to a salve:/
An approued good Medicine to cleanse the body
of bloud after a bruise. or any inward bleeding
Take an ounce of the woody stalke of. duliamacy beaten
which is a keeping kind of night shade groweing in hedges
and 6 ounces of white wine lett them soake together 12
howeres and give the wine to drinke vse it 3 or 4 times
if neede be
Dr: Rumph An oyle for any inward bruise
or broken ribbs:/
Take a pinte of the best sallett oyle. a little Malmesey a good
hande full of Earthwormes. put these. wormes into sennell
or some such thing to strip them selves clean from the
Earth. then put the wormes and a great quantity. of
melilote flowers. with the oyle and malmesey. into a
strong glass bottle. stopping it with a corke but not very
close that it may have a little vent. lett this stand in
some








with prying Gastons as Neede Shall required and soe use alsoe
to take the poweder of dogs turd and the powder of a Swallowes
nest made in fine powder and mingle with it Soe much of
the Groome ointment talloe valentia do strabiaria as will
make it like a ponetise. and Spreade this and lay it outward by
about the throate this is great nerosity although very infinite
in number. I holpon only with the Gargle and motion
hott or warme use & aSpoone as u want the oyntment you may
mixe it with homny as a panetire and soe lay is as before!
Another a Sporiall Good one for the Squinsy
Soe So Soone as the throate is ...... take a pretty draught
of milke warmed and put to it as much of the powder
of album yrernm, finely beaten and Soarted as will Lye
uppon a fire & porrd and a little Nuttmegg and Sugar and
Stir it will together and lett the party drinke it once
or twice and it will helpe kiin a Clove browned
paper and take it fitt to lye uppon the throate Spread
it over with honny. and Strew it all over the powder
of album Grernon.
ffor a flued.
Take Cobbnobs and fipe them in Sallot oyle. and lay it
hot to the navell. this will stay any flued
for a fluxe in man or Child
Take an ounce of the Syrrop of Correll if it be for a man
but less for a Childe and giue it to drinke twice or thrice
a day as need requires with 2 or 3 Spoonefull of the water
of oater and twice distilled.
For the Bloudy fluxe or any other
fluxe a very good remedy
Distill red oaven leaves newly Shred or Suthas hand on the
tree when all other trees have shed Keepe the water in
a Glass make powder of Aroenes. thorow wipe and Give
the water and powder together Sixe Spoone fulls or more
the powder of the leaves will doe it alone:/
Another for a fluxe
Take of rubarb from halfe an ounce to an ouncea drayme to a drame and a
halfe according to the Strength of the disease and the
patient Stire it very thin and drye and toste it very well
but let it Not beene powder it and Give it in a bitter draught
of playtime water or red wine if u give a little quantity
you may give it twice or thrice./
A











































Daies together. and when you take not this eate fasteing
soe much Conserve of hipps as a wallnutt for 4 or 5
morneings this dissolveth the matter that bred the
stone. and cleanseth and comforteth this kidneies
and the vreceres:/
To bring downe the Natturall Courses
in Women: H
Take balme mugwort. wilde Germader borage flowers
of each a handefull. Isope mother thyme pennyriall
of each halfe a hand full.. sage as much. avens rootes
halfe an ounce. mace one drame. saffron halfe a scruple
Infuse these in 3 pints of Rhenish wine lett it run
through a Cotton bagg. and sweeten it to yo likeing
drinke hereof one draught in the morneing and another
an howre before supper.
A fine Gentle Purge good for
a Melancholy bodye
Take an ounce and halfe of Syrrop of roses and 10 drams
of manna and 12 ounces or allmost. a pinte of Clainefyed
whay the syrrop. of roses and manna put into the whay
and soe dissolve it by warmeing it a little. then strame
it and Give the patient to drinke. an howre or two after
drinke a little broth:/
To Make a very proved broth
ointment against the gangrene
Take oyle of St John wort one ounce yellowe waxe
halfe an ounce mingle these two in a little pannvppon
hott Embers then lett it coole. and afterwarde mingle
in it one dragme of oyle of Cloves. halfe a dragme
of Camphire. and one dragme and a halfe of the
strongest oyle of vitrioll. that you can finde this being
mingled togtether. keepe it in a little Jare glass for yo
vse when you will vse this ointment
you must spread somewhat thick vppon a little cloth
and lay it over the Gangrene and lett it stand 8. or 10
howres. and soe you shall finde that the mortifyed flesh
shall Separate round about from the good and hinder
the mortification to goe any further afterwarde
you may proceede in the cure with ordinarie remedie
to mundifie the flesh and heale it.
To





A reite for plague water

Tak[e]: sage: salamain rosemary rue wormwood
Rosafolis muggworts, peprnelly draggon, Egorymoney
Balm, spearminte;sweet marjoroom; plantain
liverwoorte sudtherin woond peny royal, scordian-
Cardus, Nettgney, flowers and leaves, sentry flowers-
& tops marygolds flowers & leaves, St: johns
worte flowers & tops, Tak[e]: of each of these a good
handfull  take  roots of butterburr of [?]
Angillico, Gentin, Elcompany pinocy zedary
liquorice, clean serapt & thin- slices of each of
these: one ounce , mash  herbs & shak[e]  in a cloth  &
lett  dry  thread  herbs & mix with  roots, puting
to  herbs, a GAllon & a halfe of  beste white wine & two
Gallons of sack: 20 quarts of  best brandy & lett
stipe all together 4 or 5 days & nights, sturring  all
together once a day, keep  nott in a Limbeck;  a soft fire, Cool:  top: of  still  a wett cloth,
wrung out of cold water paste  still about clos
at  bottom,  a paper don. in water, & flower

To make a marrow Torte
Tak[e] a qaurter of a pound of Blanched Almonds
beate  very well  a little thick, Cream;take

marrow of 4 bones, take 4 good Aples shredded
small:  yolk of 6 eggs, a quarter of a pound currants
seasoned  nuttmeg & sugar, & rosewater, according
to  taste mix  all very well together &put it
into puff peaste.





To make a Cake
Take 6 pound of flower well dryed in an ouen &
lite it through a siuil n take a quarte of A Cream
3 pound & a halfe of fresh Butter Lett e Cream W
& put e butter in
e fire till it be melted n take 17 Eggs Leaving only
6 of e white beate m very well th a spoone putting
m a quarter of a pinte of rose water or Leacke & a good
quarte of Ale paste mix. m together, 2 pound of 6 p
sugar n you washed e 6 pound of flower, put ha
of it into an Earthen pan or boule & putt to it 3 nutmeggs
Greated 6 penyworth of mace & Cloues, a litle salte y
mix e Creame & butter & Eggs & Eatte altogether, & Paste altogether, & putt
through a siue, into e flower, n sett it doune to e fire
Keepe warme, put e reste of e flower upon it, Couer
th a Cloth, & Lett Stand to rise for halfe an houre n
see t it is rise pretty well, mixe it all together th r
hands n lett it stand in e boule a while to rise n have
ready 7 pounds of Currane Clean washt & pickle &
Keepte warmily e fire, & n ur ouen is almoste hott
Lett one put m in th theire hand & another mixe m th
peaste t it maybee all a Like n n e ouen is ready, pouer
out of e pan into a hoope, upon a paper, give it a nick th
knife & soe put it into e ouen, & Lett it stand 4 houres in
e ouen, you may put a knife into it, & if it bee well
Backed it will Come Cleare from e knife, for e Goeinge
you muste take 3 quarters of a pound of fine Loafe
sugar finely beat in a morter & put to it 3 or 4 whites
of Eggs, & beate m together for halfe an houre th a
pestle n n you take e Cake out of e ouen & take no
e hoope, th a feather Ice e Cake ouer, & sett it in e ouen
upon e pite for a quarter of an houre till e Icing bee
but doe not put by e Lead of e ouen for feare it Coulder
being





Harthorne Jelly

Take a pound of hartshorne &[and] 2 Gallons &[and] halfe
of spring Water, &[and] let it boyle over a soft fire
uncovered 4 hours, thn take a littl of it onto a plate
&[and] lett it cool" to see if it will jelly or not if it doth
nott thn lett it boyle till it doth, &[and] wn it is boyled enough
take it off, &[and] lett it cool for half a quarter ot of an houre
thn stran ir through a fibne sieve soe lett ir stand till
it be cold, wn it is cold sett it over th fire again, thn putt
in a pinte of th best white wine thn take th white of 8:
eggs beaten thm up to a froth, &[and] th juice of 6 lemonds put
into th white of th eggs, whn th jelly id upon th fir put
in 2 pound of th best refine sugar thn wh sugar is melted
put in th lemon &[and] eggs sturr it aboute till it just
boyle up thn take it of th fire 7 [and] run it through a jelly
bagg into glasses or wt you please.

To make a [?] [?]

Take 3 pound of flower, &[and] dry it very well
divided into 2 parts thn take halfe a pinte of Ale
Easte &[and] 6 eggs one nuttmeg greated, as much creame
scalding hott, as will wett one halfe of th flower into
a paste, laid it by th fire to make it rise, thn take one
pound of butter melted a litle &[and] make th other
halfe flower into a paste whn th first is risesen thn take
one pound of  ? Comfitts &[and] mould it all together
as quicke as you can lett th oven
hott







































rlolipody rooted well. Clensed. 4 ounces and a halfe. of
Good Chosen rhubarbe small Sliced one ounce. and a halfe
of Good Sarsaparrilla slitt and cutt small 3 ounces. of Sweet
fennell seedes. one ounce. and halfe. of yellow docke roote e
pith taken out. and scraped and cutt Small. a large hand
full. of rootes of hopps of suttory. of each halfe an ounce
of fumitory. and betony. of each a good handefull. Chopp all
Small and putt an Empty. boulster bagg. large enough in to
a runlett. that conteynes 3 Gallons. lett the Mouth of the bagg
be holden outt. and putt there in these things by little x little
then tye the mouth of the bagg. and lett. it hang in the
Runlett. then turm into the runlett. 3 gallons of reasonabble strong ale
that is ready to worke. and lett it rorke and haveing wought
stopp it vp close. and being sixe dayes old. then drinke of
this 2 or 3 tymes a day. more or less accordeing as you findd it
worke with s. Continue this for. 8. or 14 dayes as yo
Strength will beare it:/
A Medicine for hardeness of the belly
and stopping of splene. and liver and wormes
in Children
Take a quart of Strongest ale or strongest beere. boyle in this
of wormewood. a handefull. of Cardus benidictus of Contory
of St. Johns wort of each one handefull being Choped. and
boyle them in the ale or beere. with halfe a pound of fresh
butter. being well boyled. strayne this out very harde. and
with this liquor rub the belly. and sides downeward
before a fire. Morneing and evening:
Dr Matthias
for. The Worms in the hinder Gutts.
Take the middle barke or leafe of wallnut tree boyle itt
in water then putt to this. a pinte. that is to a pinte 4
Spoone fulls of honny. and strayne this. Minister this
in a sering
Dr. Matthias ffor Itching in the hinder partes
First take orpine. henebane. nighshade mulletts. elder berke
boyle these with water. and vinegar & sweete butter till
all the moysture bee gone. then strayne this & with this
annointe the place:/
A medicine for one that hath an Extreame
Rheume. and Consumeing in e tongues
Take 3 quartes of runing water. one good hand full of
of the topps of Isope. one handefull of husked barby.
one








A Most Excellent and precious oyle or
Balsum whchwrath all nonnds in
a body Short time. It is also good
for all paynes for e Cramps Sist
Mom Gets. Shrunke Sineres and more
disseases of mans body approued:/
Take of froth and Sweet oyle of olives. 10: white
wine one pound. boyle these together till the wine
be Consumed lett it Cooke and putt it into a Stone
pott that is great Enough. then as unto it of e
flowers of rosemary and pound & a halfe of lignum
alloes 3 ounces of a libanam of  bdellium of each. ..
ounces. then Stopp your pott well with Corke pilth
and bladders and bury it in the Earth in the begin
ing of august. then lett it remaine about halfe
a yeare there. then take it out and putt in these follo
wing things
Take of Sage. rosemary. betony. and yarrow of the roo tes
of Consolida Maior. of the leaves of vitriella other
wise Called ballsaminamas of the flowers of tapens
bar take of each 3 handefulls of gallingall Cloves. Nutt
meggs. Spitanard. Saffron of each halfe an ounce of Sar
toto la. Sangnis dragonis Mastise of each an ounce of
alloes. spatie to fyn of the pyne of each 4 ounces of
Colophonia halfe a pound of the topps with the Seeds
of hypewiton or St. Johns wort one pound of mussle
halfe a drame of yellow waxe of hoggs Grease of each
9 ounces but insteade of the two left it is better to
take oyle of waxe and mans Grease The hearbs you
Mustint Small. and Stampe them the rest of the
things powder and put them all to the oyle. mi
yxe them well and sett them all the Summer in
e Sunne.  then boyle them till the hearbs be dryd
and Strayne the oyle through and put in Some
of the Artifitiall balsome. the quantity of 10 ounces
and in the month September put in of the fruite
balsamine when it is red and pound and this is your balsom
Ended. Keepe it CloseStoped this balsammina is the vitriolla
or balsam apple before Spoken of. here you must take e
fruite when it is ripe and red. In defect of this you may
take the topps of the madelen with the flowers and
Seeds.
It neare not amise to ad to this balsome gum klemni
oz













For Stinging of a Snake or Nute
When any one is stung with a Nute or Snake or Such like
Take pott or oyle that is to be had att the Apothecaries
and annoynt the place prsently with it and dipp Clothes
in the oyle and lay on it if it swell much. playsters of
triacle and diascordium mingled together is good and give
of these Cordiall waters Anwardly and tracle water is very
Soveraigne to drinke Continually if it sell much
Doctorr Matthias
To Purge Cholor and Melancholy
Syrrop of Some flowers infused a dozen times distilled
water. Sip Spoone fulls to an old body. in the morning
taken either alone or in a little mace ale purgeth
Cholor and melancholly.
Doctorr Matthias
Agaist a Malignant feaver
or agne
Pimpernell stilled in an ordinary still. to the quantity of a gallon. save the stilled hearbs and breake them small
and steepe them in that sue stilled. and putt
them in a stone pott. well stoped and lett them stand
over a bakers Chimny for a whole month. then ~
press the water Cleane from the hearbs againe and
still the water over agayne in a still and when the
water is allmost stilled out save the last that
remayne in the bottome of the still which will bee
somewhat thick and put it in a glass by it selfe and
putt sugar to it this water is a very speciall thing in
any malignant feaver or agne and the better if you
put as much as the quantity of a Nuttmegg of that
thick that was left in the bottome of the still as
before is mentioned
An approved good medicine to procure
Sleepe in a burneing feaver:
Take & poores of Scarlett of the biggness of a womans
hand then take red rose water as much as will Cover all these
over in a dish and heate it soe througly in a dish
or till it boyle. they being well soaked apply one to thee
fore heade & temples another to the stomackh two other
under the arme pitts the fisst on the fundament when
they begin to waxe drye moysten them againe in the
same








(14) D21maltlias Thee Green Salad thad soft that rad was for Green coornds.
Take a pinte of Sallattoylo halfe a pound of cofen 6 ounces
of gallon naxd. 2 ounces of elibaran. 2 ounces of green
pitch in  thele in the oyle and then put into it a spoon
e full of redigiddle in five poundes. and 2 ounces of the
pontine & Stirr it untill together and lett it  seate a little
and then strayne it and keep it.
A prepare lo Extracto nellbino absintion per sard a lo soringa
yoo must take of drye roeme nood halfe a pounde tomon
Ayne bite 2 quartes fonntoyre water and quart then sonmust
Steepe together 24 horreds and then still it till you have
a quart of  somerhat less then you must take away that
which is in that receinre which is the spinitt of the ayne
wild, and smelle strong of the narrow wood. which must be
sed thees you must take drye narrow wood. frinly poundes
senntes to  you  must put sere math of yt spircid as will
shronghly sett the narrowed wood. you must stopp the
glass that none may breath ant loading it fore in some
coole plate for 3 daies and then strayne through a frid
cloth and then you shall have a rozy litter liqor with you
shall find a lause
A: Playster for the shitih or Plonrisye
Take a test of the bottome of anye loafe of bread & test itt
kett and sprinikle it with ayne Compasata and spreade
uppon the tostes a spoone full of criatle and lay it to eplare
as hot as you can suffer it.
To first an Agne by Playster often approved
Seeth an exs gall in a skillett and putt into it an ennts
of pepper beaten small and stir it often untill it grow
into a salene like unto triatle then shifte it beetween two
donble clothes and binde it about the patients curests
a little before that fitt cometh and when the fitt is
comed to the it away used & trime & be cured Probatron est






(149)
To make the water Imperiall
after Salisbury makeing

In may take rosemary flowers and infuse them in the
best red wine or mus.e.i.. u can gett with all the coridiall
flowers as the flowers of bage br.glose rose b.dde and
fresh .i.e and water they are infused for a space then
putt there to a jelly made of caqon a logg of .eale 6
pigeons dates cinamon greate way.o.. of each an ounce
borage balme bug.os.e parsely sage j..p mints margero.
genthe marygold fo each a handfull of cleres fennell
Seedes of each and spoons full of nuttmeggs halfe an
ounce water 8 red wine as much as will ins.ice for the
tecoction of the jelly  the jelly thus made putt to the
cordiall flowers infused it must be distilled in a linbelt
in a pott fill for the purpose  adding thereto the g.l.es  of . 4
eggs and a loafe of white breade skied then . one
pound and a halfe of sugar halfe a pound of t.i.che
or mith.date and .. figgs cutt small then close the pott
with the linbelt and with a soft fior distill a water
like aque rite when ur sto.atk is tronbled drink thereof
with sugar alone or with ale 3 spoonefulls and by gods
grare it will give u ease

. mellis virgins .iny
Su.i hyperin ondenea.i
myrr.se .rogloditre as ei
camphlre
of cargophillor as drafto
mi onnia in .aee writer and sorva ad venn

The medicine is one of the most effectrall and wonderfull
remidies that may be used to soparate all malefriction or
jongreene from the .ire flesh to defend it from greater
putrifaction and make an easye foundation for Incarnation
by the apph.cation of other cor.eint remedies for that pur
pose and this is the use The jongren being soe great
yt it will be ..soe eary to make scarificetion into it up
u must first put above it a conerement defen s.tire
accordeing to the art of ch.r.egiry then apply this medic layde uppon the ine
think spreed uppon a peere of cloth and soe
jon





Gangren and leave it soe for the space of coaxy hours  take
Take itt of and soe if the mortifyed flesh doe separate
from the ...tk which if it doe not doe at ye first apply it
to itt agayne the second time. and it will doe as much as
Can be affected from a medicine. If the mortification be
Not Great it will neede now scarrification. butt only to
apply the medicine without any other untill the gangern
be throughly. Separated. roundabout and then you must
follow the care with after medicines. flilled  to it as well
to bringe f..th the mortifyed flesh. as to perfect C...

Paine in ye :
For the heade.

Take an ounce of nutt in eggs. powered very  fine a hande full
of rose leaves dryed. Mingle these together with 6 spoone fulls
of rose water. 3 spoone fulls of red fineger boyle this together
and spreade it on a cloth and binde it to his foreheade.

A medicine for the store in the
RL  Reyres which is the best of
All medicine

First tale plantime. house leeke fether foy. and tansy of ye
garden of each of them a like quantity stampe them and
strayne them alltogether and put to them beare flower
to thick it mithall and take 3 spoonefulls English
honny and putt it to them and sett them upon the fire
and lett them seeth till they see this as will playster
ever stiring it or else it will burne the pan. then you
must take a cloth a span broade all the best and soe long
as may goe round your body and back.  and soe from the
pan to spreade the same upon the aforesaide cloth
and soe lay it to yo(ur) naked body. and if yo(u) say it on towards
night it must remayne 2 daies and one night for
yo(ur) it will drye and grow this must you use when
you feele the grndying of the stone. an also once in
and weeks when yo(u) feele roe payre for the Rparl of
3 quarters of a year and after that once a quarter
you must gather these hearbs before michemass and
stamye them and strayre them and put them in some
great glass. to serve in the winter.
This






(143)
Fox ye Spare of 18weeks and all the Prystians in London d..
forsake him and these things weare sent him to drinks
of an ontlandish man and he dranke and within 3 tymes drinking
it he walkes uppon his feete and obtaines his health
and he had an hungry stomack. This he shewed me .nor
his own mouth and dehiered me the fill of the make
ing these of with he receared of ye ontlandish man

A present ..medie for an
Agns:

Take 7 Spoonefulls of Clarett wine a  spoonefull of
the  ponder of  rosemary and putt into it as much life
honny as a hazellnutt and then lett him  drinke  it  blende
warine.

A very Good medicine to take away
a warf
Take  the inward rindg of Elme and  lay it  in running spring
water for the space of 24 hours and  therewith washye
wart Continually out putt the water only uppon the wart and lett
it well noe further and as  it dryes on  weft it againe

To make the water of life
Take  balme stalkes and bores burneft leaces and  flowers or
handefull of rosemarry turn u(e)ntill leares and  rootes  a hand
full rose  so his a handefull of red rose and a  hand
full  of cornations a handfull of  ssop a  handfull of thyme
red stings  that grow  uppon savexy a handfull of  red fen
nell rootes  and  leaves a handfull of  mints as much
putt all these  hearbs into  a putt and  therewith as much
white  wine as will loves the  hearbs and  then loves  the
pott close  and lett them soake there in  8 or 9 daies you take an
ounce  of Cinamon as much ginger as much nutteregg closes
a lift he quantity and  a small quantity of A.. iseedes of great
Raysons a pound halfe a pound of dates the  hinderpart
of an ole  cony and a good flesht Copar  a dozen of larks ye
yolk of 12 eggs the red  of a legg of mutten with sin
news 4 young  pidgeons a loose  of white  breade  cutt in  sopps
Muscadine  or bastard as much as suffhieth to distill all
these things  all att once in a limbecke and there in putt
Mithridate  2 or 3 ounces  or els as much  of perfect
treack and distill it mith a moderate fire  and keep the
first water by it selfe and the  second alone, And  whenthere
comes  ... more  water with  strength then take  away
the him beck and put  into  the  pot more wine  uppon
the







Gangren and leave it soe for the space of coaxy hours yo(u) take
To be itt if and soe if the mortifyed flesh doe separate
from the gnick which if it doe not doe at you first apply it
to itt agayne the second time and it will doe as much as
Can be affected from a medicine. If the mortification be
not great it will neede now scarrification butt only to
apply the medicine without any other untill the gangern
be throughly. Separated. roundabout and then you must
follow the care with mortifyed flesh as to perfect your cure

paine in y(e)
For the heade

Take an ounce of nutt in eggs. powered very  fine a hande full
of rose leaves dryed. Mingle these together with 6 spoone fulls
of rose water. 3 spoone fulls of red fineger boyle this together
and spreade it on a cloth and binde it to his foreheade.
A medicine for the store in the
Reyres which is the best of
All medicine

First tale plantime. house leeke fether foy. and tansy of ye
garden of each of them a like quantity stampe them and
strayne them alltogether and put to them beare flower
to thick it mithall and take 3 spoonefulls English
honny and putt it to them and sett them upon the fire
and lett them seeth till they see this as will playster
ever stiring it or else it will burne the pan. then you
must take a cloth a span broade all the best and soe long
as may goe round your body and back.  and soe from the
pan to spreade the same upon the aforesaide cloth
and soe lay it to yo(ur) naked body. and if yo(u) say it on towards
night it must remayne 2 daies and one night for
yo(ur) it will drye and grow this must you use when
you feele the grndying of the stone. an also once in
and weeks when yo(u) feele roe payre for the Rparl of
3 quarters of a year and after that once a quarter
you must gather these hearbs before michemass and
stamye them and strayre them and put them in some
great glass. to serve in the winter.
This






Morneing and Evening 4 spoonefulls drinke it fasteing
and goeing to bedd for a quarter of a yeare together.
A: Blacke Salve for a Sprayne
or old Sore or New.
Take a pinte of Sallot oyle halfe a pound of red leade and
mix them well together. take an ounce and and a halfe of yellow
waxe and Slice it thin. Sett all these together on a fire
lett them boyle softly till the waxe be melted. then take
an ounce of spermaceti putt it vnto the rest. and lett it
boyle vntill it be black and rope be tweene yourr fingers. keepe
it with stirring for feare it run over. when it is boyled put
it in an Earthen pott to keepe it for r use if you will you may
add Camphire.
An Approved Medicine to breake
a fellon or pin rush.
Take a penny white leafe. Grate itt & boyle itt in Good wine vinegar
and in the boyleing putt in 4 spoonefulls of honny and halfe a
spoonefull of baysalt and soe boyle it to a poultise & spread itt uppon
Leather, & lay it soe far as is Swolne and when it is broken apply
thee salve before mentioned to the broken place. and then layye
poultise on itt.
A Remedy for the Cough of
the Lungues
Take a pottle of running water put to it halfe a pound of fyigs
slitt halfe a pound of Raysons of the summ and store themm halfe
a handefull of lignorice sliced thin. a spoone full of anniseedes
halfe a pound of french barley. fanned cleane. 3 of saxifrage
3 handfulls of Coltes foote a handfull and a halfe of Asop
a handfull of borage. a little spinage. put all these into a pott
& Cover it very Close. lett it stand in a brass pott of boyleing water
3 or 4 houres. then still all these things in a still vntill they
be very deyd. then put a good quantity of red stone sugars or
white. Probatum:
A remedye for Deafeness which Cured
one that was deafe many  yeares
Take sallott oyle a quarter of a pinte. one handfull of betony
one of St. Johns wort. one of Contory. one of arsesmart of
selfe heale. a leafe or two of herrell thee weight of a penny of
saffron. stampe all these & putt themm to thee oyle & sett it in the summ the hottest
monthes of June, July, August: Mistressrs Homsteade





156Another very good one
Take ground joye ..th runs along uppon the ground stampe it
a little & put it in a cloth and put it into the eares goody king
A Remedy for the Pilles
Take mulen loaves putt to them as much leads as you thinke
will make then flacke and soe beate y. together very
fine when they are all most beaten then put as much
capens grease as yo in thin be will serve ti make anointment
.le it continually untill yyou be n..ll
Ffor a woman in labor
When she is neare to be dehireres give some oyle of nutt
meggs in some ale or what yyou have and if all follows
nott ppresently give for a little ordinary sope in a little posett
ale
A Remedye for the Small pox
and to cure ym in the throate
Make barley roatex with a fennell roots or two the
pith taken one. 2 dates 2 figgs a sticke of lignorice
and of the broth make allmonde milke putt to a pinte
nott past in oz. 12 almonds blanched if they be good as and
if the poxe. dos not findely come forth put into this
allmond mike halfe a drame of diar rozdeinm at atyme
and beepe ythe party diseased warme in his fed all so yyou may
vse harts horne burnt in posett ale with a funnell
roots sudd in it for the p of the throate there
is nothinge better then this receipt
Take of..... whith hath been fayde in hinen to
Sneeted ym white sugar candy and allow burnt of
each a hike quantity beate them into fine powder
and put it uppon ythe  tongue in a small quantity all
Sunday times and it will beepe the throate clean
and if they shall come forth in any great quantity
soe yt the eies bee shutt with them th.ngh there seeme
to be noe.....yet for the p of the .ies
deopp into ythe womans milke m.rrhled with red rose water
Ann approsed medicine for a
Pearle in the Eye
Take daysie roots & leaves rash them and drye them yn take ythe white of an egg and beate it untill it come
allmost to an oyle yn stampe ythe daysies and sprayne ym
with a little hony & ythe egg drop it into ythe eye.
ann





Ann approved medicine for a sore
br.st to ripe it and brea.e itt

Take wormewood and mallo.ed of each a li.e quantity
boyle y. in running water until they be.ey under our
Streyne  them with bores or s.i.es grea.e untill they be
well incoorparated our spread it uppon a cloth and warme
it a little att the fire and soe applye it u must rener
it twice in .4 houres

A good .eigh to stay a swelling
from Gangering

Take very ..nnge green ashe and burne it take a good
quantity of those ashes and make strong standeing
leigh our strayne it and putt therein a good quantity of
lin tules of fe. thes and a good qunatity of wormewood
and boyle it untill ye fe.thes be very te3 or 4 times nder and sore
bath ye swelled part with leigh a day

A medicne for a burneing or
scaldeing

Take one handefull of dazie rootes and leaves one hand
full of ye plartine leaves and a handfull of collow leaves
wash them very cleane and strike them in a cloth
until they be drye stompe them till they be very
fine yn boyle them with one pinte of goose grease
and streyne itt

A Remedye for a Pearle in
the eye:

Rost an egg hard peell of ye shall splitt it in ye midst
take out the yoke then take two or 3 leaves of
gound ..id cutting them asunder then ley them in
a cloth with the whtie of the egg and a little allom
beaten small the egg being hott lay them in the
midst of it then strayne them together from which
will proceed a green water which takes away the
peare or heales any wound in they eye

for a quarterine Agne

Take ye hart of a rare make it clean wash itt in good
white wine untill ye wine come cleare from it
with









JH. be all like slime which being done put therte two
ounces of white Sugar Candy. powdered. 6 spoone full
of red rose water. and mingle them with all the
liquor. t was strayned well together. and strayne them
againe Strongly. and of this broth lett the party eate
some times crumed. or other wise deviers times in e day.
The broth beinge heate very warme. John. Fletcher.
To make gilly of a Capon
Excellent for a Consumption
Take of China the weight of Gd: thin Slices and steep
it 24 houres in 3 gallons of runing water. then boyle
with it a Capon well dressed. with a hand full of borage
and two Calues foote well dressed. a hand full of indife
and suttory. halfe a hande full of liuerwort and as much
Sorrell. halfe a pound of raysons stoned. of daws sliced
of prunes. 20. of sanders the weight of 8 d. boyle all these
together till they come to aboute 6 pintes n strayne
it and keepe it by it selfe. till it Grow Cold. then add
there to. 12 ounces of refined sugar. powdered. 1/4 of
Cinamon bruised. two spoone fulls of the Inice of almonds
e whites of 2 eggs beaten. lett it run clearely through
a fine cloth. Lastly lett it coole- and it will gelly. of
this lett the party take 4 or 5 spoone fulls at any time
with broth. or of it selfe.
Dr: Pavies Pills for the Spleen
Take of the Composition of: hierapiera: two drames of e
Gum of Gallbanum. dissolved in wine vineger  e
vineger Evaparated away againe one dracme of yr pared
Steele. a drame and a halfe of the Composition of
Diacymim in powder 2 Scruples. with sufficient quantity
of Syrrop. of Stechadoes. make this in a mass. and of a
drame of this mass make 2 sc pills. Take in e morneing
one or. two. for a weeke together. if you continue m
a yeare. as you may doe safely. take one a day constantly:
Dr: Pavies. Electuarye
Take of Conserve of roman wormewood. Conserve of sweet
Margdron. Conserve of sweet sage flowers of each an
ounce. conserve of the hearbe oake of Jerusalem an ounce
and





160 And a halfe ythe Speires of diagalage & diambra.
ponder of cehite orringe rietts of floreinte, of each
one drame the loth of ythe  prepe of Enula pampanras
roots 3 drames with sufficient quantity of syrrop
of mints make an electrary in ythe confistente of a
conserve.
To dram apply ythebrole of  ythemonth:
Take greind grie or ale keepe heated very hott be tre
two hott tiles and see layd hott on the cronne of the
heade
Dr. Burges A Chiny powder for the neakres in the Backe
Take ching and maddox rootes powdered of  each
ounce and a halfe of pepared peirle 2  drames of
penedin. and sugar  resett of each an ounce & 6 drames
mixed in together and take of this one spoonefull
in boyled milk of broth to breakefast to ape
and strengthen and to waste scp.... humore
A very good medicine for a fellon or pinrnsh
Take and rusty baron and snayles beate all
very well together and spread it way thick uppon
a Cloth warme it very a hithe and lay it on recerring
it twice a day & when it is broke lay some of the
black lake to itt just uppon ythe place where it is bro
omly and continue the ponltise all allowe ythe scwelling
till it be well drawne and then nothing but the
salve till it be .ealed upp uppon the place that
is broke only
for the stone a very good one
Take .er sine and dishill itt and take of it water &
or 4 spoonefulls every morneing with a little sugar
warme:
For a pain in ythe
nothing to bee seere to perend a cacker
Take red rose vineger and soake it and dip in it
when






When there is a greate heate in it or when it is very
hott. a red woolen Cloth. and bath the Pedastooll
with itt & when it is bathed. lay on the woollen
Cloth. hott uppon it and if this take not away the
payne. e bath it with e veregen Still and at
take e batheing. lay for a sore cloth made of
oyle of red roses: and bees waxe. no more waxe n
will make it for a deerethoth. Lay it on warme
and renew our sorewhith oyle in 3 or 4 daies

A playster for the Spleen:/
Take melilott and Camomile and 3 handfulls of
parseley and plantine a handefull. Sheeps sonatt one
pounds. virgins nape 12 ounces yellow resin, 3ff: &
white wine a pinte shred your nape and sonett and
beate your resin. put all these together in an Earthen
pott. lett it stand at the fire till all bee melted. then
take it of and rouer itt Close. and lett itt stand y
daies in a Celler. then sett itt over e fire lett itt
boyle halfe an hower. en take it of and strayne
itt and reserve it for your use:

A Purge for wormes and disseases
in Children
Take the Shaveings of harts horne wormefoodes
bruised. rozoline of oath and drame rubarb Sliced halfe
a dram. Ginger Sliced a little lett these boyle in 4 ounses of water
untill it Come to 4 Spoonefulls. en Strayne outt e liquor & to 3
Spoonefulls of it putt halfe an ounce of Syrrop of Sihory
with rhubarb & a little rhubarb in powder. mingle  m together
to give it in the morneing fasteing

A Comfortable inlop. Cooling in
Feavers. and malignant Agues
Take Strawebery water. borage water. Cardus water.
rose water. of oath two ounces. of your Inlop of wood Sorrell
of your Syrrop of the Inite of Citrons. of Syrrop
of pomgranates. of Syrrop of Clove gilly flowers. of oath
halfe an ounce. of Alrazmes 2 Scraples. of Cinamon
waterdropps. of agua Marie. 2 drops. of oyle of vitrioll
3 dropps made heare of a Inlop:
for





(160)
For the Ricketts

Take strawebery and .iohett loves hy.op yarron
colts foote bittany speedwell plantim mayden hayre
of ye well of each of the se halfe a handfill of hie
roat and harts tongue a full handefull of each .m.
soades liquori.e frome sugar candy of each anonnte
raysons of the sun a handfull corrine a quarter
of a pound dates 2 figgs 4 boyle all theso in 3 quarts
of running water unto one grant strayne it and putt
into it one onuce of fire beaten bro..esugar candy
and drink 9 or 10 spoonefulls att a time take itt in
the morneing and att 4 o clock in ye afternoone

A drink for the Ricketts

Take of the wood tameriis s.abrious Isop coc.es foo.e ey.
of each a good handefull raysons of the sun figgs
corrints a quater of a pound hp.o.ine an ounce sweete fe.
seeds a.iseeds of each a spoonefull boyle these thing
in a noew pip.in with 3 quarts of water to a pott  ar.
lett the childe drink thereof 3 times a daye

To brew a beea.e to clou.se the
Blonde in 6 gallons of .e.root

take s..r.y grase funitory brew .e .ine water .es.
of each 4 handeulls ash b.rke ivy barke of each two
ounces tancari. agrinony scabions of each two hand
fulls hqnorice two ounces anirseefe once ounce boyle
these one quarter for an houre then put the..ar.
into a boulster bagg and when u can up the drin
lett the bay be putt in it and when it is 3 or 4 daies
old lett the childe drink of it all .aies you must
amointe the childe the backe and the breast and
the belly and put a cloth about it and not shift
the cloth in 4 daies and in the oyntment putt some
oyle of sweet allmond
in this water u must shift little hqnorice a da.e
or two a little aniseede and sweeten it with
surgar candy and lett the chile take of itt at any
tyme
for





(163)
For Soreness of the eies that
Breedeth of Rheumes:

Hoggs grease very new 3 ounces wash it well  in red rose
water 6 ho.es together then wash it as long in the
best white wine as can be gotten wherein two ounces
of the stone Calaminaris being red hott hath been stymes
quenched to this thus ppreared take of Tutia well
prepared and finely polished on ounces of the stone hepetine
well washed and prepared  an scruples of alloes washed
and dissolved in red fennell water and soe dryed in your
s..e lett the water bee dryed upp and then beate them
into fine powder as graynes of Pearle in fine powder 4
graines of the stone Calaminaris  forme.ly guenched
in white winte being beaten into fine powder two ounces
mixed all thise together in a  red fennell water and soe
make itt up in an oyntment and .nnoynte the eyelidds ...y
night when yuo are in ..d and in the morningwipe it
off it is best .ee pouing of itt in a tine pott

An excellent Medicine for the
Renaticke eyes

Botony marye.on baune and saye of each a hgrantity
sh.wed them samll and in fuse them 24 houwres in spirit
of wine or 48 howres in good aqua vite then straywand and
be.pe of itt for  .se take a spoonefull of this infusion
and add thereunto  3 dropps of oyle of tartar and onnomite
the .enp.es and the corow. s.ter therewith .ar.d ..
u goe to beed and ,eepe r ur heade very warme doe it
3 nights to ge ther after that once every third night

Stor a fi.tula

Take rosin and perosin of each halfe a pound virgins and
.ape and franc.errerse of each a quarter of a pund
of mastick and ounce of harts tallor a quarter of a
pound of camp.i. 2 dragones melt that which is to be
melted and beete what is to be beaten to powder boyles
it well to ge ther then stray.e it throught a cleane
cloth with a po..he of white wine lett it coole a while then
putt to it a quarter of a pound of venice tarpentine then
stir it all well together in the white wine until itt
be cold so worke it with urhand annoy..ted with oile
of roses and make it up in wolles to be used for a future
or any other round as a playster
A






(164)
Anale prefitable to open the
obstructions of the liver and
Spleene

Take Rhubarb an ounce red darke roote halfe a pound
fenell rootes parselge rootes samllaye roote of each
4 ounces dandelyon rootes and hearbs or hand full
.. terach  3 ounces epythymum 4 ounces- came pithees
2 ounces maydon ha... a handfull annysseed Carraway
foods fennell food of each 2 ounces flowers of the chadoes
3 ounch tye all these in a fniren bagg and hang yt
in 18 or 20gallons of ale and user itt is toen daie
ale drinkethereof at create continually you may make
but halfe the receipt at a tyme or a quarter accordeing
to your drinking

The Receipe of ye oyle
of charity

Take a qrart of oyle ohire onehandefull of the copps of
rosemary an handefull of red sa... an handfull of Comoni
an handefull of the greater carender leares an handfull
of wormewood. Chopp your all small afterye maner as you
Chp hearbs for the pott and put them into the oyle in a
Glass and  sett them into the su...e and stire them every
day for the spare of 14 daies or more then po... out
the oyle and hearbs into a skilett and let  them have
a soft whal... uppon the fine then strayrae forth ye
ale hearbs and put into the oyle soe Clear  the fornner
quantity of the severall hearbes and lett them stand in
the surm the same tyme and have a whalme as
before  on the fire then put in a handfull of
Valerian chopt as  ye other hearbs and lett it stand in your
Surm the hike time then adding another handefull of
valerian chopt as before strayre all throughe cloth
and lett it havea wal... as before and  stoping itt
up close  ..ser.. it for  your use as a .........  .......
for anywonnd a Speriall re...dial for any inward
binise being taken halfe  spoonefull in  pseseftall
inwardly an Excellent oyncment for all as this proceeding
as






of cold causes in ulcers a peseruer from groweing of dead flesh.
Good for the heade ande deafenese being infused into the
Eares this oyle must be made outt or before the 10 of may.
A mouth water good for Cankers ulcers
or fore throates gargarized warme and
bled 3 or 4 times in a day.
A quart of white wine a pinte of spring water halfe a
pinte of honny suckle water a quarter of red rose water. one
handefull of beare flowers. one hand full of rose mary flowers
3 penny worth of English honny. one penny worth of roch allom
boyle all these in a new Earthen pott till it be halfe Consumed
and scurne it well. and when it is Cold putt it up in Glasses.
An Excellent Receipt for the
Collicke and Stone:
Take two or 3 good hande fulls of fennell rootes and leaves. two
hand fulls. of parsely rootes and leaves. two good handfulls
of phillipondula rootes. two good handfulls of hartes tongue
2 or 3 good handefulls of Maydon hayre. 2 or 3 good handfulls
of leaves and branches of tansey. 2 good handfulls of marsh
Mallowes, stalkes, and rootes. 2 good handfull of mother
thyme. 2 good handfulls of Clovers. 2 or 3 good handfull
of Sheap headspurse. 2 good handfull of burnett. 2 good
handfulls of Egrimony. 2 good handfulls of pellitory
of the wall. 2 good handfulls of unsett time. 2 good hand
fulls of betony. one hand full of knottgrass. one good
hand full of plantine. one good handfull of maudelin
two hand full of red Nettles. one good hand full of Camomile
flowers. 2 good hand full of dandelyon. 2 or 3 good handfull
of white Sapifrage. two or 3 good handfull of bugless
2 good hand full of forage. 2 or 3 good hand full of Ground
sell. 2 good handfull of parsely branches torne. 2 good
hand full of fumitory. one ounce of Elecompane rootes
one hand full of Comfrey. one good hand full of bubell
one good hand full of scabions. take and wash them very
Clean and dry them in a clean Cloth till the water be Cleane
out the v to be one good handfull of red rose budds.
if you Can gett them stampe them very small in a stone
morter. then strayne out the **ice very hard. and sett it on





(466)
On the fire and into it as muth elacifyod honny.
mill make it very sweet.
Putt into it boyleing 2 spoonefulls of parseloy sudds and 2 spoone
full of carraruoy. seedd. one spoone full of ........ seedd
one spoonefull of Algeindon seedds one spoonefull
of annils seedd. bringe them all. and lett it boyle to a syrrop
keepe it for your use for the collitf and stone mother
and spoon.
You must take two spoone fulls in a morneing fosteing
one spoone full att 4 of the clocke in the afternoone
one spoone full last to bedd. keepe you warme. and sweat
for one houre in the morneing if you ran nolte in your
afternoone.
A ponudor. For the stone.
Take the two longe bones in a whiteimgs headd pound and
searte them. and burre seedds. being also powddwed. and
searted. and the insides of gizzardds of penns of clirtbeens
deyod and finely beaten and seared. and the stone in ythe
oeds yall. & when all these and finely beaten. then soke
a fine quantitiy of all butt the stone in the opes yall of
that take but a wuarter of the quantity of ythe rost. minyle
all thesr toyesper and wett shet patient .ake as muth
as will bye uppon a shelling. in a quarter of a printe of
white wind in the morrneing fosteinyd and lett him fast
3 hours after
This is an approved medicine
to breake the stone and
.eeinye it a way in short timme
For a thistulo.
Ffrist gather shele hearbs followeinge in the month of may.
and dry them in a close roome from the fire and turne
them and in a day. Untill they be dry. Then in inimybe
them together and put then in a Caneas fayy. and
then they will feed all the geare you must have a
life quantity of eath. and gather your budds in a prill
Sonthern wood. sin be foyle. huier rooet. worme wood ..bnsow
to landine. buyle . wfietd fottles. mild argelia. mugroot
dasie rootes and bares. staniebory beares. woodle tony
horrysurbles. wood bine. staliuns. a vens. violett leards. sanite
plantine






187
(164)
Plantine hawthorn budds. Comfry wild harvell.
Dandelyon Egrimony thorns. all heahe. vabe budds. water
Bettlny. Brambell budds. Spearmints
First take of these hearbs dryed 3 handfulls and putt
m into a quart of white wine and a pott . of Coarse
Spring water and boyle them together till halfe
bee Consumeed. then Strayne the liquor from e
hearbs then putt into it a pinte of honny. and sett
itt on the fire againe & stirr it. n take it upp
and lett it Stand till it be Coldd. & soe putt into a pottle
and lett the patient drinke 6 spoonefulls. in a morneing
fasteing & fast two houres after it if it be a great sore
lett him drinke as much in the afternoone at 4 of the
C???? and if there be proud flesh in the sore you must
lay fosnd what to oat it away. you must not toent yor
sore. but soerte it with a teint for the drinke will
drive out any taint.
This drinke will ? old and new sores. Soud & wafts
gontrified bones, achos in the stomach impostumus
& thistutoos and it will stopp blodding being appliied
with a sore  cloth to the place you must remember
to putt on the mafis a playstor of





(168)
A salve or poultice esp especially good
for a

Take halfe a pound of pure cloves and





Pound of very cleane enexpertied then sett it every the
Fyre. and d. stirr it will toye 1 hor. lett it boyle
3 or 4 .halnes then take it, of the fire and keepe
yourr   use

It must be made in the summer to savur all the year
& it wll last good a long time
If  youu will.  youu may use this oyle alone to any greife
but tis best to bee used with the salude that which if
youu doe youu may leaue out the turpentime for yourr poultis
and hard still the oyle in readiness
Note that the hearbs be gathered at the first springing
out. one after another. As youu get them. Shread or flaye
them. and put them into the same oyle untill all
bee put in. lett them lye in oyle. 4 or 6 weeks stirring
it now and then. against molding
An Approved medicine for a Canker
or Sord throat in man or beaste
And alsoe for the thrushes. in
New born children
Take feathers broowd of the time broowd that
Growes on the top hill of mole hills and need spreeds
the height of halfe a yard and selandinde of earth
like quantity beate them very small and putt to them
butter new churned not washed at all, but the
whay thoroughly beaten out. to two good handfulls of
Every of these hearbs put 3 pound of butter Insoparate
them together. and lett them stand a day or two then
put them into a stillett and put to them 3 spoone
fulls of the best Charett wine or white wine. Sett
it over the fire and lett it boyle very rasily  3 or 4
houres. then take it of and strapped it through a
Course Canvis: wring it very hard and keepe It for
yourr   use
Then when youu have occasion to use it take a spoone
fulls of wine, vineger two spoonefulls of English honny
the yolks of two new layd Eggs. rosted then hard
beat the yolks of Eggs. the vineger and the honny
altogether. till they be throughly incorporated then
put to it 3 spoonefulls of the aforesaid butter beate
them throughly. and make an ointement of them
altogether.
The






The water to wash the
Sore withall
To be sayd formull Succory and endire of each **e
quantity. boyle them in running water with a good
quantity of rock allonn till the third parte before
sumed. then take it from the fire strayne it and put
into it a little white Coperas. and put it up for yourr
use then when you have occasion to use it wash thee
Sore mouth within within with this water and annoynt
the outside against the sore with the oyntment
and Chaffe it well in soe farr as there is any
swelling or soreness & This Doe Thrice
every day at the least.
To make my lady of kents
lock water
Take a red rocke of a yeare olde and pull him yn ki
him and when you have drawne out his Garbige
wipe the bloud out with a clean clothe. then cut
him in quarters. and breake all his bones very
small. then put him into yourr still with all these
Ingredients while he is warme. a pottle of the
best Canary Sacke. a pottle of red Cowes milke
warme from the Cow. a pound of raysons aft
sunn. a pounde of Corrints. halfe a pound of figgs
dates a quarter of a pound Annisseeds 4 ounces the
raysons must be stored the figs and dated shied the
annisseedes bruised rootes of parsely fennell succory
of each and hand full. scraped and the pith taken
out. thee flowers of rosemary borage and and ** glass. cows
of ivory one a hand full of maydon hayre and beltes
foote an hand full of either. still this in a balon
still if you can if not in a rosewater still with
a soft fire the first water will be very strong
the next water you must mingle ym and put into
yourr glass that you first sett under yourr still and pound
of white sugar candy. and a good quantity of leafe
gold. cut small and when you drinke any shake first
yourr glass before you poure it out you may drinke 6 spoon
fulls at a time of this water in the morninge fasting and
at 4 a clock if you please to add to these halfe a pound
of garden snaykes dresses it is very good
directions





Divertiono for prrepareings sr
John Meltins diet drink by  Sr
Theodore:: Mayerne: Sr: Symon
Baskervill and Dr: Clarke
sazpa l
Take 4 pouns of sazpaparilla n prepared and 4 ounces of
China prepared adding to those the find shaving of
firre tree 4 ounces. Sage of Jerusalem scabious.moadoro
sweet speedwell of wach of those and a halfs
of conjhps flones 4 onneths. nuttmegs halfo an onnes
thinee slices lett all be boyled in 5 gallons of new
beerre. of the streak of 8 beere. to the Consumption
of one gallon or their abouts then add to them to
ggallons moreof






172 This is not only good against the Plague but small pox
Snentering Sicknese Measles, And Srirfeffe taken A
Spoonefull. when youu first fall sick and att other
finds as neede reqireth when the first party drinke
of it first he must by a donne and s.ieat 2 or 3 hours
in his bedd and after he must be very well dryed
out of it and bee best warme and drinke none first
warme drinks and candeles see shall the sicknese
beese from the haste make possett ale with some
mazy golde leaves and flowers. give it warme to drinke
after the Sneate and dry them this drinke will
beese good halfe a yeare being best in an aqua
bitze botth
A Aleoieine for the Meagsum in the head, or a Gargae.
Take sage, roemary, and pellitony of Spain,the roowy of each of these
a like quantity, & boyle them in a pint of vinegar upon a chatondish of
coles, unthill halfe bee consumed, then putt in 2 good spoonfull of mustarde
bring made Master good vinegar, & so tel it boyle a while, and then take a little
of it as hott as you can suffer, and hold it in your mouth, as you shall taste
ocasion, & then spit it out, and take more, and thy do five or six times
every morning so long as  you shall fine ocasion, or teele the selfe greived.
A water for the fare
A bottle of water, one ounce of white Mercury, the purest you can get,
bra.. in small between two pages, then putt in to you in an darsthen
siptin, & sett it on the fire, and when it begins to ...., take it of, for
much boyling makes it froth the shin, when it y cold scam it with a
feather, & strayne it through a fine cloth, & pure it from the bottome;
If you can get, let it stand all night after you have boyed it, before you scamme or
straine it will bee the purer, you must take 4 ounces of Plain tai.e water
as much of Strawberry water, as much of brane flower water, & halfe
a pound of damask rose water, mingle them all together. Then take & quart
of a pound of bitter almonds, a quart of a pound of sweet almonds,
blanch them, and pound them altogether, and straine out  the s.eing.
of them with  the mil=ngled water. Then putt 3 quarters of a pound
of venire Carusse well beaten between two pap.y, stirre them
altogether then putt them into the Mercury water in a glasse
bottle shakeing it well altogether for almost halfe an houre,
and when  you use it, you must shake it.





A preparer extractoc nel vino
Pabsirro per vsar a lo  servisio
You may take of drye wormwood half a pound
common agua vita 2 quarts fountain water one
quart this you must steep together 24 houres & then
still it till you have a quart or something lesse then
you must take away that which is in the reservoir
which is the spirit of the Aqua vita & smells strong of
the wormwood which must be used thus; you must
take drye wormwood finely powdered 2 ounces
to which you must put for much of that spirit
as will throughly wett the wormwood, you
must stop the glass that none may breath out,
leaving it for, in some cool place for 3 dayes and
then strain it through a fine cloth & then you
shall have a very bitter liquour, which you must use
in wine or beer putting in 3 or 4 drops as you shall
find cause.
Museadine forts Excellente

A Preparer una Excellente
Composhitions Aromatica para
anomatizare il uno diuense
viuante
You may take of sugar canday halfe an ounce
musk of the best & ambergrease of each a serupte
these 3 ingredients must be brought into powder in a
mortar, then you must put to them oyle of cinnamon,
& of lemon pills or citrons, that be fresh and
odoriferous of each halfe a dramme being well mingled
together, you must keep it in a vessell of glass very
wel stopped
The Use








Another for the same. L. Hu:
Annointe the place with soape; if the skyn bee not broken
it will ease it.
Another for the same L. Hu:
Take e inner Pill of an elme, laie it in runninge water
& bathe e burn & place with it, & it will take out e fire.
ffor a Cough of the Lungs L. Hu; taught her by Mr
Cooke & by him approued
Take an ounce of flower of Brimstone, twoe ounces of white sugar
candy, mingle them together, & euery morneinge take as much as will
Lye upon a shillinge in a new laid egg, the white beinge eleane taken
away; sett e egg in the fire to warme, put in your powder, & sup it of.
L. Hu: Mr Butlers receipt to make a laxatiue drinke, and
take away swellinge of e Leggs, & to cause sleepe. /
Take ffennell & parsley rootes, washed, scraped & the pith taken out
of each 4. ounces, greene sparagus rootes whole 4. ounces, steepe
all theise 24. howers in a quart of white wine; soe drinke it fasteinge
and when els you please. /
A glister for e Collicke in the belly: L. Hu: taught her by
Mr Cooke, and by him approued.
Take a pinte of Muskadine infuse it in an ounce of Annesseedes bruised
an ounce of bayberries husked and bruised, an handfull of Camomile
flowers let theise simper in the wine an hower, but not boile; and if
the Collicke bee extreame & this giue not ease, then giue an other glister
made like this onely add to it ten drops of oile of annesseeds, and
ten drops of spirit of Juniper.
A glister in case of distraction, taught the L: Hu: by
Mr Cooke, and by him approued.
Take sage, Bettony, Sweete Marioram, rosemary tops of each halfe
an handfull of Camomile, Beetes, holyhocks, & vyolet leaues of each
halfe an handfull, of fennellseedes bruised 3. spoonefulls; boile all
theise in a Broathe of a sheepes head, vntill but a pinte & an halfe
remaine, and in a pinte of this decoction dissolue one ounce
of the extract of white Helebore, & twoe spoonefulls of the
syrrupe of vyoletts, mixe theise together, & cast it vp as a glister
of a temperate heate; ether at 5. a clocke in e morneinge, or
at 4. in e afternoone; But this is too rough for weomen in
childbed, because it prouoketh vomittinge very much; but for others
it is a most soueraigne and infallible medicine. /





Ffor the falinge sicknesse L Hu taught her by Mr. Jlis.
Take a hen, plucke of the fleathers, take out e garbage & wash it not
then fill the belly full of plantine leaves, with twoe pennyworth of
pyonzy seedes; then lay it on a slatstone & put it into an Oven; then
take a mans skull of it bee a woman bee sicke; & soe of a womans skull
if it bee for a man that is sicke; beat it into fine powder, then
when e jay is well baked that it may bee beaten to powder, then
take both  epowders and mize them together, and put a spoonefull
thereof into a quantity of white wine; & give it e patient to drinke
A breakefast to prueet e stone given the L Hu by
Mr. Cooke, and by him often prooved
Take a neso laid egg make a little hole in e topp of itt and lett out all
the white as cleane as you can; then take of the left honey, and
fil up the egg with it and stirr it together with a Bodkin then sett
it to wasme in the fire, and if ohere bee any drosse in the honey it
will rise upto the top, wch you must take of with a knife, then sup
of yr egg fasteninge with a draught of beere & aile mingled togrther
with some nuttmegg & sugar therein.
A Medicine for the stone given e L Huby mr. Cooke
and by him often approved
Take the cloves of 3 heades of garlicke, pilled & shread smale, boile
them in a pinte of milke, still if bee sender and all the milke boiled
away; then stampe the garlicke to a pultice; then apply it as hast as
may, bee suffred upon a lynin cloathe to the lower parts, and this
will give ease in futts of the stone, or gravell; to a man apply
befwiset his codds & ffandaments, and to a woman upon the share
bone; and to the beaseinge place.
Away to make oile of plantaine, or roses, or
Cammomile L Hu
Ffirst beate the hearbes in a Morter then put them into
your oile; sett it in the sunne for a weeke, then straine it out
and put fresh hearbes in; and doe this 3 tymes, and after
the draneinge of Browne Breade felt them in glasses in
the oven for twoe daies, & keepe them for yr use.
To helpe the gravell in the kidneys. L Hu
taught her by Mr. Dawson./
Take three heades of garlicke, pill the cloves of them
and





and putt them into a quart of runninge water with an handfull
of penyroyall, let it seeth from a quart to a Pinte and an
halfe; and drinke eueninge & morneinge a glasse full and make
some fower draughts of it; warme it when you drinke it
ffor the grauell & stone dissolue them. L Hu:
taught her by Mris Tryon.
Broomeseedes well beaten and searced the quantity of one drachme
at a tyme three morneings together in e Last quarter of the Moone
to bee taken in a smale draught of white wine, washinge upon it, and
soe continue every last quarter of thee Moone will much auaile.
Another for the same L Hu: taught her by the
L.V.
Take May flowers, and put a Pare of them into a still sprinckle
them with white wine, and throwe some Nutmeggs on them & doe the
same the second tyme againe; and soe till your still bee full, three
Nutmeggs will serue; take hereof a smale wine glassefull, and
asmuch white wine sweetened with syrrupe of Alshea for three
morneings once in a Month.
To cure the Pin and Nebb in the eye. LHu:
Take a pound of clay butter & clarify it in the sunne fiue or
sixe daies together, then straine the clearest of it through
a cloathe into a new earthen Pott well glassed within
then take a good quantity of the hearbe Christopher and
wipe every leafe and shred them very smale; then fill up
the butter soe clarified whilst it is warme with asmuch of
the shrewd hearbes as it will take up, then close up the pott
soe close that noe ayre nor wett may get into it, and bury it
in the ground abbout sixe weekes; then take it up againe and
cast away soe much of it as you finde putrified & melt the
rest upon a Chafingdish of embers in a flatt new earthen Pott
or Pan, but bee sure it boile not; then straine it, put it
into a glasse and keepe it for your use, wch must bee in
this manner Take at a tume asmuch of it as a prettie
Bigg Lins heade & gently annointe the eyes therewith
this





This Medicnie this made will continue good for
seaven yeares.
To give a woman if the Childe stuck in the birthe
L Hu given her by Mrs Herbert and
by her tryed.
Take Myrrhe halfe a spoonefull finely beaten in a spoone, mixt
with burnt claret wine, let the party take this and drinke
a draught of hot wine after it; But if you thinke the childe bee dead
or the woman in danger then take halfe as much of Borax with
your Myrrh and give her.
To cause speedie delivery L Hu given her by Mrs
Herberts & by her tryed upon divers.
Take a smalle spoonefull of the powder of Dittanie, mixe it ether
in burnt claret or white wine; and give it to the woman
warme to drinke, & it will much availe her.
A good Ointemt for the itch L Hu taught
her by Do Clayton & by him often prooved.
Take Ointmt of Roses three ounces, Cynamon & nuttmeggs
grated or small beaten, of each 3 drachmes, of grated ginger
one drachme; encorporate all theise together with as much
freshe butter as will suffice to make the ointmt of a good
consistance upon warme embers, and if you have nott
Ointment of Roses ready at hand; take all freshe
butter insteade thereof; and annointe therewithall
the itchy places morneinge and eveninge; Butt
Ointement of Roses is better if you can have it
To further delivery
To cause throwes in weomen when ether their paines
leaves them, or is lingeringe; if their water bee broken
L Hu taught her by Mrs Herbert
Take a spoonefull of Amber beaten and give it in a





a smale draught of claret wine or possett drinke, or any thinge that is thing
that is thin; you must put the amber uery hot into the drinke
and stirr it well els it will cake; Give it the party to drinke
and some of the same drinke to wash it downe;  or a spoone=
full of fetherwood will cause naturall throwes in weomen
let them drinke some warme thinge after it, ether burnt
wine or any thinge that is thin and warmed.
To helpe a woman frome miscarryinge La H: given
her by Mrs. Harbert, and by her often approued.
Take Oaken budds before they bee blowne, and still them in
a Rose still; and lett the woman take a spoone full or twoe
every morneinge and eveninge if shee use to miscarry
abbout any certaine tyme; the next tyme shee is with
Child, let her begin this water a Moneth before her usuall
tyme of miscarryinge; and drink it for 2 monethes together
and if shee bee ill at any other tyme when shee is with Child
after the twoe monrthes are expired;let her take twoe
spoone full of it at any tyme of the day or night.
To settle the mother, or for beareinged owne
in weomen. L H:cgiven her by Mrs. Harbert
and by her often tryed and approued.
Take Galtanum and spreade it upon sheepes leather beinge
cut round somethinge bigger then your hand in the middle
of this plaister put a little peace of cotton or wooll
and in that Cotton put twoe graines of Ciuett, and one
graine of musk well grynded together;Let the
cotton bee laid upon the Nauill, and the plaister
upon it; Let the woman lye upon her bache for
the space of an hower; and let her warme the plaister
till it fall of it selfe; and this will assuredly helpe.
 To give a woman that hath her courses too much
LH: given her by Mrs. Eam; and by her tryed
upon many.






Take the powder of the flowers of deep red Hollioake
as much as will have in aspoone, mingle is with either
a little red or claret wine, and giue it to her, and this with
ones bakeinge will stay them
For one that cannott hold their water, L H taught her
by Mrs Jhs, & of by her approval.
Take the Nauell storing upon Child, laie it in a clearne place
before the fire, let it dry hard, then beate it to powder
and put it into porrenge or drink, that hee or shee eates or
drinks, let them take it 4 or 5 tymes and it will Certainlely
care them.
To bringe away the afterbirth, or a false conception
LH :taught her by Mrs. Harbert, and by her often
approved.
Take the single yellow wallflowers a good spoone full, boile them
either in a draught of Ale or possett drinke, and giue it her speedily
to drink; the flowers will quickly bee boiled; it is best to
dry them in the begininge if the yeare, and dope them
for yourself; if you have some dry then take greene ones, and
the lesser quantity will serve
An approved medicine for an Ague L H: qiuen her
By MrsJhs: and by her often tryed and approved.
Take twoe hen turdes  as oone as they come from then; lay ether
of them to your wrests, & byinde them on with white cloathes on
hower before the fitt comes; it will giue twoe or three
stooles and a vomit wch though it doe, feare it not, for if
will cure your speedily.
A posset to giue a woman in Childbed that is sweld; L H
given her by Mrs Eam & approved upon many.
Take a good handful of winter sauery, boile it in a
pinte of cleare posett; lest the party drinke it
and it will give present ease, and needes bee taken
but one.
For the Ague in the Breast or a sore
breast L Hu: given her by Mrs Harbers
and tryed upon many
Take one ounce of yellow bee waxe, ad to it spoonefull
of





of english honey, a good spoonefull of Nay butter, twoe
spoonefull of oile of damask roses, melt the waxe honey
and butter first, then put in the oile of rose, stir them
all together, and then dip eluathes into it, when it is uery
hott, turne them twied away, and warme them gently when you
lye them on; when the uertue is gone out of them dip omene.
Agt an ordinary Agne, it cures alsoe tertian a gues. LadyHughes:
Oranges pare them as thin as you can possibly without
any of the white rynde; pare it all of one puda if you can; and then
laie it on that part of the nrest where the pulse beates; the
inner side of the pill neset to the lkyu; and rynde it abbout your
Arme in seuerall bynes and Rouds as fair as it will reach; allottinge
to each Arme aseuergll Pill; this doe an honer before the
first comes it cureth alsoe tertuin Agues.
A very good possett to giue in a burneinge ffeauer
Lady Hughes: taught her Mrs Eam.
Tak a quart of nero milk, a quater of a pinte of white wine vinegar
a quater of a pinte of berdico, halfe a pinte of faire water, a good
handfull of parsley fraised in a Morter; then put their liquors
to it, and straine it out as hard as you can; and when ythe milk serthes
up, put them in; and let it stand on the fire till it risuorse the
up againe; then take it of and straine it; and sor giue a good braught
of it at tyme;and you will finde much comfort in it.
Wor she Whites Lady
Take the best Parsnaps you can gett, be tape and wash a good
quantity of them uery cleane; put them and dwaies into a pott
soe many as the pot will hold; then fill up the pot with fauie
water and let them boile softly till they bee enough, then
straine their liquor from then; and make oatemeale
Portauge there of with a Neck of Mutton; and cabe there of
in the morgeinge, as osten the ythee day as you please, and at goinge
to bed, wwhichch in short tyme will stay then.
Another for ythee same Lady
Take the hauthrone berries, dry them to powder, and take
as much there of as will ly upon 3o. in a spoonefull of Becre
every morneinge till you beewell; which will be in five
or sixe daies.
ffor





FFor a sore throate L: L Hughes: tried by Mrs: Harnbet.
Take a good quantity of the time leave grass stalkes, rootes
and leaves; Cover them with facie water , boile & scam them
let them stand till the water looks red then straine it
through from the hearbes into an earthen Bottle without
an handle, & when the party is to jleit, let the Bottle
on the fire, & pull out the corke stopp the ; and when itt
boules put a wooden Funnell over the Bottle with the little
end unto your mouth sucke up the steame & swallow it downe
and when it hath done reakeinge gargle your throate with the
water the oftener the better, though it shallbee a ..uinsle
take alsoe trooe taggs weeke' your throate, and apply it alsoe
youre eares as hott as you can endure it, and mussle youre selfe up
with a warme drye clotathe.
FFor the white Shrush in a cmats mouth L Hughes
Take a little spoonefull of syrrnpe of service in a day, and if the
mouth bee very ill, you may take 2 spoone fulls in a day but
not together, or roach Lllom  .hbarnt  mergle so the time
sugar, and booth finely beaten and ..artedd , and put unto the
childs mouth with your ffinger after hee hath ether sucke
or fedd will cure it, and this may bee done often; but it might
bee soe tempered with sugar that it bee not sharpe.
FFor the Black Shrush L Huughes: tried by Mrs. Harbert
Take syrrupe of .yoletts, and melrosarnm, plantaine water
honey suckle water, a little white wine or vinegar and a little
rtach cllom ; boill this a little, and with a fringed curate
put upon a sticke rubb the mouth gently three or forour
tymes a day; then have a clean cloathe upon a sticke
and when you have washt all the filth of then dip the
other in the same liquide, and lett the Child sucke a little of
it downe; the liquide beinge made prettie sweete with
sugar.
FFor a Canekerin the mouth. L Hughes:
Wash it with a little of Capte Greenes water with a
elout dipt in it, and it will instantlye cure itt
Ffor the Pin and the ..... L Huughes
approved by Mrs Leergils.
Take a good halfe handfull of three leaved grasse





and all cleane washed, halfe an handfull of with daysie rootes
washed cleane, a quarter of an handfull of ground fire washed
& beaten small all together; then take three good spoonefull of cheese
Bulbs, Bubbs or woodlyee washed out to e hearbes, beate them
small altogether, then take the quantity of a quart of the best and
newest drinke you can gett and put to the hearbes, stirr them
well together and straine them; then put in a Bottle to keepe it
then take halfe a pinte thereof and make it lukewarme, so drinke
it when you goe to bed lyinge as low with your heade as you can, againe
take it in e morneinge fasteinge untill it bee all spent; and if one
quantity doe not cure you make more of it, and use it againe; and
let some of it bee spurtled into yr eye, and in short tyme it will
cure it
ffor a straine theise 3 things followeinge taught the
L Hu: by Mrs Harb:
Take Comphry chop it small, put it into a pinte or more of good Ale
a good handfull of Comfry will settle to this quantity of Ale; twoe
handfull of Ashe of wheatebrann; boile all theise to a pultice
apply it as hott as yu can endure; shift it twice a day.
The second taught her by Mrs Harbert
Take a good quantity of Parsley shread it & put to it a little
white wine; boile it a little and lay it to e place as hott as yu
can endure it; shiftinge it twice a day.
The Third:
Make a Ladder of Castle soape; and bathe e party in it
as hott as you can an hower together
ffor the runinge of the Reynes L Hu taught
her by Mrs Harbert
Take twoe handfull of plantine leaves, one handfull of knotgrathe
(in winter twoe handfulls) one handfull of Camphire rootes,
washed, scraped and thin sliced; put all theise in a Bottle of
small Ale or juice pintes and boile them to a quart; Drinke
a good draught of this in the morneinge fasteinge, and
last at night, continue it a while it soe; and it will
cure you, you must take it warme.
ffor Crablice
Take a melteld cloath, such Siluersmithes use; rubb the place wth
it, and it will kill them.






Ffor the runninge of the raines LadyH: taught her by L. G. M.
Take a new laid egg, take forth the white, warme it upon embers
and fill it up with white orris well sifted and mingled together
let the patient sip it up in the morneinge, takeinge an hour
after at t feast; this maybe taken at any tyme as there is occation
but if the party bee very ill, then it must bee taken constantly for
six dayes together.
To make conserve of Rosemary flowers LCla:
To a powder of Rosemary flowers pick & cleane from the husks take
a pound of sugar finely beaten, as y are beatinge of the flowers
strane it in by degrees amongst them,
Ffor the Ricketts L Hu: taught her and approved
by mr: Bacchus.
Take one ounce of May butter an handfull of Dill, as much of very
of gile off dill and dill of verym of each one ounces, of butter
almonds twoe ounces for all your may butter, dill & sugar aquarose
of them away ; then put in the three oiles and boile it on; then
take crimson Taffata or Sarcenet, and cover it over both Canvases
downe, halfe an ounce of cloves, twoe Nutmeggs, twoe spoonefulls
of Grains of wheate breade; some franekincense & masticks
Beate all theise so well; then mingle them together with the
Crums & straine them upon the Taffata; and savedest, then
cover it over againewith downe, and quit it thick with silks
and for let the Child neare it as a Cap; when y annointe the
Child you must stroake downe his eyes every morneinge and be
sure hee takes noe cow; and in the three hot, and in the three
all monethes hee must not bee annointed; Give him sometyme
a quarter of a drink of new Cow milkwith red rose water and
Sugar; and swinge him betweene y hands sixe or seven tymes away.
To recover Children from Consumption fitts L Hu
Open of the hare that growes upper most upon a Beares back
a prettie quantity thereof; boile it on aquawater for halfe
an houer; then in t eveninge father t Chicks feete with it as hott
as hee can endure it; then take t hve soe boiled in t aqua with a
and lace it; to y soles of his feete, and this done once
or twice will doe much good; if not cure it.
Another






Another for the same. L Hu:
Take three piomie seedes broken into powder, and putt
them into a spoonefull of Blacke cherrie water, and guie it to
the childe; and with a spoonefull or twoe of the water wash it downe
yu must giue it three daies before the change of the Moone, and
three daies after, and at any other tyme when you porceuie the
child is like to have a fitt.
Another for the same L Hu: taught her by e LStapleton
On Midsommerday before sunrise gather the dew of white thornes
shakeinge it into a Bason soe much as will seene that yeare; take
flower and make dough of it with a little of the dewe, and make
a Cake thereof without any other Ingredients except Currants;
laie it on the harthstone, and the party is to eate the quantitie
if they can untill the fitts cease wch willbe in a short tyme.
A good water to helpe sore eyes L Hu: taught her
by the Lady B: and by her approued.
Take a quart of milke and a Hinte of honey; still them
together and wash the eyes therewith as soft as you please
It helpeth alsoe inflamations.
To presrue the eyesight L Hu: taught her by Mrs Rustinge
Take the purest clarified honey you can gett, and put a drop of
it every morneinge into your eyes.
A Bath for the Scuruey L Hu: taught	
her by Mrs Halbert, and tryed.
Take sixe handfull of Mallowes, twoe handfull of coastmary
twoe handfull of Lauander leaves, twoe handfull of Bay leaves
a pecke of wheate bran; deiude the bran into three
Bolter Baggs, tye them not too close, and boile them with
the hearbes in faire water, soe make a bathe, and sitt
therein as longe as you will.
A scuruey Ale. L Hu: taught her by Mr Clayton.
Take a good handfull of scuruey grasse, of brooke lyme and
water Cresses of each, an handfull, one ounce of ffennell
seedes or annes seedes, a quarter of an handfull of wormewood
Beate all theise together in a Morter; and take the first






Hurstice of them and make a little loafe there of with
meale; take it in an Oven, and put the loafe hott, cutt
in ffower pooeds into sine gallons of good Ale; let it stand
tooe or three daies and then drink there of both in the
morneinge, aftermoone and at your pleasure
Avery good Pultied for a sore breast L Hu
quien her by Hu and approved.
Take a quart of milk, put therem an handfull of brook tyme
an handfull of Camomile, as much dryed roses, thread them
very smale with tooe or three spoone fulls of lyndeede, boile them
altogether well; then thicken it with wheate flower, boile it
well after, and when e take it of the fire, put in an handfull
of Mustton surtt shreade very smalle; stirr it well together, and
lay it on as warme as ecan suffer it; shift mge it troied a
day, and it will aire the breast.
ffor strong theninge the somfrs L Hu
queen her by ous Marbert & by her approued.
Take a little more then halfe a Pinte of Muskadine
an ounce of harts hoone; out them in a pupkin and sort
them in an even with browne or eade, and it willbee a Jelly
annointe the Jomtes theren th, and it will strengthen them.
A Caudle for weakness, and unoderate fleasee of
whites Sradds, queen the L Hu: by  Clayton.
Take halfe a pinte of Maskadine, and ounce of good white
sugar candy beaten smale, of Canamon mead muttmeggs &
singer of each one drachme shred halfe of them, and pound
the other halfe smale; then put them all in a skillett wth
the Muskadine; then stake fower dates, Cutt them in halfes
the soones and pith picks out shred them, and pound or brake
them smale with a little Miskadine; then straine them and beate
the yolkes of tooe nesoland eggs with a little miskadine
then straine the yolks, and straskollett with the Muskadine
and spices over the fire, let it seeth before  yo putt in the
date; then put in the eggs and take it from the fire; and
take tooe spoonefull of it first in a morneinge before
yogoe to bed bifr ovet of bed, and last at night when
yo goe to bed





For an Agne L Hu
Take myne rootes of yarrowe bruise them and dry
them that they offend not the stomach; then make a
little Bagg prportion able to the Pitt of the stomache
quelt the yarrow into it and hange it vpon the pitt of the
stomach; or boile red sage in possett drinke and take a
good draught of it an hower before the fitt comes.
To make grlly flower sallet L H. by your L B.
Take as much white wine venegar as white wine boile them
and a proportionable quantity of grlly flowers in ythe liquo
vntill they bee tendor just good store of sugar to them; and
let them haue liquod enough.
A glister of the bloody flue L H by Mr Cooke
Take the wice of yarrow leaues a quarter of apinte, halfe soe
much wice of planbine, and a quarter of a pinte of newe
milk; dissolue in this as much mutton suett as an egg
and lett it bee cast or as a glister, and euery day one of thiese
made of a temperate heale, for 2 or 3 daies together
well much all aile.
Another for the same by the same.
Take sixe handfull of wheate brann and three hanfull
of lack Chalke finely seraped; dry them well ouer the
frie in a pan; then put them into a lynen cloath or bagg
and apply them warme to the belly; let it lye on all night
itt will all aile you much.
To make werinegara L H taught herby Mr. Wraughton
Take sixe quarters of wine vinegar, putt it in glasse
and fill the glasse with elder budds halfe full, set it in
the sun close stopped for the space of a moneth
To make rasberry vinegar L H by Mr. Wraughton
Take sixe quarters of white wine vinegar, and fower
quarters of rasberries, picke them cleane; put them in an earthen pott all night close couerd in the
moreinge straine the vinegar from ythe rasberries, and
putt twoe quarters of fresh rasberries into ythe pan
and





and so let it stand all theyeare, and when you straine
the vinegar put it into a greate glasse bottle, and lett it
stand a Monnth in the sunne.
A medicine for the smole poxe, for  fiteigne of a
mad dog, & for the new dissease. L. H:
Take a quart of stronge Ale one handfull of hearbe of greece
one handfull of sage, three heades of garlicke, fower peny=
worth of treackle being halfe a pound, one spoonefull of
pewter scraped, boill all shiyle in a Pupkin couered and
close stopt with past, that the steame may not come out till
halfe bee wasted.
ffor the smale poxe, strucken in
you may giue suze spoonefulls at once for twoe or three
seuerall tymes as you see caused, or oftener, if you finde the
party in danger
ffor the fiteinge of a Madd dogg
you are to giue sixe spoonefulls of this water atone tyme
for three morneings together fasteinge, next after
fittinge; and for three moorneings together after the full
of the Moone, and chaunge followeinge.
And alsoe for the new dissease or malignant feauer
use it iust in the same manner
To caue a Child to make water L Hu: taught
by L. B.
Take the powder of an egg shell dryed in the ouev; giue it
the child you it will helpe him; or take the powder of
stone take as much as will lye upon a groate; giue in possett
drinke made of white wine and it will presently helpe
or take an handfull of smallgoge, fry it in butter, apply it to
 Belly or Nauell of the Patient as hott as hee can sufferr it
let it lye on for twoe howers, and it will helpe uery much.
To staie loosenesse L Hu: taught herby
Doctr. Enderlaine.
When a Hare is new kill saue the blood in a cleane lynen
swath, drye it, and hang it in a peece of this cloath in a bottle
ether of Beare or wine; let the party drinke hereof till his
loosenesse bee stained; wh willbee in a short tyme.
another





Another for a Child L:H taught by Dr. Vnderlaine
Take twoe dropps of oile of Mace inwardly to a chibein
loosonesse and it will staie it
Another for a child by the same
Take of Bolearminac and the powder of pomgranets Pill
of each an equal quantity mixed with plantain or red rose water
and in each of them take froelue grains of oheis powerders in
fower of or fuie spoonfulles of the foresain waters and it will
soail them
For one olias is cosbuie or bound in body L. Sr Jo: Monson
Anoointe the Navell w spermacali  and it will give pent ease
To take away grypeinge and paine in the belly
Lady Hughes taught her by the Lady Winwood.
Have a good thick toast of wheate bread and, toast it and spread it
with ordinary soape as you would butter a toaste; apply this to the
Nauell as how as you can endure it; it will giue ent ease
For the headach L H approved by Dr: Vnderlain
Take verbena w is verievine dryed be free  ne papers without
fire or sunne, weare a smale quantity of this upon your head and it
is a psent remedy
For wormes in a child L H: by Dr. Underlane.
Annointe the stomach and Navell of the Child with oile of
Cloues and it will dewtoy them psently
To cauase an Imposthume in the head to runne
when its stopped. Lady.Hughes: taught her by Mr. Cooke
Take two spoonefull of white wine, a spoonefull of honey, make
it warme and dropp a fewe dropps of it into your eare and
it will helpe you.
For the wynde of the Mother of Mastrise
L.Hu: taught her by Dr. Underlane
Take of bayberries , huske them, beat them to powder and mingle sugar
with them accordinge to your tasts in clary water, wherein boill
dissolve a little gumme draggon, boil that till they bee ready
to dropp; and when they are cold, drop twoe or three dropps of
oil of nuttmeggs upon a Cake thereof ; and  we eate  one
in the mornings, and the other at night, the oil is
best to bee present out and drachme is quantity
enough!
A. H.





A Medicine for the toothache L: Hu: by
Valentine Pell.
Take ginger, liquorice, Alicompane roote dryed, & Cynamon of
theise fowre a like quantity (that is a drachme) nutmeggs, Maie
and cloues a like quantity  (that is a scruple) beate all theise
spices into fine powder, searce them through a fine suie,
and mixe them all well together; putt some of it into a quill
and blowe it up into the nostrills nearest to the paine; and
it will give perfect helpe.
ffor a cold L: Hu: taught her by Sr val: Pell.
Take three ounce of Syrruppe of Maiden haire, an ounce of
syrrupe of vinegar, mixe them in a glasse, and take a
spoonefull thereof.
ffor the wormes L. Hu: taught her by Mr. Ruthin
ether for children or others.
Take halfe an ounce of wormeseede; & asmuch fennygreeke
bruise them & put them into a Pinte of Muskadine, let it steepe
all night, then give 2. or three spoonefulls thereof at a tyme
for three morneings together, & it will Kill them.
ffor inflamed sore eyes: L. Hu:
Take Arsmart that hath the blacke in the middle of the
leafe; bruise the leaves & lay them vpon the eyes made
warme; or take the Arsesmart beate it, and drane out
the uice;  dip a double cloath in it, & apply it to e eyes

Another for the same L: Hu:
Take Cassia put it upon double cloathe, and apply it to the eyes
Another for the same taught her by Dr: Marcorium
Take conserue of red roses with the Musillage of Rumces
seedes and apply it to the eyes.
To make an oile of a red dogg that cured a lame, drye &
withered Arme perfectly; wch had beene soe 12. yeares L. H
Take a younge red haired dogg, keepe him three daies wth out
meate, then strangle him with a Cord, let him lye deade a
quarter of an hower, in the meane tyme boile a Kettle
of sallett oile upon the fire, and put in the dogg, it makes noe
greate matter whether hee bee whole or cutt in peeces soe
that hee bee all there, skin and haire; seeth him
almost to peeces, keepe the Kettle alwais close covered
and





and whilest it is boileinge, take 4 store or an hundred
scorpions, and put them in a bason on the fire intill they bee
througly burnt, then put them into the kettle with the oile & dogg
putt there unto a good dishfull of greate gorund roomes or smalladge
well washed a good handfull of ... Johns nort, an handfull of roilde
or Marsh Mallowes, one handfull of Mallowes worth an ounce of
saffron seeth alltogether roell ontill the flesh of the dogg be broken
and fallen pooeds; and because which must have much oile, you may
at first put in halfe into the kettle trooe parts of water, and
but one of oile, and in seetheinge powrel in water till the dogg
bee almost broken in pooeds as abbouesain;  then ... it wake cold
after this take the bones of the dogg and the hearbes; and when
they have pressed and squeeezed them wrill that the substance
remaines in the said oile; then cast them away, then take that
onely wich is abbove the water the oile & greate, and cast away
the water if there bee much of it; but if there bee soe little water
asyo.. can searsily dis coone the oile from the water, you shale
take altogether for a little water cannott bee good; then
straine it through a strainer or Canuces; first wett and
steeped in white wine; then takes ... or eight ounces
of on guenstum ..., a pound of the marrow of the
gammon, and bones of an hogg, a pound or more ipyon
can gett it of the marrowe of the nones of the hinder
partes of thighes of an Asse; Putt all theise together
with the said oile and grease serth if ... pon the fise
then add to it a dishfull or an halfe of the oile of roses
and when it seetheth you shall putt there to three ounces of
masticke, three ounces of gain ellemy eight ounces of
red wake; but the masticke and gaine must obee will beaten
into powder, and sifted; and when all thes hath boiled
halfe an hower, lett it coole againe, and set it in the sunn
in some close vessell couered for 7 or ... daies, and
you shall have an one collent substance and water for all
ruide of cold enfirmities, and for many of the sal soe.
Take Author hero of did see the experience of it upon a
gentlemans left Arme that was lesse then the other
by





By the one halfe, and hee had nether strength in it, nor any
use thereof to helpe himselfe with; and beinge annointed
with this oile (in the sunne) by the space of an hower together
untill the oile was cleane dryed up: and had alsoe pearred
through his Arme, within 3 daies beinge; it was
perfectly discemied that the raines gave nourishment
unto the members, and within nyne daies after, that arme
was as full of fleshe as the other arme; and as Sounde & whole
as if it had never beene hurt.

ffor one that is blasted L Hu: by L B.
Take oile of Plantaine & annointe the places here with
and it will psently help it.

ffor a deadPalsie if the speech bee lost
L H by L B.
Take the hearte tuens, rubb it in yoour hand, and lay
some underneath your tongue and some abboue, and it
will revouer your speeche./

Another for the Same tryed by mySelfe upon Dr:
Harton & Sr. ron Kinadon, when Speech was lost
yet recouered.
Take the spirit of pure venice Turpentine, Siauen tymes
drawne, and twoe or three drops thereof give at a tyme in white
whyne or Ale twice or thryce a day for a weeke together will
restore you againe; and if the palsie take any other wrinse
then rubb that jointe with this spirit, chafeinge it with a
warme hand for a quarter of an hower together; and itt
will psently restore it againe

ffor the scuruey L Hu: taught her by Mrs. Woodyard
approued.
Take sixe quartes of smale Ale ten daies old halfe a pound
of horseraddish cleane pickt and scraped, slice e raddishe
and putt them both in a Pipkin, lett them infuse together
12. howers; then powre the cleare into Bottles and keepe
the same well stopped for your use drinke a Porrenger full
in the morneinge, and asmuch at fower a clocke in the
afternoone; this is exellent both for the Scuruey and
dropsie





Dropsie; it must bee taken warme; but it must not bee
used in the heate of summer.
ffor the Kings evile L.  taught her by the L. B.
Take one handfull of Egrimony an handfull of Mugwortt, an
handfull of hearbe robert, steepe them in a draught of small
beare, and drinke thereof in the morninge fasteinge, and last
at night; if the sore bee broken then steepe till in beare and
drinke it for a fortnight together morninge and eveninge, before
hee take the other of Grimony, Mugwort and hearbe robert; putt
 hearbes in steepe over night that you take in the morneinge
and steepe these in a morneinge that  take at night.
ffor the white evile L.
Take broome blossoms, still them, and give the party three
ounces of the water in the morneinge fasteinge for nyne
morneings together, Alsoe if the Kernells bee bigg, then take
the red dorke roote pared and beaten very well, mingle it
with tarrow greese and make a salve of it, then warme it
a little and lay it in the Kernells; as the party mends, you
may leave or continue at  pleasure
Another for the same L.  taught her by L. Heathapp
Cuckoe Pintle beaten with tarrow greese into a salve make
it very warme, & apply it to  place ether broken or whole.
A Cordiall water for the stomach by L.
Take three piptes of sack; three pounds of red cherries stoned
three ounces of Cynamon, an ounce and a halfe of Nutmeggs, a
prettie handfull of rosemary, an handfull of balme, an handfull
of Marygold flowers, and burrage flowers of each a handfull
putt all theise in a still and stop it very close; then still itt
and putt it up in bottles; Take 2 spoonefulls at a tyme.
The Plague water L.  taught her by Mrs. JJles
Take Rice, egimony, wormewood, Salendine, Angleca
Scabius, Tormentill, Sage, Balme, Mugwort, Pimpernell
Speremint, Scordium, Carduus benedictus, Dragons,
ffetherfewe, Woodsorrell Avens, Burnet Motherwort
Pallingall, Marygold flowers, Burrage flowers, Cowslip
flowers, parsly flowers of each a pound, of Rosemary a pound
 a little









of Cynamon and ginger bee some what more then that of
the cloves; the spices must bee tryed in a pooed of Carrsenett
or Lanone, and for boile altogeter to a pinte; and sweetened
with sixe ounces of fine sugar, or white sugar candy, and hauge
it into the glasse where in yre putt it with a graine or two of
muske, and  drink a spoonefull or more as you please
Against the new feaver L. Hu: taught her by
Doctor Langehame.
Take the stalk of butter burr cutt abbout 4. or 5. inches longe
finely ... and sliced abbout an handfull, Dandelion twoe
handfull as much sorrell, and one handfull of lettice leaves all bruised
Putt all them into a posset in this nanner followinge.
Take almost a pinte of fine stale ale, put there to some five
spoonefulls of the ... of ... Apples, or ..., or three spoone=
fulls of white wine vinegar, and the iuce of a good lemmon or twoe
mixe theise, and put them almost into three pintes of milke
as it is seetheinge over the fire; let it remaine over the fire till
the possett all bee very cleare;and the curd soe hard and tough
that it may bee gathered or taken of; then putt ye hearts soe
prepared as afforesaid therein; lett them sttand therein an
hower or twoe very hott and close covered in an earthen vessell
then drinke thereof hott or cold as you please; Roopinge a spase
dyett, eatinge little or noe supper att all; useinge alsoe straberrie
leaves, sorrell, endive, borrage, spenage, Dandelion, with the
palpe of ... and malo in these & well boiled froath.
A drinke against the plague. L. H: by D. Clayton
Take three pintes of malmsey or muskedin, boile therein
an handfull of sage with soe much rue untill a pinte
bee wasted awaie; then straine it and lett it over the fire
againe; & putt there to a drachme of longe pepper halfe
an ounce of ginger, with a quarter of an ounce of nutmeggs
well beaten together; let it boile a little, and put there to
two drachmes of Methridate, and one drachme of ...
a quarter of a pinte of Dougon water or Aquetifa
or Angelico water; Reepe this water as a most
soveraigne abbove all of hers; take of it alwaies
mornieinge





morneinge and eveninge three spoonefulls at a tyme
if the party bee alreadie infected; if not one every moon=
rnge is sufficeint, in all plague tymes next to god must your
trusye in this water as most indoubted and to helpe you
ffor though it haue beene tryed upon many, and it neuer failed
any if the heart were not dead and drowned with the dull al
before this was taken.
 To duleyer a woman of a dead childe. L adyHughes:
taughts herby Dr. Clayton
Take amber, beate it to powder and make a fume ouer coales
lett the woman putt ouer it with chrathes and Blancketts clow
albout her for some halfe an hower and give her to drinke
some Amber in bitches milk; it may chaunci to take
away her senses; especially abbout the tyme when the fume
and srink meebe; put in short tyme it oprnrth the body
and shee willee duleyered; This was tryed by one Mrs
Brinkhurst of Backinghamshire upon a gentle wooman
in greate extremily and danger of her life; because it was
truely syprcted that the childe was deade in her body
whereupon this was giuen & done unto her; and thereupon
within halfe an hower shee was in greate extremtie and
speecheless; but was instantly duliudeel well & safe; sayeing
that abbout the very tyme the fume and drink melt
shee felt her body open as it were with ascrue.
A good Caudle for the white Lady Hughes : taught her
by Mrs Pellin, and by her tryed and approued
Take of the best rd rose le aus, knott grass, Clary and
plantaine of each halfe an handfull, floroeris  changell
of Centry, rosemary and white water lillies, of each some=
what lesh then of the 3 former, eringors, and Comphrey rootes
of each halfe an ounce, Cynamon and white saunders of
each twoe drachmes, one nutmegg sliced, shread the
hearted and halfe a pinte of clarett wine 24 howers
straine it and add fower eggs with the whites, twoe ounces
of refined sugar, and fiue or sixe spoonefullsof red rose water





water; make a Caudle here of; and take a good draught.
mornenige and eveninge blood warme; to . chip you
pleash, put halfe a punte of elllegant mingled roell
with the rest; and take it b. or d. daies together.
to make the cordlall water called the treacle water
L. Jlu: taught her by Mrs. J Les.
Take three partes of Cardilus water, and put into it one
ounce of hart shorne shalled; boile it to a quart, then
take gentian rootes one ounce, tormen till rootes, .hicompanie
rootes, and dryed Rynedes of porme, Cytrurns, of each of them one
ounce; beate them into a very grosh powder, and of the
heal-bes of Cardiuls and Ningrlico, of each one once, of
the flowers of Rosemary, Maryguhd, barrage, Bugglame of
each twoe ounces, and one pound of od venice treacle
dssulued in siee pim tes of white wine, and three pintes of
red rosh water; in facse all their thengs together fowre
and torn by horoers; then distill them in a Leinbeche
and dreanke forore spoonefull of it at once
The vertues of it are their siaucen especially
but good for many theings not here name.
1. It is good aganist any infection
2. It is good in a burneinge flauer
3. It is good for the yellow jauindied
4. It is good in or against all conlculsions
5. It is good in an Dlgue.
6. It is good infalntcinge or soumndunge futts, in Child bedd or of her wish.
7. and Lastly it is good for y woomes in children, and in any sicknesse or contagion, an excillent Cordiall
The wall nutt water for the outues there of called
the water of life: LJLU: taught her by Mrs. JLLS
Take wallnutts in the begennige of June, beate them in a
Moter & still them in a still of leade, roope that water by
it selfe, then gather more wallnutts about Midsomer day
and the them as you did the other, and rope y water by
it selfe alsoe: then abbout a fortnight after that, gather
more wallnutts, and use them as you did both y former
roepeige  the water alsue by it selfe; then take a quart
of each water, and putt it altogether, and distill
it





it in a stillitory of glasse of glasse, and keepe it close stopt
for your use.
The vertues of it are theise followeinge.
i. It heules all manner of dropsies and palsies, druncke with
white wine fasteinge.
2. It is good for the eyes, if you drop one dropp into them
3. It is good to helpe the conception of weomen, if shee drinke mo=
deratly thereof one spoonefull a day in white wine.
4. It will make ones face uery faire, if it bee washed therewth.
5. It is good for infirmities within the body, and druieth out of it
all corruption, if it bee drunke moderatly wth wine or water.
6. It killeth wormed in the body, ether drunke with wine, or by it
selfe.
7. If wine have turned or chaunged his coulor, put a little vyall
hereof into it, and within 4 daies it will rectify it againe.
Whosoe drunketh of this continually shall liue soe longe as
nature may well continue in him.
An electuary to bee taken for the whites next
after the foresaid Caudle
Take Conserue of white water lillies Cornfrey and red roses
of each one ounce, Egreinony roofes, and Cytrons condifu
of each halfe an ounce, prepared red and white Courall
Pearle and white amber of each halfe a drachme
The spices of Viatragaranthi frigidi and Viambra
of each twoe scruples, mingle all theise together wth
Syrrappe of Comphrey into an Electuary; of which
taken in the morneinge fasteinge, and at fower a cloeke
in the afternoone each tyme, as much as a lardge Nutmegg
and soe alsoe this strengtheninge plaister followeinge
Emplastrum and Henrnium Casaris et Diapalma
ipreaide upon uery thin leather, and laid upon the
backe and raines./
ffor stoppinge






FFor stopping of the monthly Courses
Take halfe a pinte of plantine water, halfe a pinte of red
rose water, and halfe a score of wafer bottoms, putt them into t
water & shake them till they bee dissolved; then sweeten them
to your tast, & drink a draught thereof morneinge & eveninge
about a after of a pinte each tyme.
Another for tsame given the L Bacchus.
Take a quart of smale Ale and and boile therein an handfull of plantine
as much Rottygrasse, a stick of Cynamon, and thrteene jordan
Almond skins and all, & when it is boiled, sweetene y taste
and drink it morneinge and eveninge till you finde helpe
such wilbee in five daies as hath beene often approved.
ffor a ffellon L Ha: taught her by S dr: Bacchus.
Open the skinn with a Lanett, and crush out  t matter
then cleanse it by often injectinge water & salt into it with
a serringe; then take leaven and soape beate them together, and
lay it lon t sore; and y neede but to dresse it once; if y have
throughly cleansed it with y seringe.
Against the stone in the bladder, the way to use y gum essence
of Goates blood L H: by mr. Cooks, and  glister to bee
taken before the use of it
Take every morneinge fastinge seven spoonfulls of the
gum essences of Goates blood. And fast an hour after it, then
if you please eate y breakfast, doe this seaven morneings togetherthen insteade of the gumtessons take sixe spoonfulls of Bean=
shell water, and as much of white wine; a spoonfull or more
of fine white sugar, and a quarter of nutmeggs sliced thin
doe this other seaven morneings together, then for beare 20.
daies, then come to t use again both of the quintessence of
goats blood for seaven morneings and after that of the Bean shell
water againe, whereof y shall find an admirable effecte
but before y make use of it the day before make use of this
glister followeinge.
Take mallow leaves, holly oak leaves, & Camomile, the hear be
Mercury, and Rollistory of t wall peach one handfull
boile all theye in the broth of a sheeps head to a quarte.
addinge





addinge to these things twoe good spoone full of frimell seedes bruised; and to somewhat
lesse then a pinte of this broath, add twoe ounce of course sugar, & as much sweete butter
as an egg; lett this ghoter bee and minisfred of a temperate heate
and lett it alsoe bee given in the begininge of any fitt of thee stone, & in any extreimtie thereof.
To stopp bleedinge of a wound at the nose L.Hu: taught her by Bancrofte Bishopp of Oxford:
Take a lynen cloath, wash it in white wine vinegar, then dry it wash it soe a second tyme then dry it againe,
and in a be tender of it; spreade this in a cutt or wound & it will presently stoppoyolent bleedeinge; or
put it up into the nostrills and it will stopp bleedeinge at the nose; the ... of the hearbe perry
winckle put up witha fine ungg into the nose workes the same effect;
soe ... doth ether veriliu or vinegarr used soeether with a ragg or linte.
Another for the same the samee
Take the shaveings of bleu leather paint, put it up into thenosorills and it will staunch bleedinge at the nose.
For the scurvey L.Hu: taught her by the L Bacelues.
Take a Bashell of Malt make thereof twelue gallons of Ale when you turn it up hange it in a Bagg with a quarter of  a pound of varsons of the sunn stoned, twoe ounces of anneseedes bruised,
one ounce of Orrange Pills; if you please a good hand full of roman ... dryed, as much best any as much sage both dryed;which sage is to bee bouled in the Bort, and when the turn up your
Ale put there unto a pinte of the ... of water cresses, as much the mice of Seurvey grasse, and when it is eight or tenn daies of you may drinke it with your meat or at any tyme.
Ffor the Kings evill. L.Hu:
Gather halfe a Bushell that is fower gallons of the fflowers of ffore gloves cleane picks and sifted beate.





204
Beate them very smale and rinse them with as
much fresh butter very cleane washt from the churne
as the foxe flowers can drink up; then put them into
a new Pipkin that was never used, and sort them over a
gentle fire, and lett it boile softly abbout fouer howers
then take it of, and when it is cold cover it closed, one in a
Moneth sett the pipkin in an oven after the breede is
dran one; puttinge into it a peled off freshe butter to keep
it from groweinge nought; and when your use it lye avery
fine hollan cloath on the sore; then take for much of this
ointement in a saweor as will some for once & warme it
and dye the fine cloathe in it & lett it bye upon the sore
till it bee well; if the sore bee broken it will make it runne
very much at the first; the first springe and fall after
the sore is well, take some purgeinge dryringe phisicke
such as Phisiteans shall thincke best agree with e body
A Drink for the stone L Hu
Make a Bagg of a yard of fallen double, then take
Mallowes, holeyoaks, parsley, fennell, clary, sasifrage
white Archangell of each an hand full, eight topps of
Speare Mint, wash the heartes cleane, & dry them in a cloathe
take Callames, Aromatius and gallengall of each e waight of
twelue ponces, of gum arrabeck, qum troagantha, gum of
a cherre tree and myrrh the best, of each the waight of
sixe pones lardge Mace one ounce, of Anneseed as twoe
ounces, bruse all theise, and put them and the heartes in yo
bagg, tyeinge it closed; then put into it sixe ponses of the
best white wine, let it boile with a quick fire tilll twoe pints
there of bee consumed; then powre it out into a Bason
and lett it stand till it bee soe cold that you may wringe the
bagg; then put to it three quarters of a pound of fine hard
sugar, and when its cold bottle it up for youse; drink
every moremge sixe greate spoonefullls of it for three
daies together, restinge from it other three daise
and soe for three weeks every springe & fall
To make





To make the womans Balsom to helpe deliuery and
other uertues, & how to use it, galen L Hby Mr Coche.
Take fowre handfull of the purest white garden lillies, shread
them and infuse them in sixe ounces of the sweetest & best
Oile Omphasinum, wch is of greene Olives, and let all theise
stand in e sun fowre daies.; then straine it, & infusee like
quantity of lillies, and lett them stand in the sunn sixe daies
in the meane tyme gett three ounces of the oile of sweete
Almonds new drawone without fire, & mingle it with the
foresaid oile of lillies; then mingle theise together, and
dissolue it in twelue graines of the best Civett, wch must
bee kept together in a glass, close stopt for yo use, in this
manner followeinge a Moneth together before e  tyme of
the womans deliuery, lett all her belly on both sides to her
graines, and soe farr as her belly hes abboue her nauell bee
annointed with this balsom with a warme hand before
five a quarter of an hower together; and first it will
keepe all the vaines oher belly from danger of breakeinge
although shee should haue uery hard labour; and next it will
prepare her body against the tyme of her labour, that shee
will haue speedy and good labour; and with lesse paine & trouble
ffor a sore legg or other part L H
taught her by Doctor Clayton
Take vergin waxe, & oile Olive of each a like quantity , boile
them in water, shaueingethe wax into the Oile; & keepe this
ointement for your use.
ffora sore legg burneinge of scabb. by the same
Take Maloine that hath broade woody leaues and yellowe
flowers mixe it with hoggs grease, stone honey & leade, and
make a plaester hereof & lay it to thefore legg; Mr. Richard
Qiftorden Hampshre cured with this a gentlewoman and sore
legg; wch had beene given ouer by divers good Chirargeons
as uncuraeable
A Medicine





A medicine for the stone L Hu: by Dr: Palmber ap.
Take of Cassia newly drawne one ounce & an halfe of choren
Rhubarbe in powder one drachme & an halfe of venice Turpen=
tine boiled twoe drachmes of the powder of diatrage canthym
frigidic one scruple; of liquorice in powder halfe a drachme
mingle them together with suffitient quantity of Allthua.
w is March Mallowes; Take therof the quantity of
a wallnutt in e morneinge fastinge, & drinke after it a good
draught of possett drinke.
A diet breade for strengtheninge e bake, good against
windynesse, Consumptions, Rhunes, weaknesse of stomach
L Hu guien herby Dr. Clayston, & oft by him approued.
Take the kernells phirticke nutts 2 ounces, annesseeds &
fennelseeds of each one ounce & 1/2, Annesseedes, of Coriander
seeds prepared & Caraway seeds of each halfe an ounce, brake
them all to fine powder, and with a suffitient quantity of
wheater flower, make 2 dozen of Rolls of breade; and cafe
thereof in steade of other breade
A rare Cordiall water LH: & the vertues of it
guien herby Mrs Iles.
Take Cynomon, nuttneggs, cloves, ginger, graines of
paradice, & Cubibs of each twoe ounces, Castoreu one drachme
safe leaves and flowers, rosemary flowers, Cowslipp
flowers, Burrage flowers, bugglass flowers & stichas
flowers of each six handfull of the tops of sweete
Mariorum, balme leaues, Angelico leaues, bettanie leaues
of each 4 handfull, of the rootes of male pionie twoe
hanffull, Calamus aromaticus, & 2 woavie of each an
ounce, the bone of a staggs heart, the Pells of 2 Cytrons or
Lemons if Cytrons cannott bee had let the spices bee
made into powder, & the hearbes flowers & rootes grossly
beaten, infuse theise for three daies and three nights
in Muskedine or sacke then distill them in a Limbecke
or glasse stil, w is best for the purpose
This matter is excellent agt the fallinge sicknesse
Palsies, Appoplexes, fitts of the Mother soundinge
fitts, or any paine in  head, the plague, or any





any in feetwise dissease, for Conuulsion fitts in Children or
others, admirable for the Collicke the stomach & the
smale gutts, twoe or 3. spoonefull taken at a tyme, when
any of e infirmitie trouble or afflict you.
A Diett drinke to cleanse the liuer and spleene, to bee
taken as neede requires springe & fall: Do Clayton.
Take Polypodem & sassafras of each 2 ounces, sena three
ounces, Rhularbe 3. drachms, Agarick 2 drachms
Mechoaeon one ounce Julop halfe an ounce, liquorice one
ounce and an halfe, annesseeds. 2 ounces, raisons of the
sunne stoned 5 ounces, Mace, Cynamon & Nutmeggs of each
one drachme, ginger halfe a drachme, putt all theise shread
bruised & beaten into a Bolter bagg with a Pibble stone
of twoe pound waight, hange with bagg in an earthen
pott with a Spiggett in with bottom, filled with 2. gallon
of good middlinge Ale or beare, sue as with bagg may not
poin at the topp, but the waight of the stone in ay
onely in aso touch with bottom, Couer the Pot with a
Napkin & board upon it for 24 howers, and then
morneinge, you may drinke more or lesss as it moues
you and lett the Ale or beare you pu theise thinges
into bee a fortnight or 3 weekes old ready ffor
drinkinge
A good water against the Poxe, Plague, pestilence
Measells, burneing feauers & vemons watter in
the stomach & heart or surfetts, good for children
in comulsion fitts to stat cassinge, or any paine
in the stomach.  L H
Take Sage, Cellandine, Rue, Rosemary, wormewood, the
bearbe, Roasolis Magwort, Pimpernell, dragons scabious
egrimony, Balme scordram, bettany flowers, Marygold
flowers & leaues, Carduces benedictus, of each one handfull
then take the roots of Tormentill, Angelica, Ellicompane
pione and liquorice, all cleane scraped & sliced of each
halfe






halfe an ounce, wash all the hearbes and shake them in
a cleane lynen cloath till they bee dry; then shread them
and mix the rootes & hearbes together, then put them into
a gallon of white wine, & lett them steepe 2. Daies & 3. nights
in an earthen Pott well leaded, close couered & stirred twice
a day at least then distill them in an ordinary still
with a gentle fire, reserueinge of the first runinge
a Pinte and an halfe w ch is  e strongest, & alsoe a quart
of the second runinge by it selfe; soe stop them up sewally
in bottles for your use; you may alsoe take a Pinte of  e Last
runinge keepe it alsoe by it selfe; stop vp the still with
past of Rye meale, wine vinegar, white of eggs, and
course Bolearmonicke; of the first runinge you may
giue a spoonefull or twoe; of the second twice soe
much; and of the weakest w ch is fittest for Children
giue twoe spoonefulls, and to a new borne childe to com =
fort the stomach one spoonefull; Giue it warme w th a
little sugar, and in an Infectious disease mixe w th it
any Tulip or Cordiall syrrup. Take it at any tyme
but fastinge the best.
 ffor e Piles or Emrodes, aspe: approued Medicine
L. H:
Take bleue vitrioll seeth it in a Pipkin & likewise seeth
eggs hard, then take asmuch of the hard yolkes of the eggs
as of the bybyoll,  mixe them together, & fry them
till they bee blacke, then bruise them, and an oile as red
as blood will come of them; wherewth annointe e place
with a ffeather.
The Italian Plaist, & e vertues of it: L: H: by Cap: Greene.
Take ten ounces of oyle olive, 4. ounces of yellow waxe
of lithurage of gold, of siluer, and Ceruse of each fower
ounces, of Myrrh 4. Drachmes, and of venice Turpentine
4. ounces, ffirst put into a Pipkin; twoe pairts
of





of the oile with all the waxe cutt in smale peeces, and when
the waxe is melted putt in the mettalls one after another
stirringe them upon a moderate coole fire, the Pipkin
must stand a little abbove the fire & not touch it when it
is boiled to a brownish coulor then put in the Myrrh & the third
part of the oile, stirringe them, lett them boile together till
they bee of a brownish coulor. then take it up & put in the
Turpentine sturr them well abbout, and then powre them
out suddenly into a buckett of faire water, Kneade if there
a little, then moulde it upon a table into smale rolles, and keepe
itt for your old sore/ theise bee the verturs./
1. It cures old sores, & greene wounds applyed there to plaisterwise/
2. If mitigates the paine of any Aches, applyed searce cloathe Coise
3. If cures Imposticines in e face, ffellons, & giues present remedy to those
t are galled with ryd emige, beinge annionted therewith.
4. If yu pase cornes after e full Moone very neare for that which fetch noe
bloode; then lay a plaicfer hereof on the place & let ... lye on fowre
daies, then pull it of and scrape it with your nailes, & take of any
hardnesse that vissth  in the plaee. Five or six of the dye plaisters
will bringe bringe forth the cornes by the roots, &  in the meane tyme it
takes away the paine; if yu chaunce to fech blood in cuttinge
them at first; then shift your plaister euery 12 howres till it
bee whole.
Sr. Gilber Talbotts water & powder to cure a wounde
Taught hereby Sr. Tho Alesbury.
Take a quart of a pound of green or bleue vitrioll beaten
dissolve it in a quart of water, in some of this water putt
any ragg that hath the bloode of the wounded party
upon it, keepe it in a Pot indifferent warme & where
wash ... the wounde ether with white wine or whey
& keepe it uery cleane./
A salve to cure old woundes, bruises, Impostumes
& sore breasts. L Hus
Take a quarter of stronge beare half a pound of figgs
bealen very fine, boile them together a whyle,
then putt in a fene Crums of breade,
boile





Boile them to a salue; then putt in twoe ounces of
Barrowes grease, & Keep it for your use
A water for old sores, or greene woundes.  L H
Take Callamine, over leaves, woodfine flowers & leaves of
Mallowes of groundsill of bramble leaves, of broad plantaine
acidied sage, of each an handfull, with twoe red Jockerootes
Scraped and sliced; putt theise into a bottle of raninge
water, boile halfe away, then straine it, and then
sett the iuce on the fire till it bee ready to seethe then
putt to it a quarter of a pound of Allom, 2 spoonefull
of english honey lett it boill one walme; and if the wound
or sore bee foull; whey warmed is good to wash it.

ffor a bruise  L H: by Mr Cooke.
Make a Pultice of Clarett wine and Crums of bread; apply it
hot to ye place & it will give sent ease.

Another for the same by Mr Cooke
Take an ounce of oile of roses beaten with ye white of an
egg till it come to an unguent, annointe ye place there with

ffore sore eyes.  L H
Take new hoggs grease 3 ounces washt in redd
rose water five howers, & sixe howers in white wine
wherein Lapis Calaminaris hath been ten or twelue
tymes quenched, then take tubia well prpared of
Lapis Hamatites, wch is blood stone, washt & prepared twoe
Scruples, of Aloes washt & finely powdred twelve graines
mixe altogether with a little red fennell water, and dryed in
the sunne till it hath dryed & consumed the water and
beeinge hard dry make it into powder and take asmuch
as a greate pins heade, and rubb it from the farther
corner of ye eyes to the other Corner till it bee dissolued and
if any thinge grow in the eye putt a little within the
eyelid and in ye morninge wash ye eye there in white rose
water or red fennell water a little warmed.
Against







Against sore breasts by reason of e curdlinge of
the milke in weomens breastes  L H
Take 4 or 5 handfulls of white mints warmed in an
earthen Pott between twoe dishes, apply it hot to the Arme
pitts, & between the breasts.
Another for the same  L H by CapGreene
Take a peece of red rose Cake warmed in Creame untill all
the leaves are finely melted; applly it to the sore breast
and its speciall good
The blacke salve or plaister very excellent for
draweinge, & healeing all mannr of Aches, except  goute.
Take an handfull of Rosemary, an handfull of lavander, as much
tyme, of Dill, Bettony, Brookelyme, yarrow, Burrage, smallage
verum, Camomile, Orpin, Nightshade, plantaine, hearbe Robert
Adderstougue, polypody of the oake woodbine leaves, Daysie
Comfry, Rue Juce, Sanacle, of each of theise an handfull
beaten small, put in a quart more of veriuce, straine
theise together, & take the juce thereof, then take a pounde
of new waxe, a pounde of oile olive, a pounde of Colophon
a pound of pitch & a pound of May butter, serth all till
they bee melted, stirr it well on the fire beatt it runn over
till it bee all thicke and melted; then take a gallon of
faire water in a vessell, and a Canvas cloathe for a strain
hold it over the water and straine it therein; then lett
it coole and take oile or May butter, rubb it on your
handes that it sticke not, and make it up in prettie
Rolles, and spread it as  use it. /
A Balsome & the vertues thereof  L H
Take a quarter of a pound of waxe cutt small, put it
with a pinte of sacke into an earthen pott, melt it
take it of the fire, and add to it halfe a pound of veriuce
turpentine washt in rose water, and a pinte and
an halfe of sallett oile, boile theise with a soft fire
till they bee incorporated, then take it of, and
lett





lett it coole throughly, then take the Cake met it it againe
then putt in an ounce of red saunders & stirr it continually till it bee cold.
The vertues of this Balsome are theise.
1. It cures greene  woundes, melted in a spoone & applyed.
2. It cures burneings & sealdings beinge there wch annointed.
3. It cures outward bruises ; applyed outwardly.
4. It cures all inward bruises, taken warme with sacke or possett
drinke, the quantity of an hazell Nutt.
Ffor the Piles. L H: taught her by Capt Greene.
The powder of puckfist or Huesbeall, and live honey tempered
together and applyed the place, bothby rubbing in a little
& a cloath dipt in it and applyed to the place.
Another for the same L H
The fatt of a siluer ele applyed to the place as an unguent.
Another for the same L H:
Take Pomatum spreade upon a fine cloath as thicke as the back of  a
knife strane upon it e powder of Incke galles finely searced, apply
it to the placee.
Another for the same L H
Take Bores grease worke it upon or with blacke leade untill
it bee e same coul, and apply it to the place.
A medicine for the inward Piles. L H
Take e best Methrdate you can gett make it into rolles as for
a suppositer, putt it up, & instantly it cures inward piles.
Another for the same L H
Take unguentum Album, spreade it upon a ragg, & wrapp
it abbout the piles; twice doeinge will dyue.
Another for the same  L H
Take ether leaues boule them in faire water till they be soft
then squeese the water from it, and apply the leaues as warme
as may bee well endured to the piles, and as it cooles lay on
hott, both upon the piles round abbout, & backeward alsoe.
Another





Another for the same L H
Take a little honey and scrape chalk very thin upon itt till
it bee thick enough to spreade upon a clothe; wch beinge
applied giues present ease, and cures them
Another for e same L H: Jteures inestf pilesalser
Take a roasted onion mixe it with clay butter and putt
it up as a Tent.
Another for the Piles. L H
take Album Graecum made into fine powder, mixe it with
May butter, apply it, & it will prsebt cure
An oile for an Ache L H: app: by Lady North
Take twoe handfull of Camomile, as much greene sage, as much fetherne=
wood, as much wormewood, some topps of Lavender, twoe handfull of red=
mose leaves: Put these into a gallon of sallett oile; they must
stand nyne daies how steepe therein, and bee stirred every mornige
and after nyne boile them upon embers 2. howers, stirr them
still, when they hath boiled an hower put in a quantity of aqua
composita, when it hath boiled 2. howers straine it through a cloath
when it is cold put it up into a glass;All theyo hearbes must bee
gathered in May whene dew is not upon them the Cam: sage, and
fethernewood must bee of an equall waight, the herbes must bee
cutt smale before they bee putt into the oile ye must have halfe a pinte
of aqua compostita and by little & little once in a quarter of an hower
whilest it is in boill enigh it must bee outt into it, the rose leaves and
lavender must bee pulled and cutt before they bee putt into ye rest; this oile
must bee chafed in with warme hand ether before the fire, or bee a
little warmed when you please/.
A very good Pultice for any sore which and Ague in it. L H
Take an handfull of Mousoare an handfull of Rhubarbe, an handfull
of wild Mallones, an handfull of hollyoak leaves, an handfull of
sharpe stinkinge nettles and an handfull of red sage, boill them
in new milke, the herbs beinge first shreade, till they bee
very tender, then thicken it with greate rate meale well
Rabes, and soe lay it as a pultice to the sore; if you have
ouation lett it lay on aday and a night, otherwise put a
night onely./
A perfect





A Perfect remedy for any sore breast off app: L H
Take Piggs rossen in the reddest you can gett, leaste small and
must it into leare, then warme it a little and stir it, and drink
thereof three tymes a day, & put a red  a bath to the breaste, if it
bee not ram.
A plesent remedy for a sore breast, specially for such as
aines with milk. L H given her by  Lady Kalhgrey.
Take a sheepes head cleane washt, throwe away the braines
boile it in water 4. or five howers; take the fattest of the
broath and boile it in sor much ryci as will make it  thicknesse of
a Pultice, ad to it  e yolks of twoe eggs, halfe a drachme of salfron
in fine powder, and twoe ounce of oile of Camomile; spreade this on a
cloathe and so apply it, shift it once a day.
A round drink to bee made in e middle of May, & e use of it.L H
Take virga aurea , wch is a golden rod, wormewood, Baglass, mugwort
senancle, Nantaine,  Dandelion, Mood bettany, Ribwort, white bottles
paysie roots, and all Augns, hathounebudds Egrinomy, oken leves,
bramlle budds, wild Angelica, Comfry, Minte, Scubios, straberry leaves
Cenique foile & byelett leaves, of each one hand full, put them into a
Pottle of white wine, and a gallon of cleare runnine water, boile them
together till halfe bee wasted; then straine out the liquid from
the hearbes, put to it a quart of honey & boile it againe, put it up
into a glass, stop it close; Take 3. spoonfule thereof, in the
morneinge fastening and less at night, untill  till  have drunk a quart
here of; This water is for old or new sores, and for woundes in the
body; layeinge withall a plaester of honey and waxe upon them
It is good also for woomans breastes, and putrified bones makinge
them to seale and for aches in the stomacke. Also to break an
Imposthume, makinge it to come out ; it hath drain bulletts
out of as owners body that hath beene longe in it, and healed the
place of the sore; its good to staunch bloode
A drink for the Ricketts L H
Take Tamarisk, Liuerwoort, harts tongue, Cowslip of
Jerusalem, Coltstoofe, Clouers, or three leaues grasse, Comfry
Suceory of each twoe good handfulls, of egrimony the Half
quantiti; Boile it in sixe gallons of ordinary woort
as





as stronge and use stronger then the child is used too--
Boyle it well and when tis cold lett it worke as other drinke
and tun it up; then take a good quantity of scuruey grasse
and halfe for much water Cresses cleane washt, Crate it
together and straine it, and take a pinte or more of the
Jucie thereof, and put it into the ramdlett to the woort
let it worke a little together, then stopp it, and when; itt is
ten daies for your child old drinke of it 6. or & weekes together
insteade of other drink days nights, & the springes & fall alsoe

ffore the groneeige & increaseninge of the spleene. L H
Take harts tongue and feuerwort of each alike quantity
cleane washt and pickt, beate them in a stone mortir
with a little Ale, straine it and give the Childe some of itt
every morinenige fasteinge ; your may putt some sugar to it
of syrsupe of suceory, it must bee that wch is simple
made julth out any, compound with it; Take this fastenige
ten mornenige together, and at night; and gudy tyrsed  you
take it annointe under the ribbs on both sidees of the
Belly with this Ointement followinge, beinge
made as here after pscribed.

Take May Butter and Neatesfoote oill of each twoe
sixe ounces, three ounces of Bolearmoniak finely
Searet, mixe them together  ouer the fire, and lett
it stand hott a prettie whyle; But not soe hott
as to boile, when you take it of the fire; stirr it
till it bee almost cold that it may mingle well
and the Bolearmonacke not settle too much to the
bottom; when the Child is annointed with this you
must put on a pooce of scarlett next to the skin
over the belly, and keepe it on as longe as it is
annointed; But it make the skin to pimple then
put on a double lynen cloathe, and leave of the
Scarlett.





ffor the yellowe Jaundice R:It :approv:
by the Lord Shefeild and his daughter
Make Ashes of Ashwood, then take the urine of e party
and make a past of it, then take juice, seauen or nyne
heades of saffron with this past crust ouer, and couer
euery head of saffron by it selfe; then put them in a
Cleane dishe for yor use.
ffor the Ricketts. L H
Take a pound of the leafe of a Barrowhogg with three
handfull of the beardes of onsett Leekes; beate them
together in a stone Morter untill the beardes of the Leekes
bee not to bee seene, then before the fire, mornenge and
eueninge annointe both  e ancles, knees and wrests and  e
Anooe bones next the necke, and  e ribbs where you shall finde
them knotted but not  e belly nor the stomach.
L H Another excellent for the Ricketts used by Dor
Clayton and Mr. Browne
Take one ounce of the oile of earth wormes, one ounce of
the oile of foxes, halfe an ounce of the oile of castoram
one spoonefull of Annesseede water, mixe theise and
annointe the backe bone and hipps eury night, and
let the backe part of the hipps heade bee shauen uery close
and when you apply, this doe not full it in, but only with
a warme hand, gently putt it on; for much rubbinge
weakens the jointes.
ffor the eyes L H by Mr. Corke often by hime approued
Take of Lapis Caluminereus, and Lapis Tutius, quenche
theise in halfe a pinte of white Rose water, and
halfe a pinte of white wine; heate the stone
Lapis Caluminereus red hott and quench it nyne
tymes; then straine the water and wash your
eyes there with.





Another for the Eyes
Take your owne water wch you make over night and keepe it
in an earthen vessell in the morneinge wash y within
and that water you made in t morneinge wash y eyes with it
till y eyes bee well wch one of theise 2 Medcins will soone bee
ffor a Bloody fluxxe L H
Take flowergrasse make it unto a round Ball or Lumpe of Dough, then put
it unto a skelett of water, let it seethe, then take it out and lett it dry.
it will bee very hard for that you may grate it at y pleasure, of ones
make pap and eate thereof A tymes a day season it with a
little sugar and a leafe of Mace.
Another for t same taught her bye Mr Mark Wald
Take Cuttle bone beaten into fine powder, and drink a spoonefull
at a tyme in smale Beare & it will help you
An excellt Medicine agt all manner of fluxes L H
taught her by Sr. Tho Alcocke
Take Races of ginger slice them into thin slices, dry them
and when you use them put some charcoale slaked into a Cfing-
dish, put them into e  bottom of a Close Stoole; lett e disseased
party sitt ouer the same, first straneinge e sliced ginger and over the
Coales, & still renew it with fresh ginger, let yoparty sitt for longe
ouer it as hee can the heate of the coale will make him both
Sweate and thirsty; therefore lett him haue some smale Ale pr
Beare with Mace boiled in it, more Mace Ale, and when he is
warme wth sittinge, lett him bee putt into warme bed: thryce
doinge of this will savue
ffore Red sore eyes L H
Take snailes with their shells beate them to a salue put them
in a lynen cloath; bynde them on yr eye shift them once a day.
Another for the same. L H





often as you please and if it bee for a hott Rhume quenche
the stone in white rosewater, and if for a cold Rhume
then quench it in white wine
ffor blood shott eyes. L H
Take aproued of stale white breade, as much as will couer
the oyle soake it in red rosewater, untill it bee throughly
wett and soe bynds is to yur eyes all night.
Anointment for an Ache L H
Take a quart of creame, a good deale of Rosemary, boile theise
anointement. Streane it out & keepe it for your use
Another for the same L H
Boyle spruce beare to a salue, spreade it upon leather, and let it
lye upone place for longe as you please
To make an ordinary Sysant L H
Take a pottle of Ale, a quarter of a pound of raisons of the sunne
stoned, nyne or ten good figgs, three sticks of liquorice
scraped cleane, beate and pull them in fleeckes or peeces
seauen tops of Rosemary, halfe an ounce of sweete fennellseede
bruised, and a little bgg of braune; put all theise in a neice
Pipkin close couered, boile it on a soft fire till one halfe
bee consumed, then straine it, and sweeten it with some
white sugar candy, or white sugar accordinge to your taste
and for take three or forore spoonefulls of it at a tyme.
A singular powder good for many things hereafter
set & prone, given byL Hby Mr. Harbert.
Take Osmond royall, picke & washe it uery cleane
then dry it in an Ouen beate it to powder & sift it
give as much at a tyme as will  bye open a groate or
treepence, in cold burnt wine, beere, the or e like
in a morneinge fastinge, for 3 or 4 daies, and
if you bee not well, take it againe as aforesaid
The verues of it followes






The vertues are theise
It is good for Ricketts in children qiuen them in milk very
morneinge; it is good to stace the whites in weomen taken
as aforesaid; if a woman have too many other couses or
that they keepe noe containe tyme of cominge lett her
take here of ether & or 5  sixe daies together; but shee must
by noe meanes take them as such tymes as shee hath them
upon her
To helpe deliuery at  tyme weomen are in labour
giuen the L H; by Mris Harbert
Take 4 ounces of oile of lilhes & three grains of musk
grynde it and put it into  oile; lett the Midwife use this
insteade of butter; this may keepe a longe tyme, and the
longer the better
Another for Lame  by the same
Duck grease beinge dryed up and  Midwife useinge it as
aforesaid, will cause speedy delvery
A very good water for any wound or sore LH
Take a quarter of a pound of Orange Pills dryed & beaten into fine
powder, a bottle of runninge water that runs from norther
South, boile the Pills in the water fower of fiue howers
then strane squish it throngh a fine cloth without squeeszing
it to a brogde preserueinge glasse; then after a fortnight
tyme when it is fully settled and all the Mother down taken
out, put it up in a cleane glass & keepe it for you the so keepe
bee in the manner, wash the wounde of sore with it then dipp
apron of fine lyner cloathe into the water and and apply it
and if it bee an old sore  often  wash it hepe with
the better.
 For a certan Ague L H
Take a third part of white wine, and  quantity of a greate
nutmegg of London Treacle let it bee put on embers to
resceiue a gentle warme  howers, but without for longe
untill halfe a quarter of an hower before it be taken
of and then it should boile gently giue it  Patient
milk warme the night before the fitt come, and itt is
the better if hee sleepps upon it for that hee take not
cold; it causeth a gentle sweate, and if this put it not
away





awaie at the first tyme takinge at the second tyme
it will assuredly doe it
Another for the same l.tu:
Take a quicke spyder, & put into it a Walnutt shell, bynde the
shell uery fast with threede then lave it in a little Bagge
and lett the party weare it abbout his necke
To make the best pomatum Le tu: taught her by
Mris Jles
Take the leafe of a Barrowhogg, laie it in runninge
water 4 daies, shifteinge the water eury day; then take
the suett and putt it inot a deepe gally pott, and lett it into
a skillet of water ouer the fire, lettinge it stande till it
bee all melted, then straine into a bason of faire water
and lett it stand foe bottom away, then cutt it out, and it there
bee any lett leinge ini the muddle of the cake, serape it of and
dry it in a cleane cloathe, then put it into a a gally pot againe
Lettinge it on the fire as before, lastinge it onely in elt, and lean
in if there be any neede; then powre in a good quantity
of rose water, and when you have taken it of the fire
leafe it up, ether with a longe spoone or a sticke, till it
bee stone cold and it must stand for a day or twoe; then cutt
it out of the pott, and pwore owt of the rose water, seraye
The Cake the second tyme it ovation bee; and dry itt on
a cleane cloathe as before; then putt into the pott againe
as before; adn melt and pwore in annother  good quantity
of Rose water, and beate it till it bee cold; after it hath
stood thus a day or twoe, cutt it out, dry it uery well from
the water, otherwise it will not keepe; then melt it
and powre it into little potts; you neede make of this
but twice in the yeare, when you are to use it
steepe guine dragon in rose water, and to halfe a
pound of this suett, add the quantity of a good
Walnutt of that gum dragon; and incorporate
both well together into a morter; and for use
it, as you haue ou ation
..y





My Lord Chomley his purges bath for the goute The purge
Take of Sene orientall sixe penywaight, polypody of your oake
sixe peny waight lignu Aloes 2 penney waight, all made in
powder of Musk Leuant twoe graines all this must bee taken at
one tyme in a draught of good broathe; and drunke some thin drinke
after you have taken it.
The bathe.
Boile tarnipps in faire water to bee as thice as a papp
and how the part in feete therein; use it alwaies as hott
and warme as you can endure it.
ffor the Dropsie Mr Bourcher
Take a good handfull of Rue and 3 or 4 handfull of
water cresses and twoe handfull of Camommile cutt them
smalle & beate them in a Morter; then put therein halfe a
pinte of whitewine, straine it through a faire lynen clothe
sett it in a pan, let it seeth a little whgle, then take  white
of an egg & beate it, put it to the drinke, then straine itt
againe if it bee bitter out a little sugar to it and take thereof
4 or 5 spoonefulls next yo heart; fast 3 howers
after, and once a weeke take this own it followinge.
Take 3 or 4 daffadilly rootes, washe them faire and
cleane, cutt them smale and seeth them in half a pinte of
Ale and a halfe pen worth of saffron, seeth it till  Ale
bee consumed to  halfe; straine it and doun itt
warme; you must eate a guarter of an hower before
this vomitt; it will bringe fleaghme and all euile
things out out of your bell, & body and cleane you or poodinge
will
Mr. Bourcher ffor the swellinge of  belly or leggs by reason of  dropsey
Take a handfull of Walwort, an handfull of tyme.
two or three smale rootes and twoe or three leaues
of Burrs, halfe an handfull of Parsley, and handfull of
Mints twoe handfull of fearne that growes upon the
oake, washe them cleane and chop them together
seeth them in a gallon of white wine till halfe
bee consumed; then straine it and put it on the
fire againe, putt therein a pound of sugar
make





make it like unto syrrupe, and drinke 2 . or 3 . spoonefulls
thereof morneigne and eueninge.

A bask for one with begins to hauee Propsie Mr Boureker
Take with hearbes & flowers of Camomile & handfull of small agge
and Lauander seauen handfulls, of hysope, wormewood, fether
fewe and sage of each  2 good handeful; seeth them in faire
water, put them in a tubb, let them coole of them selues wthout
puttinge any cold water to them; then twice a week bath
therein; take for e most part most meate; for moyst
meate engendreth waterysh humors and encreaseth
the dropsie; Drinke stale beare, or gaseoigne wine
a draught at euery meale; hott meates and Rootes must
bee sodden in his broathes; if your belly swell annointe
it with the oile of Camomile, or any hott oile; drinke
not abboue a quart in one day; and sd bee not so lulled
take some sena in pottadge or broathe
Another approued Medicine for e dropsie Mr. Bourcher
Take the longe spriggs that growes upon the stalks of
greene broome, burne it in an Ouen clearne scrapt when you
have as much Ashes of it as a peny loafe, mixe them with a
good quantity of white wine; stir them well together, and
lett them stand twoe daies; then straine e wine from your
Ashes and night and morneinge, drinke half a pinte
thereof, and when thatis gone mashe more the same
way; Drinke it as aforesaid; and in ashuint tyme
you will bee cured perfectly

To knowe whether the dropsy bee cureable or noe M Bounher
Take Barley Meale, theise of spinage & Marygold
make a plaister thereof, and lay it three tymes to the
Patients Liuer; and if the plaister bee soone drye, they
are cureable; if otherwise incureable.

A Remedy for the watery dropsie. M Boureher
Mixe twoe drachmes of salvianella with any
appropriate water, twice a day take it fastieinge
in the morneinge





Another for the Droppe Mr. Bouch.
Take an handfull of the tender topps of Broome stampe and
straine them in a quart of stale Ale, boill it till halfe
bee consumed; putt some Cenamon and ginger to it, sett the
Patient upright in a Chaire; soe that his feete touch not e
ground by twoe foote and an halfe, then put under his feete
a pan of Charcoale; and over  e pan laie a paire or twoe of
tongues; and lay thereon greene broome; let the patient sett
the soles of his feete thereon; and give him some of that Ale
to drinke bloode warme; lett him sweate well; and putt
him to bed; and by gods grace it will helpe him in a
short tyme
To ease the paine of the stone. L: Hu:
Take a lapfull of parsley boile it in water, & seetheinge
hot put itt into a closestoole; and sett the party over itt
and it will give him much ease; keepe some of this
liquor upon  e fire; and as  e other cooks putt in hott - /
Another for  e same & alsoe good for weomen in
Labor to helpe Delivery. L Hu:
Take a Pecke of lillies, picke the Leaves, shreade
them smale, putt them in a gally pott with a pinte of
Sallett oile; Cover it close that nothinge may gett into it
Bury it in a dunghill for 5. or 6. weekes, and when
you use it, annointe the Raines of the Backe
therewith; it will much ease them, & asswadge
swellinge; and is good for weomen in Labour to
helpe Delivery.
ffor an Ague. L Hu:
Take a peeue of Lemon Pill pared very thin
as much as will goe abbout the little ffinger; laie
the inward side neset the little ffinger, betwixt
the upper and the second Jointe; and itt
will putt away the Ague.
ffor the





Ffor the yellow Jaundice.
Take egg shells and pill of the skins, dry the shells
and beate them to powder; and to twoe parts of the
powder misk one part of saffron; give the party here of
as much as will dye upon & in possett drinks ... hath
Marygold flowers well boiled in it; mingle this powder
in a spoone full of this drainde; and then take a good
draught after it./
Ffor a burne with gun powder.
Take lensoode oile and serape Cerise into it; and annoite
the parts with it.
To make haire growe.
Rubb the parts with a red cloath a greate while; and then bathe
it with your owne water as hot as you can endure it
Ffor a Burne.
Beate snowe water and sallett oile togrther very well
and bath the part untill all the rednesse bee quite gone out
then anointe the part with Luabella. his Balsom
Ffor a ... or nebb.
Clari by honey & drop it in twice a day
To caees sleepe
Take the wallflowers and lay them ... the kellowbeeres
Ffor the Tooth Ach. Recipe: approved by Mr. Geldrop
Take spoone ... worth of powder of swarle, and as much in
quantity of powder of burnt Allom, mingle them with honey
in a spoone; rubb your gums with it; and if your toothe bee
hollowe, stop it here with; and this seldome or never failes
this quantity will serve three tymes.
In an miracle seare cloath for a sore breast, or to healpe.
In past haves ffellons, green or red Cutts.
Take halfe a pound of the best oringines ware, racke a pinte of the
oile of roses, halfe a pinte of oile olive, melt them altogrther
and lett them stand still they bee cold; then take halfe a pound
of while leave beaten thine. putt it into the oile & ware
thenself it over the fire; and lett it boile halfe an houer
then take twoe ounves of masticke twoe ounces of
ffrankin cowse. twoe ounces of myrthe; twoe ounces of
gum.





gum of lanum, beate all the gums very smale, put them into
yor other ingredients, and let tgen fill halfe an hower more
then take a quarter of an ounce of Campfire, & put it in, stirrit
ouer the fire till it bee black; then take it from  fire and dip
yor cloathes therein; or make it opin rolls for y use
To make the Queens Mother of ffrance her Pomatum
Mr Cooke taught it the La: ffn:
Take sheeps feete abbout e full Moone, Seal of the haire & be
bruise the bones, and beinge well washed foile them in a Pipkin
of water; lett the fatt or oile that riseth bee catiously
gathered with a spoone; and often washt in red rose water
to make it white & sweete; then take a quarter of a pound of
the nearest Pigs Suett often washt in rose water & bruise
then take of each of theise a quarter of a pounde; and
after they are often washed together, add to them an ounce of
the purest oile of gelsamne, soe mince it up well together
and it is a most pure pomatum.
ffor a fflea taught L: H: by Dr. Henrye.
Take of Balaustines finely powdred two drachmes of
hawthorne prepared, Bolour, Contrayerua, of each halfe
a scrupl; Casse a ligina in powder Aboue scruples, mince all
together, and take halfe a drachme of it at a tyme in milke
To make a very good Pomatum. L. H:
Take a pounde of theflecke or fatt of a Barrow Bigg(, that
is a Bore Bigg gilded) take it hott out of the bellie
and putt it into springe water shiftinge it twice
a day for five daies; then take it out, and picke the
skin cleane of; take twoe Marshe Mallow rodes,
twoe Lillie rootes openinge of them; and pickeing
them very cleane, then take halfe a dozen bone wafers
sliced thin, halfe a pound of butter Almonds blaunched
beateing of it in a Morter ; and as you beate it putt
in three ounces of the oile of Tarter; then putt the
fatt and all theise together into a greate Bason, and
Lett it upon a pot of seetheinge water; and lett it stand
till it bee all melted







till it bee all melted, then take it of and straine it lettinge
it stand till the next daie; then take it out of  Bason,
make the Pan cleane, and sett it over the hott water as you did
before; and one ounce of Tarter finely beaten, one ounce of Borax
turnt upon a firesholue as you doe Allam, then beate it to powder
and put it in; then when it is all melted take it out, and straine it
into a cleane Bason; and beate it three howers, then put it up
into a gally pott
A Cordiall syrrupe for the cheareinge up & cureinge Mel=
ancholly persons, highly comended and approved by
many; & by Lawrenties in his treatize of Melancholly. L.
Take of the rice of Burrage & Buglasse of each a pound and
an halfe of the jucie of sweet Apples a pound, of the juice
of Baline halfe an ounce, of Oyers graines or cuchanell three
drachmes infused duiers tymes in the former juices,  & strained out
of saffron halfe a drachme, of fine sugar twoe pound; make
theise in a syruppe boyled to his height & Aromatize or
sweeten it with a drachme & a halfe of the powder of Diamargariton
frigidum, and fowre scruples of the powder diambre, and
take 2. or 3. spoonefulls of it morneinge & eveninge.
ffor the eyes to eate of any fleames or Rell or
any thinge that grows in the eyes. L.
Take three handfull of sage, one handfull of salt, as much
honey a will dissolve the salt, lay hte sage on a rounde
heape, powre the honey & the salt into the midest of itt
and worke it up close together; then bynde it uphand
in a weete paper, rost it in embers; and straine
rosted sage betweene twoe Trenchers; and every
morneinge & eveninge dropp some into the eye  a
quill, & rest a while after it.
Another for the eyes L.  though  sight bee
taken away with  Moister p.ee
Take Cellandine and Alehoofe of each 3. handfull
stampe & straine them & mingle their juice  honey
drop thereof into  eyes morneinge & eveninge
and





And if this should faile ,then use the former of sage but this assuredly cates of any filme or pearle that growes in the eyes, of any ill that prowedeth from the smale
pore it recouered one that lost his sight seaven yeares, by reason of the Mr poche ... in the eye.
Pultice to dissolve humo & most exeollent for a sore breast to breade & heale it ; and beinge tymely laid to it, to dissolue it without breakinge.
Take a sheepes head woolls & all, breake the bones, heth it till it fall in ...; then straine it, and to a quart of that liquid put a quarter of a pound of tihe; and let it ,boile till it come to a pultice.
then put to it frooe penyworth of affron finely pounded or ground; Lett it seeth a warme or twoe; then putt to it twoe  spoone full of the oile of Roses; if they have not these as may bee ...;
This cures any of sore in thelegg .. lues meno.. most exeollent to breake & heall a sore breast with this ... ... it affords breast was cured, when shee was thought past lecordy.
Fore the Bloody Cure ...:
Take a quart of red wine of plantaine water one pinte pom granett peele and Bynorhon; boyle theire togrther then take halfe a pound of ...nutt..., beate them smalle as you doe Almond milkes; Drinke it morneinge and eveninge as often as you will; in the boilenge put in a peele of hard sugar.
A Medicine for a felon happens in the Somite
Take hear be grace, Ragnort, hors tongue a quantity of rusty bacon, and a peele of Allom;beate all theise together; then put to it a quantity of Tarr mingle it well togrther, put it in a gully pott, you may heose it all the yeare.






To make the greene oile for all Bruises in May ...
Take cammomile, tops of bays, fether few, sage, reroses
the whites dipt of Balme, of each twoe handfulls
sothernwood, elder budds, Lavander, Lavander Cotton, Rue,
Rosemary, Costemary, Buglasse, rounter savery, elme leaves
of each one handfull, shred c smale, & put in a glasse
put in as much sallett oile as will cover them, then tye up
the glasse close, sett it in the sunne for 3. or 4. weeks
stir it every day with a stick; then cruise some 30.
cloves and put into it; take yo glasse close tyed, & sett it
in a skellett; then fill it up with waber, & lett it boile a
day upon a soft fire; always e water boiles awaie loe putt
in more; when it is boilled straine it, and put sixe
spoone full of clove oile to it, stopp it closet, & rope it
for yo use. The rertue here of id for all old or
now bruises, to bee warmed & annointe yo bruised
part morneinge & eveninge; oftner forcation bee
it may bee takn unoard upon any fall or bruise in the
body 3. spoonefull warmed in adraught of white wine
or possess drink.
Do Maycones pyeruative agt the plague
or any pestullent dissease.
take a lardge swanne Quill; and put into it thre
quarters of an ounce, (that is sixe drachmes) of Quicke=
silver stopped open end of the quill with waxe
sowe it up & Ribbin & weare it abbout yo necke next
yo skinn.
A medicine for a Cancker LH
Take one spoonefull of honey, as much Roch Allom
burnt, and beaten to powder, as will lye upon Bd
as much buy salt beaten fine, as will lay upon twoe
poned; mingle them in ye honey; then take a pound
of






of fast rustie Baron; how it vpon a Rwite to  fire till
it melt; then lett it dropp 3. or 4. tymed vnto honey, mingle
theise together ; then take some of the Medicine,  the
top of yo finger or thumble, & hold it on the placed greeued
 yo can come to it,  take a little sticke with a cloute
 on  topp, dip tin the Medicine; how it on  fire
a prestige noble yo must not sucke it; but how yo mouthe; fast
an howoer or twoe after this; this cures at 3. or 4. tymes
dresseinge.
Sr Myrrice Williams directions & course of physick (?) curedy (?) Lady Hubbert of Mellaneholy. Shefumemge Lack for the heade.
Take the wood of Alloes & of Costus of each twoe scruples
of gallia myskata halfe a drachme; Ole fanum twoe
Scrples; of liquid storax as much as will make trocheleds.
here of for a fume.
The Fomentation
Take Manorum Mint, stachodos & cowslipps of each
one handfull; Camomil & bettauy flowers as much as y can
how betweene twoe fingers, & a thumbe, of Calamses aromanticey
and Cypresse roote of each twoe drachmes; enfuse &
boile theise in white wine & sage water each a quart
till the third part bee consumed; then straine
it and forment  party with a spange.
The Oiles
Take the Oile of white amber, oile of Nuttmeggs
by expression, of each halfe a drachme; oile of carth=
loormed twoe drachmes & one halfe; of gallia, muskata
one drachme; wike altogether.
The Powder
Take , Cynamon of each ha: a scruple; Costus
frunkinconed & gales of each one scruple, of dryed red=
nol- leaucy as much as y can how betweene the fingers
a thumbe; make theise into powder.
The purge





The purge.
Take the leaues of Sena halfe an ounce, choyse rbubarbe
Trooe drachmes, creame of tarter one drachme & an halfe
Cinamon, ginger, Cardamous, of each halfe a drachme
Lioce clours; in fresh theise in halfe a printe of..h : roine
all might; then boill it gently a quartur of an horoer
and straine it; put there to syratyre of Roles or manna
once ounce, Menite water and Cinamon water of cache
one spoone fall; misee all & take it warme
The Cordiall Bolus.
Take spocies Afomaticum rosatam, one drachmes 1/2
powder of gentian ha: one drachme; .orth spirit of
caramurags, as much as will make a  Bulus trool
dolrs a terro and ; take the purgringe medicine againe before
prescribed
The Diett Drimbe
Take of guaiacum three ounces, sasla fras & jreoj
flowers of each one ounce, house tadd ..h rooted one ounce
Calamus aromatucus & gall ingall of each 2. ounces and
an halfe Ledoary, trooe ounces, beltally, & flowers of rose
marry & consli ..s, sage Marioram & gelly flowers of each trooe
hand falls, Coaes, nutmeggs, geinger & Cinamon of each 2 . drachmers
prepare & mixee theese together, & cntuch of hem in equal
partes in sage water & johite joine a quart of each; at
them boill gently, then cleares clarity the same cedduig
of ..le oh at is tutt for drinheinge & gallons &1/2. and
bottle it u.
The Clectuarey
Take conserue of sage, ground pine, rosemary flowers
of each one ounce, uenice treacte one drachme; specias
Diamibra one drachme, with syrrappe of stichade, make
an electuary; Take morneinge and night
A medicine to cure an odd sore, greene jooanude
or sore eyes. Mr. Stephin.
Take raine water in an earth pan or pott before it fall
on the ground ; then take a pound of bishle of lyme to a
pott





Pottle of this rainewater and steepe it together 5. daies
& nights. stirr them 4 or 5 tymes a day; then straine it
through a cleane lyn cloathe.
If it bee to dresse tt an absore then make it salt wth salalmeniacum or Almoniaeus, warme it upon a little fire to take e coldnesse of
it; apply it to e sore, & it will heale it or any greene wounde; and
Lett But noe deade or prouide flesh to bee in it
If to cleare e eyes & stopp Rhume in them, then morne
inge, and euening dropp a little of it into them and; mixeinge
with it a very little of e salt of damaske rosees, red fennell
or red sage; and thies make e salt of damaske roses; take the
rose leaves power e water is distilled out of them; burne them to
ashes, after calcine them in a Crusible, then steepe them in
a quart or bottle of the water, that is distilled out of them
5 or 6 daies till e saltnesse bee fetcht out of them; then
straine or filter the water through a browne or graye
paper untill it bee very cleare; then take e water, and
putt it into a glasse still, or greate high glasse wthout a Couer
Boill it in Balnco untill e liquid bee all gone; then take
the salt wch is in e bottom; and keepe it in a glasse or Bell
lose couered neare the fire.
Another for the eyes. Mr. Stepkin.
Take right venice fawlke, grynde him to powder
upon a painters stone, put it into  e eye to strengthen it
or to take of any tender seurn, or to take of thicke skin
or scume of the eye: mixe of it with liue honey & powder
of eggshells, not boiled nor washed but rawed; onely bee
sure to take away the thin skinn or filme on  e inside
and soe brake it to powder and searce it through a uery
fine searce, and applye sometyme of it selfe  e powder of
e eggshells, and sometymes mixed wth  e honey, not warm enight.
Another for the eyes.
Take Lapis Calaminaris white graye collor, & quench it seauen
or eight tymes in plantaine water, then mixe it with
Acatesfoote oill till it bee thin enough to dropp
then dropp it into the eye; if there bee ether west
or





437
or Simple in t eye it will helpe it.
An excellent receipt for an old Cough through newer
forgreate?      Bourches.

Take 2. ouncesof raisons of the sunne washt cleane &
stored, 2. ounces of figgs washt & shelled; twoe ounce of ellicompane
Rootes, orged & sliced, one ounces of Annesseed &, ounce of
fennell seedes a little brused, one ounce if liquorice scraps
thick dryed & a little brused; Boile all these in a gallon of
smale ale, & one handfull of onsett hysopp till halfe bee roasted
then straine & put to it twoe penyworth of honey, one
penywoorth of wolfe butter; and one penyworth of saffron will
dryed & made unto powder; Boile all together





to take awaie without blemish all spotts, markes or Pitts
left by the small poxe, giuen mee by Mrs Stury by
her approued neuer faileinge; and since I had te
Receipt tken by my selfe upon many.

Take three quartes of Butter milke, 20. somme Pippins
the cores taken out, pared & thin sliced, one pound of filter
Almons blaunche & pounded, and a pound of raisons ofe sunne
slict & flower white lilly rootes, sixe pennyworth of
Camphire; still theise all together with twoe lemons sliced amongst
them; After it is stilled before you use it; it mustbee well sunned
for a fortnight or a Moneth, or els it will make the skin yellowe
Bath e place with a soft tufte of silke, dipt into e water
for both qahand or or a spunge wilbee too hard to apply with
vpon a fine tender skinn

Another for the same
Take a shoulder of Mutton, & as it roasts a cleare fire
put a dish of cleare water to recoure e first droppings; butt
bee sure noe gravey come to it; let it stand till it bee cold
Melt and beate it an hower with damaske Rosewater; then
take Spermaeceti, and halfe the quantity of white waxe
melt alltogether, and dip it in fine holland that hath been
worne, & shape it to a maske, or what yu please.

A receipt of Angellica Cakes qqt winde in your,
stomach uery pleasants comforteable for the
stomach, taught me by the Lady Monson

Take 2 pound & 1/2 of fine sugar, a pinte of red water
twoe ounces of ginger scraped & sliced thin, twoe ounces of
Angelica rootes cutt smale, and halfe an ounce of Comphrey
rootes; Boile the red rose water, ginger and Angelleca halfe
an hower with a spoonefull of sugar before you put in you
Comphrey; then putt of Amber grease & muske of each twoe
graines, steeped in a little red rose water grynded together
and putt into the rest; and when it is almost boiled to
a Candy






219
a Candy, the twoe pound 8 1/2 of sugar beinge putt in by
degrees as if boiles; then lay, or dropp it into little Cakes
scrapeinge some sugar upon e  plates; laie them on & turne them
that night or e next morninge; then put them into a glasse or
Boxe; Keepe then neare the fire, & eate of them as e  please
A Cordall Julip & cooleimge qiuen mee by the
L H and tryed by myselfe.
Take a pottle of springe water into a h put 20 of e  best
pippins you can gett, first cleane pared, cored & quartered
boill them with a quick fire untill you  have taken e  strength of e
Appls accordenge to your tast & likinge, stirr  them not because
then they will goe to papp; runn e  water from them through
a new haire seeuee or searce and sweeten it with some syrruppe
of Cytrons one ounce or halfe an ounce of ether, accordinge to
your owne tast and likinge.
A very wholhome. Rosemary Ale to drinke at all orauy
tyme of the yeare; taught  mee by  Mr Srakle e  Chrirgon
Take twoe ounces of the shavings of old Rosemary, soaked & beinge
drye; one ounce of Nutmeggs sliced & put into sewall Baggs of bolter
and a fflintestone of twoe Bullets hangringe at them; the
then pareinge of a Kuttle spoon of an Orrange. Ryned put theise
into fire or nyne gallons of smale Ale (or as you will for strength)
srink a reasonable Draught there of at any tyme; But it e
best and wholsomest to bee drunk in afforneinge fasteninge
A most Certane approued Cure for a Rupture L H
often toyld & never faild.
Take a quart of Aqua vita, and a good hand full of Rosemany
Shreade & putt it into a bottle with the aqua vita; stopp it.
and putt sett it into a skellett or Pott of seetheinge water; lett
it boile together, and keepe it for you use wch must
bee in this manner
Make it hott, and take 2 spooles of white Cotton, &
dipp





dipp into it, wings it out hand, and apply it as hott as
can bee suffred vnto the plate; doe this threeor fower
tymes in ye morneinge & as oft at night; and ye last tyme you apply
the Cotton lett it lye on ye plate vntill it bee next bled; and three
quartes of this will helpe or cure any rupture eertinely.
A most Certaine Receipt for a surfeite taught
by Mrs. Smithe to dr: I
Take a Pinte of white wine & a quarter of a pinte of mystard
seede; cleane dusted & pickt but not washt; steepe it in e
wine 2 howers; then eate it all both wine & Mustard seede
withe a spoone; w you may doe in the space of an hower w out
offence to yo stomach, or distemper any way ; and this by wine
shall psently helpe you
? To make Mathiolus Cynumon water
Take twoe pound of lardge Cynamon; burise & putt to it
eight pintes of Rosewater, and fower pintes of spanishe
wine; Put altogher in Balneo Matur; stop it close that
it breathe not out; lett it infuse 24 howers; then drawe from
it eight pintes or thereabouts; dulcify it with a pound and
an halfe of fine white sugar.

Take a pinte of fumintory water, twelue greate Orenges
& sixe good lemons cutt in sunder; wringe the iuce cleane forth
of them; through a cleane larone cloathe into a seruet
Cupp or other Cupp, and peelt it vnto e fumintory water
then sweeten it with a quarter of pound of fine white sugar
Drinke halfe a pinte at a draught; morneinge, after
noone, and eveinge to bed three daies together./
A psent cure for one that had made bloody water
14 yeares. sr. Rich Hasteings.
Take the oile of a new laid egg, anouued of venice
Turpentine





Turpentine unwasht, one ounce of Cassia new drawne
mix all theise together, and they will serue for twoe; take it
2 or 3 morneings together, fasteinge almost 2 howers
after; this was lately approued upon my Coz: Sr. RichHastings
To couler haires browne Sr JaGallowry.
Take the greene husks of walnutts; let it ly youu for a fornight
then bruise them in a scellett, and putt a proportioable quantity of
faire water unto it; Boile it halfeway, then straine it in a course
lynen cloath and keepe it in aglasse clse stopt; then take a
spunge & dip it therein; and rubb or stroake ouer yo haires
therewth; till make graye haires to look browne.
The greate Turks care for an Ague one day
well an other ill; giuen by a Jew the Turks phistian
to a ffriende of myne.
Take one whole Nuttmegg, then waight in Allom, beate them seuerally
uery fine, mingle them together; diuide them into 3 equall partes
on yo well day, take one of theise partes in a spoonefull of Marygold
vinegar; or Marygold flowers steeped in vinegar; ffortie eight howers
after it take a spoonefull steeped and vinegar alone, to wash it downe,
and exorcise upon it; take a mouthfull or twoe of an apple, and itt
will staie it if  first doth not; probatum est.
Another by the same man for a purge for  vurininge
of the raines & other oenerous offenses; it hath beene
knowne to haue cured many; if taken in tyme.
Take Sena 5 ounces, of Annesseedes, fennell seedes, parsley
seedes of eache twoe aounces; of liquorice two ounces; make
all theise into fine powder, and drinke ten peny waight
of them in a little white wine, or possett drinke
morneinge and eveninge
To make a Chimicall oill of Turpentine
Take 2 poundes of venice Turpentine; 12 gallons of
fountaine





Fountaine water pult together in a greate Copper vessel
with a Couer and cooler; soe from is wille drawne a white and
thinn oile; and in fe  bottom will remaine a blackish Rosen
if the fire bee encreased, this white thin oile like water may
bee extracted in Balnco Maria in a glasse vessell without any
other thinge. But if you would haue it of a yellowish red; is must
bee done with a hotter fire; putt in a glass vessell with water
open Ashes or sande
ffor greate stoppinge in the stomach & fe  broate
By Mrs Ann Kinge.
Take a spoonefull of syrruppe of nettles; lett go downe uery
leasurely; Doe this 3 or 4 tymes aday &last at night, ether and
or when you are getting to bed
To staunch blood at fe  Nose or a cutt veine. L Hu
Take fe  Mossse of a dead mans skull & apply it to fe  part and it will instantly
stoppe fe  bleedige; As lately was approued by LCatington at Oxford.
For an ill scuruay or Canckor, fin a childes mouth that hath
almost perished all the teeth, gums & mouth. My daughter
Stanhop taught if mee & it cure her younge some. Shad shee
Stanhop taught it mee & it cureher younge sonne; that shee
Had by her former husband Heebewood; when hee was uery
farr spent, & almost noe teeth left & fe  gum alsoe pshed.
Take the Bryne or syruppe that greate Oliues are keet in
apply if diuers tymes to the Gums & mouth, or place infected
and it will psently cure it
An excellent thinge to cause sleep in feauers
Take the white of an egg well beaten till if bee oile; spreade
that oile on a lenen cloathe; aud at night when y goe to bed clapp
this on your foreheade ouer your temples; ett if bye on all night
this neuer failes; I tryed it upon myselfe in affeauer; whe
I culd not sleepe for many nights till Itryed this
A Drinke  for the Dropsie
Take a prettie quautity of barleymeale, kneade if up
with the iuce of water Cresses, and scuvaey grasse, and noe
more





more water then to make past of it, fill it up with sage
shreade a little; then bake it; take it out and breake it
in peeces, putt it in a Bagg, & soe turn up your Ale to it in a
Dr.  Whittmore.
Lundlett; when it is fitt to drinke take it at meals & other tymes
A most rare Receipt for a Burne.
Take three spoonefull of sallett oile; then take ye white jam
egg beate it well; take twice as much of it as of your oile; beate
them together till they bee as white as snowe; then annointe ye place
once in fower howers; this will keepe it from searringe
and take awaie your paine. Dr. Whittmore.
Dr: Whittmore Artificiall Issue purge.
Take Rhubarbe powdred towe scruples, And less white Agoricke
halfe a dracame; and of gentian roote powdred halfe a drachme
of waxe three drachmes, ffirst melt your waxe; then sprinckle
your powders (beinge finely powdred) open your waxe; mill them
well together untill your waxe harden; of this make Pills to
sett your users arunninge
Dr: Wrights Diett drinke for ye dropsee
Take 4 ounces of shaueings of Ivory, china roote sliced smale
twoe ounces, Egremory newly dryed 4 handfulls; salsafras wood
sliced thin three ounces dryed Orange Pills Cytron Pills
grossely beaten of each one handfull; wheatebran one handfull
and an halfe; Roman wormewood dryed 2 handfulls, ppared
coriander seedes, Gallingall Rootes, Caraway seedes, grossly
powdred of each three drachmes; mixe all theise together
and with fower gadds of new steele, put them into a Bagg
to hange in the meddle of a Lundlett of fower or fiue
gallons, and turn it up in the vessell full of good Ale
this is to bee taken at Meales, and as often as you please
three Baggs will serve twice.
Probatum est. /
ffor





ffore a vyolent sore throate
Take a swallowers nest, boile it ether in milke or Ale a good
while, then lapp it in a cloathe, and apply it outwoardly to
your throate, and wn in twoe hours it will helpe. Mr. Whalley.

Doc:Whittmores course of phisicke in t dropsse
called Anasarea, noth wch bee cured Mrs. Morton who
was farr gone in it.
ffirst hee purges her body and used things to strengthen e stomach
helpe concoction corroberate the Liuer, and used theise topicall
Medicines followinge.

The Bath for Leggs.
Take water Cresses, Brookelyme, Bettany, alike twoe
handfulls, germander, groundpine, seawind weede ahkean
handfull. seward barke of Ashetree ,Bayberries, Juniper berries
and Cumin seedes each an handfull and an halfe ppare theise &
boile them in 15 quarters of water to ten, and soe resevare it for
your bathe.

 The powder for the fume
Take Amber, Mastike, Olibansam, of each twoe drachmes
Caciamahae three drachmwa, rosemary an handfull ligne Alores
yellow saunders, either, twoe drachmes, red roses halfe an handfull
make them into a powder.

The Covroborateinge powder.
Take sage, water germander, wormwood, germander, bettame
of each twoe handfull; flowers of rosemary, Red roses, & stach bades
each two handfull; Beane meale & Lupines ether aounce, Bay
berries, Juniper berries & mirblees, each an ounce & an halfe
mesbe & Amber ether halfe an ounce, soe make upe powder
My way of useinge them at night iust before shee went to bedd; shee
sate with her leggs in the bathe up to fe garterings places for an
houoer, as best as shee could well endaier; then with her cloathes
well smoaked with fe  fume, was fe  leggs dryed & smoaked; then
Psently was shee gott to bed; and her leggs wth other drye cloathes.





waters ffume, were wrapped up with some of the powder sprinckled on
them; By the helpe of wch things in the space of some Sevennights
once in three or fower daies; givinge her an easie purge; the
Swellinge had quite left her
Dor: Whittmores receipt for the Lozenge.

Take of Candid Cytron pills goinge, Lemon pill of each twoe drachmes
of Candied ginger, a drachme and an halfe, of erengo rootes candied
three drachmes, of Blaunchd Almonds twelve. of cloves & gallingall
of each ten graines; cutt them all very smale with a Knife; then
take 2. ounces of loafe sugar, & putt to some 2. or 3. ounces
of rose water, and boile the sugar till it come almost to e height
then put in e things & Last of all three graines of Ambergreece
and twoe of muske. after you have stirred it well together
powre it forth upon a Lye plate & cutt it into Lozenges. This
very good to strengthen yoour Stomach and very useful against a
rawe wh stomach, used by Mee. R.H.

Dor: Whittmores diett drinke for a dropsie; wch is somethinge
more purgative then that on e other side of the Leafe
both very good.
Take sarsaparilla cutt three ounces of it, Chyna one ounce
sasafras wood five drachmes, leaves of Sena 3. ounces polipere twoe
ounces, Rhubarbe and Agariche of ether halfe an ounce, Ireos rootes
Mecoaean, ether sixe drachmes, Monchs Rhubarbe, & Raphani
siluestris, one ounce & an halfe of ether; the inner barke of
ashetree one handfull, Egremony twoe handfull; flowers of broome
and Sambuci of ether halfe an handfull; Shaveinge of Iuory
and hartshorne rasps, ether halfe an ounce, Carthamus
seedes sixe drachmes, annesseedes & sweete fennell seedes of ether
halfe an ounce; Bagberries and Juniper berries of either
three drachmes, ginger, gallingall cloves and Cynomon, euery
one twoe drachmes, 3. Nuttmeggs. yellow sauders 3. drachmes
Prepared for a diett drinke.







ffor an Ulcor in the Kidneyes given mee by Bishop
Morson, & by him approved.
Take new laid eggs as warme from  henns as can be gott
breake out the Crowne handsomely, and takeout the white from itt
then fill it up with  best english honey; incorporate it into
yolks & supp it all out, & soe as many as  stomach will beare
and as often as you can endure it; & this will certainely cure
in a short tyme.
The Balsom of Luetellas & the vertues thereof
as it is now made, but not after his pscripcon; for that
is formerly in another place of this Booke; given
mee by Sr. J Monson
Melt 4 ounces of scraped origins waxec put to it a pound &
an halfe of pure Oile Olive beaten  a pinte of Canara sack
put into a skellett on the fire, & beinge ready to boile; putt into it
one ounce and an halfe of red saunders in powder, and twoe ounces of
naturall Balsome; fowre ounces of  oile of St Johns wort
couchaneale halfe an ounce finely powdred, pure honey fower
ounces spermaceti fower ounces; mill and incorporate them
well together as they are boileinge; And lastly putt to it one ounce
of right venice Turpentine that hath beene beaten & washt
in severall damask rose waters, untill it bee pure white
Then boile them all a longe tyme, and take speciall Care it
runn not over; then take it and straine into a silver
Bason or Galley pott; and when when it is cold cutt a peece of
it downe to the very bottom; powre out all the water, and
keepe it in a glasse Bottle; for it is good to wash a wounde
with all, and then melt the Balsome; and here followinge
are the vertues of it.
1. It cureth the headache by molteinge & chafinge it into the
temples, and annointeinge the inside of the nostrills there
2. It cures the biteinge of a mad dogg, the loose knarley flesh being
cutt away, it cures greene woundes, Burnes, Bruises, paines
and Aches.
 3. Bones.





3. Bones, sinnues, orassy paine or griefe comminge onely of cold causes
by moltringle it, & annointinge the wound all ouer wth it, spread
it cold upon plaisters, and bynde it all over e sores, dresseing it
once a day, for wounds & plastings, probat.
4. It is good against winde Collicke, or stitch in the syde applyed
there unto warme with hott cloathes, foeer morneings a quarter
of an hower together.
5. It helpeth and cureth vlcers, or ffistuloes bee it neuer soe deepe in
any part of tho body beinge there unto applyed.
6.It is good for any infected .with the plague, meazells or smale
poxe, presently take in warme broathe, a quarter of an hower
fower mornings together, sweateinge upon it.
7.It is good against poyson, helpeth a surfit, takeinge one ounce of
it in warmed or hott sacke.
8. It staucheth bleedinge in greate wounded ; takinge flaxe or longe
Linte & putting into it, and soe tyied hard unto it.
9.It helpeth digestion by annountinge the Nauell & stomach therewith
at goeinge to led ; chafeinge it warme before the fire.
10.It helpeth and easth the spleene; spread upon cow leather, and
apply to the place
11. It healeth the biteinge of madd doggs, & vennomous beastes beinge
both outwardly & inwardly applyed.
12. ffore a wound wash a bullett, warme it very hott & powre it into the
wounde, and couer it over with lint dipped in it; itt will  cure itt
in a short tyme, and keepe the Sinnewesfrom shrinkinge
13. Its good for a scald or burne, beinge dressed herewith as hott as may
bee endured; it will cure it without any scarr.
14. It helpeth hoarsenessed and cold, and its good for a consumption
the waights of a Nutmegg taken first and last, and swallowed
downe to make good way for cleareinge the Liuer of
humors and heate; Although much purified.
Take one pinte of Endiue water, one quart of new milke
Ale





Ale measure; putt them in a faire new skellet or Pipkin
lett the vessell beesoe lardge as to continue a double quantitive
that it may seeth up and have 4 spoonefulls of white wine vinegar
and when it riseth up to the top of the vessell, readie to runn
ouer, putt in the vinegar and stirr it abbout with a spoone, and
lett it boile twoe or three wames after the vinegar is in; then
take it of the fire and couer it with a powder dishe, with the
bottome downwards; that the dewe or steame may not bee lost
drinke a quarter of a pinte of it, at fower a clock in te morninge
in his bed, and lye twoe or three howers after it, and at nyne a clock
in the same morninge; take the same quantity againe; and the
like againe at three in the afternoone; the same quantitive againe
att his goinge to bed; hee must not eate nor drink of two howers
and this by gods blessing will cure the liuer of corruption and
coole it; it may bee drunk ether warme or cold; when you have
taken it of the fire and that it is somewhat cold; you must take it
of the curd and  putt the drink into a pewter pott; couer it close
and putt it in a coole place
The magnsteriall pill for the spleene./
Take of diacathelicon halfe an ounce, of the tincture of
rhubarb a scruple, of the extraction of Cetracke a drachme
of creame of tarter a scruple, of salt of wormewood, & salte
of scuruly grasse of each one scruple, of prpared Cassia a
scruple; Beate all these together, and make them up into
fortie pills with the flower of Liquorice, and take fiue of
them in the morneinge, and fast twoe or thee howers after
Then take a meale of broathe wch must bee made with openinge
hearbes and Rootes, and an hower after againe, take
another mease of the same broathe then dine abbout
twelve a clocke; and after dinner you may goe abroade
when you goe to bed you must take five more of these pills
and soe





and for on till you have taken all thaise Pills; yo drink must
bee one spoons full of wormewood beere or, Ale; and drink noe
other drink for seauen or eight daies; and eate veale, Chicken
or Rabbets stew or boiled.
The Cordiall Pills
Take of Alkermes twoe drachmes, of tincture of Corrall
one scruple of drye sucket of Cytron pills twoe drachmes, one
scruple of the conserue of Centaura, fiue graines of Bezor
one scruple of the fine powder of prpared pearle; make
this up into pills: Giue three in the morneinge; walk an
hower after; take three more at twoe of the clocke, and
three more at night; theise must bee thus taken for three
daies together, and they will both seettle the stomach and express
winde, and strengthen the heart; theise in the morneinge
must bee taken fasteinge.
The magistereall pill for the frenchepoxe. P. G.
Takke diocatholicon halfe an ounce, of Confretio Hameck
halfe an ounce, of Tincture of Rhubarb one drachme,
puluis sanctus twoe drachmes, salt or scuruey grasse twoe
drachmes; of Creame of tarker one drachme; of  extraction
gum guaci one drachme; Make these with 4 of liquorice
into one hundred pills; Take fiue in the morneinge
fasteinge; and fast twoe howers after; then take a Messe
of fine thin phisicks broathe made with openinge
rooted and heartes; and keepeyo chamber that you
take noe cold; abbout three o'clock eate a Bone or
twoe of a Rack of Mutton dry roasted; and for three
daise





daies together take theise pills, mornenige & night
then rest for three or fower daies, and take this
Drink followinge
She Diett Drinke  L.G
Take three gallons of springe water, put into a
Brasse Pott well tinned, and not formerly used but
onely seasoned; putt into it a pound and an halfe of
Raisons of the sunne stoned, twoe ounces of englishe
liquorice, scrap and thin sliced; three ounces of
sarsaparilla, made cleane, cutt in short peeces and
bruised, one ounce of quacum one ouned of salsafras
one ounce of Chena roote sliced uery thin; Boile
all theise with a temperate fire till halfe bee
consumed; then stranie it; make fresh every other
daie, and drinke this drinke altogeher when
you doe not purge
Theise pills with this drink will cure e
Poxe, altough it bee in the bones; But then
you might sweate twice in the intermission
daies (when you purge not) with the
new Diaphors ticke powder, and after
that take three pills followinge ; wch
will strengthen the decaied parted.
The Cordiall pills for she same P. G .
Take Confectio Alkermes one drachme, tincture
of Corrall one scruple; extractio gum guaci
twoe drachmes, of ppared pearle, and washt
in aqua







in Aqua sarsaparilla one drachme; of Turpintine washt
in aqua lethae one scruple, orientall Bezor ten graines
sea horse pissell tenn graines; beate all theise in a stone
Morter, and make them up into pills with the flower of
sarsaparillia; Take therein the mornenige fasteinge
fast three howers after, walke untill you sweat; then keepe
warme; if night also take five pills, and this pill
give you a grutle sweate and comfort the heart and
stomach, and reuiue the spiritts; Take theise on even
three daies, & soe continue for 10. or 12. daies together.

A medicine for the plague as a peseruatiue

Take hearbe grase, aetherwood, Mugwort, wormewood of
each one handfull; three or fower handfull of Juniper
berries, those that are blacke; Cutt and shread  hearbes
smalle, put them into a fflaunders Pipkin; power
there to 4 quartes of white wine vinegar; and lett
then soake seauen nights; if the hearbes beedry; if they
bee greene lett them not soake abboue 24 howers; then
putt one spoonehandfull or two of theise hearbes wch bee
in the Pypkin into a still; then take out a quart of
the same vinegar, and power it out into e still
upon the hearbes, and distill it wth a grutle fire
for twoe greate a fire will wast it awaie; and soe still
it untill you haue stilled all from the Pypkin into
the stillatory; and after this power it into your
Pypkin againe; and putt as many fresh and newe
hearbes with soe many berries as you had before into
the Pypkin againe; and soe lett them soake
other seauen nights, and then still them againe
as you did before; and soe againe the third tyme

with






452
with the same fresh hearbes, and berries, and att
the last tyme putt fower ounces of the Methridate into
the pipkin amongst the hearbes; or five or sixe
ounces of treackle instead  of the Methridate, and
beinge stille as before, put the same into a duble glasse
stop it and bynde a leather abbout it, and if e patient
bee infected giue him 4 ounces here & at a tyme; and if neede
bee hee may take soe much for twoe or three juices, as y see
Cause; to a woman give but twoe ounces at a tyme, and
to Children accordinge to their age, as they are able to
beare it, and sweate after it twoe or three howers, and one
to stand a houres by & wipe their faces; least by puttinge
out their owne hand they take cold.

A medicine to drawe the venome from t heart
afor the sore appeareth.

Take a Cocks pullett, or chicken; let the feathers of the taile
be quite pulled of, till the rumps bee bare; then how the bare
of the pullett to the sore; and the pullett will gape & labour
for life and in the end will die; then have another
readie & doe the how with it, and if it dye dtill apply
more for longe as any die; and when all the poyson is
drawne forth, the chicken that is put thereto will
live; and the sore will psently asswadge; and the
party forth with recovereth.

The Plaister to draw a head to the sore
of the plague, and to break it

Take twoe lillie rootes, one handfull of soure dough
twooe handfull of Mallowes, one handfull of Linseede
stampe theise smale together and boile them in a
quarte of wine Loos untill they bee thicke; then
Laie it an inch thicke upon leather, broader then
the sore; and lett the borders or ends of the leather
bee plaisterd with Cordeirs or Coblers waxe
to make it cleane and riche, and this is
twelve





twelue howers will drawe the sores to a head and breack it
A plaister to drawe and heale the sore
Take twoe spoonefulls and an halfe of the iuce of
Spurge, and a good quantity of wheate flower and one
spoonefull of turpentine; temper them together without
fire; make a plaister hereof, laie it to the sore, & change
it every 24 howers.
To make pilla Rupha to puent the plague.
Take of Aloes saccatvina one ounce, of myrrhe halfe an
ounce, of saffron halfe an ounce; Theise must bee all finely
powdred but the Aloes must bee ppared thus
Take an ounce of syrrupe of Lemmons, in wch infuse the
Aloes beinge powdred, untill you see e Aloes sincke
to the bottom and settled; then powre away e syrrupe
and mixe the saffron & myrrh with the Aloes, and make
it vp into a Masse of wch  pills make one or twoe of
the bignesse of a smalle pistoll bullett; wch  take to purge
the heade one hower one hower after supper; if for
the body twoe howers before dinner, if in yr tyme
of infection assoone as you vse in the mornenige
A soueraigne water for a Cancker
Take wormewood, sage, Pennywall, red filbert leaues &
rue of each one handfull, wash them cleane, dry them
in a cloathe; then putt them in a pan with twoe quartes
of stronge Ale boiled away, to three pintes; then putt
in asmuch Allom as a wallnutt, and fower spoonefull
of honey; sett it on te fire, couer it close; and lett itt
boile leasurely to a quart; then draine it, and keepe
it for your vse, other to gargle with itt, or to
washe the place.
ffor the paine in the backe
Take egrinony & mouseare, both rootes and leaves
straine them well with boares grease and laie it
  to





to the back or annointe the place back therewithe
with a warme hand, or before the fire
For a sore Arme or Legg that is Blistered
or inflamed.
Take sweet wort, boill it thick with malt flower, and
put there to sheeps suet tris ; Spreade it on a cloth and
apply it as hot as it may be endured. dresse it morneinge
and eveninge, & where it cleaveth to the fore, doe not pull
it of, but lay anew; ffor as it healeth it will fall
of by it selfe
ffor any griefe or sorenesse in a mans back
Take the roots of Comphrey thing sliced and infused 24 hours
in muskadine; then put the yolk of new laid egg
and some grated nuttmegg into it; and soe drink it in
the morneinge fastinge; fast an hower after it, &
this will make yow well.
ffor eyes troubled with Rhume
Take the urine of a Boy under seaven years old, put
it into a brasse Candlestick wash the eyes with it, and
it will speedily helpe them
ffor the heate of the back.
Take younge plantaine leaves stampe them, & straine them
and mix the uice of them with womans milk, and
bath the back oftentymes therewith. Lett it dry of it selfe
if it bee for a man each the milk of a woman that hath
a man child. if for a women; then the milk of a
woman that hath a maiden childe
  first






227
First water wil bee as gold, the second as silver, the
third as balme; keep the the water for it is most
prtious, and soe are all three; the first will serue insteade
of Balme, with a feather dipt into any of theise, three
waters; it cleanses the eyes & takes away a Pearle
ffor one that hath a Rupture & is burst.
Take Ashbudds, dasie rootes and leaks, & comphray of each
a like quantity; straine them well & put them into an
earthen put; putt thereto a much deere suet as will Couer
them; when it is melted  sett it in a kettle of water, lett it
boile three howers, you shall knowe when it is boiled enough
partly by the greenenesse and alsoe by  e  wasteinge of
it; Then straine the hearbes from it, and when yow
will use it heate it in a saucer, and putt to it a little
Aqua uita annointeinge the place, and Keep e  place
Well trussed upp
Another for the same *
Take wallwort boiled in the Spirit of tturpentine, applied and
vsed as the former, is uery good for the same.
A plaister to heale one that is bursten in e  belly
man, woman, or Childe.
Take tender cropps  of Olmond in May and dry them
in the shade, powder them smale; Keepe it in a bladder
an winter and and sommer put it into yor drinke, this will
make the broken belly as greene as if it were new broken
and the patient must bee well but gently trussed; that
hee or shee may walk up and downe all the day withitt
and lye in it all night till they bee well and whole; wch
wilbee  within 24 daies; if they bee well ordered &
ruled; and they must lye upright as much as they can
and lye still in their beds 2 howers euervy morninge
after they have drunken this Medicine; and  wak must
eate noe white meates, and walke but easily for feare
of  straineinge; untill they bee poerfect well againe
The







The plaister to heale one that is broken.

Take the rootes of polypodium upon the Enula Campana roote
of each fower ounces pare them cleane, & stampe them smale
with a little Comfrey amongst it; then temper it with oile
de Bay & alittle Capons grease; then spread it on a thicke clath
and lace it to the treened place under the trusse, chaunge it
eveninge & morneinge, & it will helpe suddenly; it strengtheneth
all the yeare longe but only in the monrthe of May; and in that
monrth take the leaves of polypodium, Enula Campana, Comfry
and daysirs leaves, wringe them in all pointes dareinger that moneth
as you doe the rootes the  & rest of of the yeare

A Medicine for an Ague in a Childe
Take the hearbe sheapheards purse a prettie quantity bay salts
and Browne leaues; stampe them altogether & spreade it upon
a cloathe; apply it to tChildes sores as before t fitt come; renewe
it euery twoe howers

A possett for an Ague in a Childe
Make a possett with Dandelion straine it & quiet e Childe
to drinke, as often as hee calls for it when e  fitt come; renewe
it euery twoe howers

An approued Medicine for any scald
Take an ounce of Sparmaccabi, and twoe ounces of Bacon grease
of other grease, melt them together, and annointethe soretherewith
Mr. Anckor white salue wherewith heeled many
Cures, for sores, woundes, Aches, and paines
Take Rosin and parraffin of each halfe a pound, waxe
ffrankinscents, haressallon of each fower ounces, Masticke
three sponnsworth, Camphire three ounces; Beate the
Rosine, parraffin and ffrankscents into fine powder
Canuas into a bottle of white wine; Boile them halfe
an hower, then sett it to cool that it bee but luke
warme; the putt in 4 ounces of white Turpentine
and a pound of Camphir; stir it till it bee cold; then
putt it into cold water and wash it into Rolles
of what fashion & bigness yo please
The receipt

[UNFINISHED]






>The receipt to make the oile of
Massicke to fortify & strenghten
weak womb and limbs./
Take Mastic & bruise it in a Morter, put it in a quart
glasse with halfe a pinte of Malmesley, and a pinte of
good oil of Roses, then couer the glasse & sett it in a Pan
of boileing water, & lett if boile till the wine bee consumed
then take it from thee fire &  lett it stand till it bee cold, and reserue
it for yourr use; applyeinge it to the greeued place, & chafeinge it
in with a warme hand.
An oile for greate Aches or  shrunksinnewes
Take garden wormes in May, put them in a vyoll or Pott
cover them over with Rhenish wine, stop the glasse or Pott
fier not uery slow; lett it stand 24 howers and in that
tyme they will purge all the earthly substance from them
putt them into another glasse, and cast away the rest
then take thee best & greenest sallett oile you can gett, and
powre it upon them; stopp them uery close that noe aire
goes out. sett it in the sunne all day, and at night couer
it with a wooden cloathe; doe this in the twoe monthes
of June and July; and then it is readie made; annointe thee
greeued place twice a day, and dry it by the fire untill
the Patient finde ease; which wilbee in a short tyme as
hath beene often prooued.
A Drinke for a hott Liuer
Take a pound of red Currans, boile them in a quart
of runninge water till they be halfe sodden away, then
straine them well, and take the iues of three
Lemmons, and put it in after it is strained, and three
ounces of fine sugar, and soe drinke it in thee morninge
fastringe; at three a clocke in the afternoone, and
againe at yourr goinge to bed
For an old sore, to knowe whether there bee any wormes in it or noe.
Take new milke from a Cowe put runnett honey to it, then
take asmuch honey as will make it fitt to spreade upon a
cloathe.





cloathe; strane sugar thereon, that noe curde can bee perceuie, and
laie it on ye sone; if there bee any roomesyou shall perceuie holes
in the plaiffer , and aslonge as you see any holes dresse it herenish
foie away, and after use a healinge salue to it
An excellent Ointement for any griefe coming of
cow caufes, used by the Earle of Warwicke
Take neats foode oile, Camomile flowers and Malmsfry of cache
like quantity; make a plaiss thereof & apply to the
greeeved place
for an Ache or troithinge in any Limbe used by
Dr. Penney and DoctrTurner.
Take twoe handfull of Cowslipp flowers, twoe handfull of red
sage, one handfull of Camapitts, stampe all theise with a
sifthstreins. quantity of Ale ou Beere, and putt it into a uessele
of three gallons of cleor beere; and after 4 daies drinke
it continually till it bee all spent; and ni that tyme you
will finde a greate ammendement.
To make one fatt in short tyme
Take new milk from the Cowe and faire runninge water
of each an quantity; sweeten it with sugarcane
and drinke euery morneinge fasteings a good draught thereof.
A special Medicine for wormes in the body
Tak a pottle of Malmsey and one ounce of ye powder
of Orange Pells, a quarter of a pound of sugar, and
one handfull of Rosemary; Boile all theise together
then take out the Rosemary, and burne ye wine
and drinke it fasteinge
This Medicine cure a man that hau a marvellous
gnaweinge in his body, ayeare or twoe at the least
hee was almost madd with the paine, & takinge
this drinke it made him ouud a worme at his
mouthe soe longe that it was pulled out
by force
For those that take in their sleepe





For those that talk in their sleepe.
Take e  iuice of Mariorum and fennell rootes & drinke them in wine/
For one that hath lost his eyes
Take them .e of Primroses and peell them vnto his mouthe
Ffor wormes in the stomache.
Take an Orrenge pill of the yellow rynde, and a suffient
quantity of faire springe water in a skellett when it sertheth
put in your Orrange and lett it haue sixe walmes on your fine
then take it out and dry it with a cloathe then stampe it in
a Morter, puttinge there to powder of aloes, & warme
them together, and apply it to the mouthe of ye stomache upon
any new peece of scarlett as hott as may bee suffired, and
shift it euery twelve howers for eight daies./
To proeure appetite
Take Centaurey, Mayberd, and powder of pepper, serth them
in wine; & drink it twoe nights when you goe to bedd.
For a Cold or Cough approued.
Take a quart of faire water, raisons of the sunne stoned twelve
figgs shied, halfe a hand full of younge hysopp, a good handfulle
of french barley, boiled before in another water aniseedes &
liquorice bruised; boile all together till halfe bee consumed
then putt in twoe ounces of white sugar candy, and drinke it
warme morneinge & eueninge.
For a stronge old Coughe
Take as much flower of brumstone as will lye upon a shillinge; supp it
vp in a raw lain egg 4 or  5 morneinge together, fasteinge
after yo takeinge of it 3 howers.
To staie a Flake.
Take a cleare bone of roasted beife, burne it to powder, and
take as much as will lye vpon twelve pence in possett ole & drinke it
An execellent medecine for ye Cough, or stoppinge of the Lundes
Take a pottle of white wine, one halfe pound of figgs slitt then
in sunder, twoe handfull of hysope, let them boile with a
soft fire till they come to a quarter; then put in three
spoonefills of honey; lake of this sixe spoonefull first
and last./





To heale a wound most Excellent
Stampe snails very smale, temper them with the powder of
Myrrhe, ffranekincence, Rosin and the dust of a Milne
laie it to the greife & it will close & heale it, though the
syneoes were broken in sunder the roote of Comphey in
powder, cast into the wound or mixt with the salue is
very execellent for greene wounds, as hath ben approued
ffor tho paene at the heart.
Boill one handfalll of haire hound in a quart of good ale
till it bee tender, then chopp it smale and boile it againe
and when it hath boiled a good whyle, put to it one handfull
of good to wheate meade, lett it boile againe, then take it of
spreade it on a cloathe, and laie it on e stomach hott.
A plaister for a weak stomache
Take Mehlolt & Minte, of each one handfull, a quarter of
an handfull of wormewoood, a few rose leaues, anneseedes
and Bumin seedes, of each a spoonefull: mingle all together
put it into a Bagg & quilt it & dish it on a Chaffingdishe
of Coales, sprincke with malmsey, & its very warme
to the stomache.
ffor the Palsey
Stampe one handfull of hearbe bennett straine it, then
put there to asmuch neatefoote oile as e iuice of e hearbes
and Malmsey as much as both, boile them together till
one quart bee consumed: then anointe e greiued
placed eueninge & mouninge
A speciall water for the palsry, numcesse
or lacte of feeleinge: of Rhumein the leggs & or feete.
Take a Pinte of Malmsey (or more if you will) put
there to a quantity of gray or black soape: Boile
them on a soft fire till the royle bee somewhat thicke
then washe the greiued place therewith
morneinge and eveninge ‘
Ffor (the) palsry





ffor the Palsey By Mr Turner
Bonell a Badger of ffoxe rost it in his Belly sage rose=
mary, Angelica of each a good quantity, as much of hearbe
Mariorun, Cowrslipps & Bettony beinge first chopped with
the fatt & leane of the gutts, then take Nutmegg, ginger, loins
Mace  Castov^eum & put them into the Belly; before yu savce
it vp, bye bothends to the spitt, to prevent vent and bathe
it only with his owne drippinge; the pan bring first halfe
full of vinegar; when it is halfe rosted; pricke it that the
iuice may come out of the Belly & other places, & rost it till
it will dripp noe more; keepe the oile close stopt in a
glasse; sett it in y^e sunne, & annointe with it
To staunch the bleedeinge of a veine beinge
brocken in a mans body
Take Rhubarbe eight and forty graines, lay it on a little stone
with Coales under it to burne it to ashes; then beate it to
powder, & drinke it in any kinde of warme drinke
ffor the bleedeinge of the Lungs
Take the water of Alicompane and horehound water
of each one pinte; of the wae of Lungwort & spoonfulls.
of rosa solis twoe spoonefulls; of the water of young oaken
leaves but budded three spoonefulls; Boill all theese
together in an earthen Pott with a Couer, then putt
thereso one pennyworh of fine white sugar, and
drinke thereof.
ffor the bleedinge of the Nose
Take powder of Bettany, asmuch salt, mingle
them together, and putt it into the nose, and
the blood will staunch; then make a plaster
with the white of an egg; sheapherds purse, and
the powder of Bole armoniacke; laie it so the
Temples of the heades it will staie it.







462

ffor a perillous hoarsenesse
Take sage, Rhue. comon popy boile them altogether, take
thereof morneinge & evening a spoonsful.
ffor the ffluxe.
Take the cheekes of a Pigg burne them to ashes, & take as much
of the powder & garden cresses; and give it the party in meate
or drinks.
ffor the fluxe.
Take an egg cast out the white, and keepe the other, put
thereto powder of pepper, and of sanguis draconis, roast t
yolks hard & give it the patient going to bed, and let him drink
after it.
Another for the ffluxe
Take plantaine halves boile them well & straine them through
a clothe; then heate an iron nyne tymes & quench it therein
then take blanched Almonds, and with t same water make
Allom milk; & take three or four spoonfulls at a tyme.

Another for the bloody ffluxe Dr : Butler
Make a hot fumgation euerytyme you goe to the stoole with
hott embers and powder of tarr its good to use franckincense
drink wine or Ale. wherein hath been boiled e bark of Rospasse
trees with Cynamon.

Another for the ffluxe
D. ButlerSeethe in Ale or red wine border of routes, all elder tree rootes
and plantaine rootes; garnish thereof, its very good: prooved.

Another for the ffluxe.

Take Chicken weede, boile it in milk; it is very good & approved
saue it, the juice of yarr one.

A medicine for looseness; appr: t ffryor

Take a quart of red ioice, melt it on the fire to be seething
hot; then take some little per, rose cloves; straine them therein
wring the wine out of them as much as you can, then take the
powder of mastichs, the powder of cloves & straines it apon tcakes
and laie them and lower t lower end of tstomachs navell as hast as t patient
can endure it; when one is cold, there must bee more. prepare
to bee applyed till y finde ease.

Auery





231

Auery excellent broath to stay loosenesse.
Take halfe a greate Cocke Chicken, & boile it, then put in
strawberry leaues & rootes, plantaine, barnett, & fiue leaueed
grasse, feach one hanfull; Boile them well together, then take
a good quanttity of the meate & seede of a Pomgranete, put it into
the broathe untill you thinke it swell, & soe use it.
Another for the same
Take twoe quartes of milke, when it doth seeth putt into
it twoe handfull of plantaine leaues; let it boile halfe away
then put in halfe an ounce of Cinomon, let it boile halfe a pinte
away; then put in twoe spoone full of Beane flower; let it boile
straine, & drinke it; this hath beene prooued.
ffor the dropsie
Take the iuice of smallage  & ye iuice of famitory, cleanse
it with sugar and make syurape thereof; gaie it to ye Patient
to take; & by gods helpe it will cure.
Another for the dropsie
Take a pottle of stronge Beare or Chamberly, three
handfull of the docke leaues, or Mallowes, boile them together
till they bee tender; then beath yor legg eueninge and
morneinge as hott as you can endure by a good fire; then
goe to bed to sleepe if you can; you must drinke noe newe
drinke; take to hoch sanum alsoe mingled wth grated
Nuttmeggs when you goe to bed; ye biggnesse of a walnutt
A Medicine for one that is deafe.
Take vinegar and crumines of leaurned bread, and ground wormes not washed but wiped cleaned; fry them altogreher, and apply shein warme to the
eares.
ffore all manners of sored eyes.
Take snailes, serthe them well in faire wafe, gather the greesed
thereof, & annointe e eyes when you goe to bed.,





A soueraigne water for e eyes
Take smaladge, red fennell Rhue, Verain, Bettany. egrimony
Giner foile, Pennyroyall, Cellandene, of each a quarter of a pound
Beate them in a Morter smale, then take fifteene pepper Cornes
beate them uery fine; put all into a faire pan, wth three
spoons full of honey fiue spoonefull of the urine of a
younge childe, halfe a pinte of whitewine; boile all a little
on e fire, then staine it through a fine cloathe; when it
is colde putt it unto a glasse ; and annointe the eyes with a
ffeather within the lidd; this is good for an hard wateringe
eyes, and all sore eyes.
For e Pinn & webb the eyes.
Take the pinion bone of a goosewinge, the longer it
hath beene killed tho better it is, melt it in a cleane
Sawcer ; when it is cold putt one dropp into your
eyes when you go to bed; use it till your eyes bee well
which wilbee in a short space.
To take the Morphelo out of the face
Take red rose leaves three handfull, maidenshaire of
the wall twoe handfull, Bettony, Pennyroyall, fenell
veruagne, eyebright, Endiue of each one handfull, Camphire
halfe an ounce, steeped one whole might in a quart of
white wine, standinge before in a pott; then putt in e
hearbes and distill it twoe daies after
For the black Morphenee
Take a new laid egg steepe it in stronge
vinegar untill the shell bee sift, which wilbee
in three or foore daies; then take it out and
brayit it with a spoone, and wash the morphen there with





To make syrrupe of damask Roses
for high coloured faces

Take foure pound of faire water make it blood warm
putt in half a pecke of dammask Roses lett them stand
34 houers, then wring them out hard; then warme
the water againe, and putt in annother half pecke of
Roses, lett them stand as before; then wringe them
out, doe soe fouoer mourings; then boile one quarter
of a pound of sugar in it soehigh till it come to the
thicknesse of molten honey; this is good for an high
coulored face, and for the heate of the liver; After
the same manner you may make syrrupe of vyoletts wh
are good for the uses abbovesaid; both taken inwardly
and to anointe the face therwith. Probatum.

The preparation or makings of the spirit of Rue
bring a greate cordiall excellent to preserve youthe
in old age with fresh & good coulour without wrinckles
or shewe of age, and agt the plague, pox, or any venomous
or contagious infection, taintes of the blood, and good
agt all manner of goutes, but chiefly agt the old goute
to bee taken fastings; its good also against all
obstructions, & good upon every surfeit.

You must gather the e in a dry day in June; & hott
betwixt eight a clock and twelve, chopp it small
bringe first cleane picked; putt it in a large glasse
body ot still of glasse, fill it almost halfe full not
pressed downe hard; then putt on the head of  t e
glasse and late it, and sett it in Balnco Maria-
and a cleane decanter of it of glasse, and gently distill it
till it bee almost dry; But you must not distill it too
much. last that it smell of burneingr; that
which remaines behind take out cleane &[and] throwe
it away, and putt as  much fresh, picked and







and chopped Rue as at the first tyme and powre the
water you distilled from it vpon the freshe Rue; & lute the heade
putt to the Receuier and distill it as a fore; Destill this
alsoe the third tyme with fresh rue; then take all the
spiritt foe distilled three tymes from the Rue, and putt
that spirit into a cleane glasse Bowl; & sett it in Balme
Maria; then lute & put on the head; & putt a Receuier
of glasses & distill it gently; leaueinge one fourth partop
it behinde; that is distill awail three partes, and then
lett it coole; and that whh remaines in the bottom cast away
for the other is the true spirit; if you will once distill
or rectify that againe in a cleane glasse; leaueinge the
fourth part of that behinde; you haue the a moste
excellent spirit of Rue; ffor the glasse wherein you
keepe it, hangs at the bottom of the Corke that stoppst the
glasse some ambergrease ground with a little sugar candy
in a sarsnett Bagg; the proportion of it to to bee taken is
4 or 5 spoons fulls fasteings, (in th) some sugar candy
Directions for the spleene
Ffirst tak a wooden a wooden dish that hath beene used
and fill it halfe fall with hott embers, put upon it
one handfull of hearbe grace; then bynde ouer it a
double cloathe, and hold the flatt side upon your
spleene, as longe as you may endure the heate, which
beinge past, use this Ointeiment followings
The Ointment for the same
Tak a little Ointment which you shall laue at the
Appothecaries, calle urguentum Althea; with
a warme hand annointe the siele downewards, then
wipe it dry, with a cloathe afterwards; apply this
Plaster following; brings a little warmed and
keep it close
The plaister





The plaister of the same.
Take halfe a pound of porrasen, one quarter of a pound of
yellowe waxe, twoe ounces of storax, calamita, a quarter
of an ounce of Beniamin, 4. penny waights of cloves, halfe a
pound of hoggs suet clarified; three quarters of an ounce of fine
Bolearminicke, a quarter of an ounce of oile of spyke, shaue e
waxe alsoe, beatee rossin smale, & e storax smale as  ycan
Brate alsoe the Beniamin & Bolearminick, soare them, &
boile them altogether a quarter of an houer; then put in the
oile of spike, & soe make it up in rolls; first annoint ye hands
with butter, as it will cleaue soe to them that e cannot get it of.
Ffurther directions for the spleene.
Vse to rubb the napp of e necke with twoe dropps of the
spirits of Rosemary, soe it be wise yor temples; rememberinge
often to repulse the humores with your hand in the morninge.
Other directions for the same.
If yor plaister on your side doe waxe dry at any tyme
then moysten it with a little oile of Capers.
Other directions for the same
Confectio Alkermes is necessary to bee taken often
to quenche and abbate the the Melloncholly vapours that
arrise from the spleene.
Ffurther directions for e same
Take a quarte of the pickle of Olives; cleane it finely
then foment the left side twoe or three tymesd an
houre at a tyme; after Gatheringe annointe e side with e
ointment made of unguentum de Altea, and oiles of
Carawaies together; then put on the plaister abbove
mentioned.
More directions for the spleene
The water of elder flowers, dresss it with sugar, three
spoonfulls at a tyme, is a prestent remedy, oile of





oute of nuttmeggs. three or foure dropps to annoint the
spleene , is also an excellent remedy. To bleede soak leeches in
discretion if generally sccounted a good medicine to re=
freshen the spleene

To make agararisme fo a sore throate given
by y.r L:Ha & to her by Mr Cooke

Take plantaine, woodbine, Columbine, Cingfoile & strawberry
leaves of each one handfull, of [?] [floroe] , and red rosw leaves
of each halfe an handfull; Pomgranat flowers half an ounce
Boile theise in three pintes of faire water til halfe bee
consumed; take also a pinre of this strained from the
ingredients, of consome of red roses two ounces, of the
spirit of vitriall twentie dropps. let them stand abbout
two hours, then strain out the liquid from th consome
of Roses. use it warm.

Horshegreene sicknesse given me by J.H

Take a quart of milk and a quart of white wine, make
a possett; take a pinte of earthe wormes, put them
into white wine; untill they are cleansed therein
then take of the curd from the possett, putt the wormes
in, and lett thenboile two or thrree soalmes in an earthen
pott, and drink halfe a pinte at adraught twice a day
for ten daies together; make fresh every day

Angell breade for a consumption given mee by
the L Ha taught her by Mr Coax

Take pure wheat flower , putt it in a gallet pott some
halfe an inch deepe; then take white sugar candy brate it
small and laie another layre of that the same deeenesse
of the flower; follow this methode untill y have filled
the pott; then cover it close and sett it in an oven
after browne bread is drawne ; lett it stand forer
and twentie houers then take it out and if you can







can gett out your breade ; if not break yor Pott carefully
toe take it out, Brake the breade in a Morter very fine; & then
searse it; and to a pound of this powder add a quarter of
an ounce of prpared pearle; Give it in milke, Barley
broath or what you like; To a man give twoe spoonefulls at a
tyme; and to a Chide one spoonefull at a tyme.
Another for a Consumption given mee by the L H
Take a gallon of new wort before the yest is put to it; Boile
it in an Iron pott till it bee consumed to a pinte; Keepeinge
it scuminge as longe as any froath will rise up from it; this
must bee done with a constant gentle fire; put it into a
galley pott; when it is done; every night, morninge, and
afternoone; take as much hereof as will lye upon a Knifes pointe
it must bee longe in boileinge & not too suddenly.
A very good Almond milke to coole & quallifie
heate of e stomach, or liver, & good in Agues
Take one handfull of french barley in a pott be of faire spounge
water untill the water dissolve and twine of a red coulour; then
shift it and put in foroer or five parsley rootes, and twoe or 3.
fennell rootes washt and seraped; and the pithes taken out
and when they have boiled a good while, put in theise hearbes
followeinge as you finde the sicke bodies temper; if hott, hysope
& horehound;  if cold, Burrage, vyolitt, succoury & endive leaves
when the water is halfe consumed beate yor Almonds with
twoe or three spoonefulls thereof, or with red rose water
then drawe them with the rest of the broathe, and putt in
some sugar; you may alsoe boile a whole peecie of Cynamon &
eight or ten raisons of the sunne stones with the hearby
if it bee a hott feaver the Cynamon is not good.
A receipt for the greene sicknesse made wth e
pared steele, in stronge wine vinegar. L. H.
Take an ounce of the fileings of needles, and alsoe a little
stronge white wine vinegar; lay ye fileings of the needles
upon earthen dishes on hearbes; then take a sprigge of
rosemary





Rosemary, and with it sprincke fileings of the needles wth
white wine vinegar and when the steele is well burnt you
must take asmuch thereof as will lye upon a lardge shellinge; then
take conserue of red rose budds mingled with the steele as much
as the shellinge will hold; and beinge well mingled together, give
it to the party to eate, and  lett them worke hard upon it till
they sweate , and drinke nothinge but wormwood Brave for
longe as they take it

To make juice of liqice a very fine waie.

Take fower ounce of english liquorice finely beaten and
searced, put it into hysop water and Coltsfoote water of
each a lid quantity till it bee as thicke as butter, addinge
alsoe to it halfe a spoonefull of rosemary flowers bruised
Set it on the fire, let it boile softly till it bee as thicke as tars
meale, stirringe it very often; then straine it through a thicke
new cloathe as longe as you can get any thinge out of it ; then
Sett it on the fire againe, and put to it foure ounces of white
or brown sugar candy finely beaten; boile it till it come to a
paste; then roll it up in balles and sett it by the fire, and
Keepe it for your use.

ffor a thrushe or Cancker in ye mouth L Hu:
Taught her by the LParkechard appr:

Take pure honey and clarify it then take a peece
of Roch Allom making a paire of red hot, and hot the
Allom in the tongues, lettinge it dropp into e honey
stirringe it together till it bee sharpe hard enough; annointe
therewith the part infected twice or thrice aday
and if the cancker bee downe in the throate, let te parte
Swallowe some of it downe; it is best to clarify the
honey in an egge shell; because it will keepe best for
And for ayounge Childe putt this Medicine betwixt
the lipps once or twice aday; and it will presently
cure and heale it./







and to disguise it that it bee not knowne what it is, you
may putt in some Ambergreease into it to alter te taste.
Dr. Ashworthes oranges very cordiall. L H.
Take of the cordita pulls of Oranges & lemons, or of
oranges onely, one ounce and an halfe, of ginger candid the
waight of seaven pence, of the lesser kindes of graines or
Cardomaines, the waight of twoe pence halfe peny; or carrawary
seeded of a penny halfe peny; white sugar for fower ounce
dissloue the sugar in a little rose water, and make them open into
Lozagers,  dryeinge them gently at a stoue; add to them as mushe
and Cuett of earh twoe drachmes; but leave theise twoe out it
it bee for a woman that is subject to the passion of the Mother
Also to make Lazeorgnes powder, good against Agues,
burnings feavers, smale poxe, poysons, or consumptions
and to prerue age in health & streangth, to bee guien
in enduyw water, to a man or rooman ten graines,
and to a childe foure.
Take eye raggs of pearle, red corral, Crabs byrs, hareshorne of
each also quaniity; then take soe much of the powder ofe
blacke tipp of a Crabs elanoe, mixe itwell with the rest, and
make it up into balles, with gelly made of hareshorne, where =
into you must infuse some saffren, and bringe decocted keepe
it for your use.
L H: To stopp bleedinge, taught her by M Eiles
Dipp a cloathe in wine vinegar, and apply is to the bottom
of the belly warmed, and it will staunch it.
How to ppare Aloes L H: taught her by Mr. Cooke.
Take an ounce of Aloes. fower ounces of iuce of  damaske
Roses; putt it into a little pott and cover it; but not soe
close but that it may breathe out; put the pott into
a skellet of skaldinge water over the fire, and soe lett
it breath awaie; untill it bee as thicke as honey; stirr
itt
itt





stirr it more and then with a fine white sticke; then putt
it into a gally pott pott, & keepe it for your use.
A Purgeinge Pill: L: H:
Take halfe an ounce of Myrth, one ounce of Aloes, one drachme
of saffron; Beate theise sewally & searce them; then take a
quantity of the syrrupe of Roses with Agaricke, and twoe
dropps of oile of annesseeds; make it up into past, and then
into pills; take one in the morneinge fasteing; and halfe an
hower before supper, and you are nether tyed to dyet nor to keepe
the house.           Dr: Heareinge.
ffor a stinchinge breath powdeinge from ye head
L. H: taught her by ye Lady Brocharel.
Snuffe up your owne water every morneinge into your nose, and washe
& cleanse it well, & this will cure you in short tyme.
ffor a tinckleinge Cough. L. H.
Take Cynamon water, & putt it into soe much red Saunders, as will
coulour it, and when you goe to bed, weete a Lumpe of fine
sugar in this water and putt it into your mouth, to melt by
degrees, and it will staie it psently.
A Medicine for the wormes. L. H:
Take a pinte of Muskadine, of wilde tansey, Camomile
pennyroyall, of each one handfull; Boile it awaie to halfe
and then sweeten it with sugar; To a suckeinge Childe
giue but one spoonsfull; & twoe to one of older yeares.
A medicine for wormes in Children in
somer. L. H: taught her by Dr. Herney.
Take a Pinte of Barley water, syrrupe of vyoletts one
ounce and a halfe, sal prunella, one drachme, oile of
uytroils ten dropps, mingle it; Giue to a Childe of
three yeares old three spoonsfull in the morneinge
fasteinge; at fower in the afternoone, & pportionably
as they are in yeares. /
ffor the





Ffor a Consumpsion in a Childe. L Hu: taught
her by Mr Goobe.
Giue the childe euery morninge foure spoonfulls of
him pernall water; if the childe bee too loose in his
body, sweeten it with sugar of Roses; if otherwise sweeten
it with manus christi
ffor windein a childe LHu:

A little Methidate given sometimes as much as a Pins heade
or distillDill water and treacle water mixe with a little sugar.
ffor a consumption of the Lunges L Hu:
Take a quarter of middleesmale Ale, a pinte of Coltsfoote
water, halfe a pinte of hysops flower water,  an handfull of
ponny royall, halfe a pound of raisons of the sunne stoned 20.
blewe figgs, sixe dates stoned, & the inner skinn taken out
Shreade the fruite smale; then take a quarter of a pound
of english liquoice, halfe a spounefull of annesseeds, bruise
and boile all theise together untill half bee boiled awaie
then straine it, and put in a quarter of a pound of sugar
candy; Every morneinge drinke sixe spoonefulls fastinge
and as much at fower a clocke in the afternoone; if your
stomache will beaere it useinge yor ordinary exercise

ffor tho Cough of the Lunges L H: taught by L North.
Take Coltsfoote water and hysope water of each one pinte
an handfull or more of Maidenden haire; boiled in a pinte of
water till it come to halfe a pinte; threedcore or more of
raisons of the sunne stoned, sixe sticks of liquorice scrapedr
and sliced, one spoonfefull of clmeseedes ruffed cleane &
bruised, sixe bleue figgs sliced; boile theise together untill it
come to a third part, then straine it and put 3 spoonefulls
of syrrupe of Burrage; sixe ounces of browne sugar candy
boile it up to a syrrupe; and with a liquorice sticke briuse
at the end, take it when yr cough beginns

Another for your Cough of Lungs. L H by LaNorth & others
Take a pinte of conserue of red Roses and dissolue

into





into three or foure dropps of naturall Balsom, and
soe take the quantity of a walnutt every morneinge fastinge
& every eveninge before you goe to bed.
If the Lunges bee putrified take three or foure dropps
of the spiritt of sulphur in a spoone full of Beare or possett
drinke, three daies together euery three weekes; Butt
though you use the spirit of sulphur, if the Lunges bee
putrified you must alsoe use the naturall Balsome;
ffor it cured Sr. John Monson; when Dr. Butler of
Cambridge & others of the best Phisitians in england
have giuen him ouer as hopelesse of his Recouery
ffor a fffluxe. LHu:
Take a buttoke of beefe cutt from it (againste e  graine)
a peece is breade as a palme of your hand, and as thicke
as a toaste; scrape choales upon it untill it bee fully white
all ouer; then laie it iust upon  Nauell; and chaunge
it with freshe euery twelve howers; and in fower or
ffiue daies it will Certainely staie it.
ffor a sur feitt  L Hu:
Take a toast of the Grains of wheaten breade, cutt
round abbout the bottom of the loafe; put it into aqua
vita, sett it ouer a Chafingdish & coales betwiet twoe
dishes, and when it is throughli warme & soaked; then
apply it to the mouthe of the stomach; shift it euery
twellue howers; Or take a spoonefull of whole
Mustardseede, and swallowe it downe in a little
drinke; and it will cause all fullnesse that cloggs
the stomache to disgest & putt ouer.
ffor a ffluxe L Hu: by Dr. Haruey.
Boile an handfull of Coperasse as it comes from
the tree in a quarte of faire water vntill itt
come to a Pinte; sweeten it and lett e party
drinke it





237
Drinke it three or foure tymes adaie; and it
presently cures and staies the fluxe.

To staie ffluexes of Rhume:  L.tt. tryed
by Mr. Pryce, as alsoe to prevent feavers.

Eate a shipp Biskett every morneinge for 15 daies
together, springe & fall; & eate not after untill noone.

Ffor a surfett, and to pruent approachinge agues
or fflauors, taught Pl:hfa by Mr. Cooke.

Take red poppie water halfe a pinte, of t e syrrupe of
red poppies five spoonefulls; of th syrrupe of t e uice of
Cytrone one ggod spoonefull; mixe them well together
?with a little of the juice of Lemon, &[and] drink it at twice

Ffor a Rupture in t e  Navell or any other place

Take of the thickest Mudd that comes from a grynde singr
stone, or grynde stone, and take the same quantity of
Camphry rootes, beaten or shreade small; and with
milk make a pultice thereof; laie it warme to t e belly
shift it only, morninge and night for nyne daies together
but not to a woman; if she other lies in or is wth childe
But I have knowne this faile

Another for the same L Hu

Take a quantitie of musk and dissolve it ether in white
wine of beere in a spoone, and drinke it ofl take a spoonefull
or two of the wine or beere after it fast 2 houers after, tn
neede not observe ant diett with it. Take t e first moringe
3 grains, the second foer, and the thirs five

Against Convulsion fitts L Hu

Take piome seedes, fine gold, Corall, pearle, brazor
stone and Amber of each a like quantitie; brate
them to powder, and give it morninge &[and] eveninge
in Endine water, as much as will lye upon a
groate and the party must weare a Necklace &[and] bracelet
of piome seedes

Another







Another for the same L H for a childe
Take a quicke moule and the heade of it, lett it bleede
vnto a spoone; and give the Childe of that bloode mixed
with Ale or beere; or blacke Cherry water if it may bee
had; when you expect the fitt to come upon him./
For sore eyes L H: taught her by Mr. Cooke
Take of the iuice Alehoofe twoe spoonefulls, of e iuices
of Cellandyne one spoone full; to each add halfe a spoone ull or
more of english honey, that is white & pure; let theise dissolue
together in a siluer Porrenger, but not soe hott as to boile
put it of in a glasse and keepe it for yo use;; w must
bee in this manner; dropp into the eye euery morneinge
and eueninge & daie tyme a fewe dropps at a tyme; it is of
excellent vse.
Another for the eye sight
Take the distilled water of Rue euery morneinge
three spoonefulls fasteinge; or els take the hearte, stampe
and straine it into beere; & drinke it as aforesaid
Against the fallinge sicknesse or convulsion
fitts in man, woman, or childe L H by Mr. Cooke
Take the gall of a male Puppy whelpe betwixt a fortnight
and a monnthes old of any kynde of dogg except a mastiue
or water spainell, add to this a spoonefull of the lime tree
flower water; let the pateint take this in the morninge
for three morneings together; three daies before the
chaunge and full of the Moone; To which purpose
you must have, three Puppey Whelpes in a
readinesse; If for a woman or younge female
childe; then you must provide the gall of
a female Puppey Whelpe./
Against the





238
Against the Scuruey, and other infections of
the spleene & liuer; Giuen e L: Hu: by Mr Cooke
and to him by Mathias.
Take sixe pound of garden scuruey grasse, twoe pound of
white brianie rootes; one pound horshe Raddish
rootes; a quarter of a pound of winter Barke; sixe
Lemons twoe ounces of  Nuttmeggs shreade; slice theise
ingredients and infuse them in a Pottle of white wine
foure and twentie howers; after still them in Balneo
Mari&aelig; Tacke a quarter of a Pinte at a tyme ith a little
sugar morninge and eueninge/

Against pisseinge ones bed, giuen the L: Hu:
By Mr Cooke
Take the leafe called Mouseare, gathered in sommer
dry itt, and beate it to powder; Giue the partie asmuch
as will lye upon a shillinge in porrenge, or what other
thinge yow please euery morninge; This will
Certainely helpe and Cure./

Here ends e Receipts
contained in the Lady
Sarah whole Booke
of Receipts





239





240





241





Bread Pudding with MS. 363

Grate 1/2 a H of stale Bread - Pour over it 1 pint of hot milk and
leave the mixture to soak for an hour in a covered basin -
Then beat it up with the contents of 2 eggs -
Out the whole into a covered basin just large enough to hold it
which must be tied in a cloth and placed in boiling water for
1/2 an hour - It may be eaten with Salt Sugar of Sherry Wine
Ex Culverwell's guide to Health & [??]
Pub: by Sherwoods
23 Pat'r Row/.

Parmado

Place some very thin slices of crumb of Bread in a saucepan and
add withe more water than will cover them. Boil until the Bread
becomes pulpy. then strain off the superfluous water and beat up the Bread
until it becomes of the consistence of gruel - then add white sugar and
when permitted a little sherry wine





MANUSCRIPT
RECEIPTS

HUGHES

75

1637








