10a
198


Notes on Dorsey
Volume I.






10a
198

R.P. Richardson
Philadelphia
Pennsylvania

89162   C
EX LIBRIS COLL MED PHILAD INSTIT AD MDCCLXXVII
NON SIBI SED TOTI

Class 10a No. 198
Presented by
Mr. Montgomery Harris.

5.00





Notes on the lectures of Dr. John Syng Dorsey professor of
materia medica in the university of penn.

Vol. II Nov. 7th 1817. 2nd Lecture.

In commencing my lectures on the mat. med. Gentleman,
I need not inform you, that the chair has heretofore
been filled by men of the most distinguished talents.
In teaching the branch to which I have been appointed,
I shall make every exertion to be useful to you; I am
well apprised that all that a teacher can do, is to
judiciously conduct you to a knowledge of the elements.
The mat. med. has for its objects an acquaintance
with every thing that preserves and supports life.
Of these, it is highly necessary that the student should
be informed. I propose to pursue the plan of my
able predecessor, discriminating between what is
useful & superfluous, rejecting the latter and giving you
the former, in order that you may become good practitioners.
We shall commence our lectures with the subject of
animal life. Dr. Johnson defines life to be the union







Animal life &c

of soul & body. This def seems to be very obscure but we
must not forget the difficulty often attending definitions.
I shall define life to be a power of resisting
putrefaction & chemical changes or processes, & of
perserving the system in a temp. different from
that of the atmosphere. Among many, the phenomena
of life as exhibited in motion,-heat-, sensation, &
thought have been said to constitute life.
This doctrine has had many advocates, Dr Rush
taught it & before him Dr Brown. This we consider
completely refuted by the fact that life may exist
without its phenomina. Fish when frozen for some
time are not dead yet all the phenomena of life
are absent. Vitality is as perfect in plants as in
animals and in the oyster &c as in man.
By Drs Brown, Rush & others, life has been said to be
a forced state, but none of them are the authors of it
for Dr Cullen  taught it as early as 1766 in the university
of Edinburg. Stimuli can never create life. They say





Animal Life

a capacity for life exists, but the capacity for it, is life.
Most of the actions of life are the effects of stimulants, as
sound on the ear, light on the eye, et cet. Can any
vital action take place without the agency of stimulants?
The actions of life are forced, but the powers of life are
not forced. We might as well say that the air makes
flame when we burn carbon &c. Tis impossible to
produce life in dead matter, by the action of stimuli.
If you take two fishes, one frozen dead, the other alive,
by applying heat to both, the former will suffer
putrefaction, & the latter will not. Next we may
inquire whether or not organization influences life?
Among the lower classes of animals the organization
is very simple. In the Hydatid & polypus, we have
examples. The Hydatid is extremely simple in its
organization, it probably consists of nothing but a
stomach and absorbants, and digestion constitutes its
only function. The doctrine that the blood possesses life
has been defended by Mr. J. Hunter. When we consider





Anaimal Life

that the blood is the great source of nutrition, &
that every part, muscle, bone &c is formed of it, it
seems not irrational to conclude that it possesses
vitality. Life we know cannot arise out of, nor
depend on mere organization. This of itself is nothing.
Wherever there is the power of preservation, the
principle or power of life may exist. An egg must
have the power of self preservation and therefore life, as
is proved by its resisting putrefaction and preserving
its temperature. You will examine the experiments
of Mr. Hunter on eggs. He found that a fresh egg does
not freeze so soon by 7½ minutes as an egg which had
been layed for some time. A fresh egg in a freezing
mixture remained fluid at 29°, a dead egg was frozen
at 32°. The same experiments were made on frogs, eels,
snails, &c. All these things seem conclusive of the truth of
which we have said that life may exist independent
of its phenomena. The blood when exposed to similar
experiments showed the same results. This proves that





Sympathy

life is not dependent on organization. We confess our
ideas are imperfect concerning what life is, but we
know what it is not. Life then consists in certain powers,
in a simple state only, a power to preserve itself &
it has higher powers, which became obvious as we
rise in the scale of being. There are two other terms
frequently made use of & the definitions of which you
will hear from another chair. These are irratability & sensibility
On the subject of sympathy I shall give you a few
observations. This we define to be action from remote
impression, and has had several names as consents of
parts &c.  So extensive is the influence of this over the
animal economy that a a knowledge of it
is quite as important as the circulation of the blood.
It has been divided into partial and universal.
An instance of universal sympathy is afforded in
these fevers which result from local diseases. Partial
sympathy is divided into remote, contiguous and
continuous. Remote is where a part is affected which





Sympathy

is not actually stimulated. Contiguous sympathy is
that in which parts sympathise with each other
which are in contact. Continuous is where the
whole arterial system sympathises with an
inflammation of a part. We have also sympathy
from sensation, as sighing in melancholia &c
but these are perhaps only partial. Mr. Hunter
died of mental mortification, on receiving a
rude speech from one of his rivals. Hectic fever
one of the phenomena connected with this principle,
has been attributed to the absorption of pus. But
that it is not produced by this, we have
several striking proofs— As in cases of scrophula,
when Hectic appears before suppuration takes place,
& in cases of suppurating bubo &c much pus is
absorbed without hectic fever being induced.
Why is not Hectic fever occasioned by the
suppurating stump, after an amputation
of a scrophulous knee joint? Thus we see hectic





Sympathy

is not to be explained by suppuration.
Formerly all kinds of medicines were thought to act
upon the system by being taken into the circulation.
Sympathy can explain this operation much more
satisfactorily. We may here notice the sympathy
between the schneiderian membrane and the lachrymal
sac & gland— when this membrane is irratated, these
secrete and discharge a deluge of tears which
washes the nostril. Light irrated and causing
the contraction of the pupil another instance. The
nose, throat, and fauces sympathise with the diaphram
hence sneezing &c. The bladder urethra & glans penis
sympathise reciprocally. A calculus in one of the
kidneys produces pain in the other. Inflammation
of eye is often communicated to the other, and after
removing a piece of iron filing from the surface
of the eye (an operation which I frequently performed
with my pen knife) I find most uniformly that on
the ensueing day, inflammation succeeds in the
other eye. The stomach has a more extensive





Sympathy

connexion of associated actions, than any other
organ in the system; Hence we find a apoplexy
nightmare &c from its undue distention, & in
cases of dyspepsia we find a great variety of
symptoms. Yellow fever as Dr. Warren has observed
has its throne and seat in the stomach,
accordingly we find a great diversity of
symptoms attending it. In one of the epidemdicks
in this city Dr. Physick had a patient who
complained of nothing but a pain in her
foot. She died & upon examining her stomach
it was found in a high state of inflammation
and engorged with black vomit.

We find the same diversified sensations of pain
in Psoas abcess &c. The connexion of the stomach
and skin has been long observed & often excites
our surprise. The effects of cold water as
reciprocally shown, & the consequences of error in
diet are well known to many of you.





Sympathy et cet

We have instances of certain persons who cannot
eat certain substances without suffering from
eruptive diseases. Some cannot eat fish without
exposing themselves to an unpleasant
eruptive disease. I do not assert that sympathy
offers a complete explanation of the modus operandi
of medicines but that it assists as much cannot
be denied. And do we better explain the mod
operandi of medicines mercury when we say it is taken
into the circulation and there stimulates the
heart and arteries? Another thing which we
should keep in view is that peculiarity in
individuals & families, termed idiosyncracy
as it is a thing we frequently meet with in
practice. Some cannot receive the odour of certain
substances without the greatest inconvenience
whilst the same odour produces little or no comparative
effect upon the organ of smell in the generality
of men. Dr. Brown who was a fellow pupil with me





Idiosyncracy et cet

when with Dr. Physic could never smell Ipecac
without having a paroxysm of asthma.
Dr Barton had a pupil of whom he related the same
idiosyncracy. We have instances where even
the smell of fish has had very peculiar effects.
These idiosyncrasies are often hereditary and
perhaps by these Gout becomes a hereditary
disease. Another thing tho purely pathological
is not unworthy our attention. I mean the
incompatibility of different actions with each
other & at the same time. The fact that no
two actions can exist in the same part at the
same time as first ably defended by Mr. Hunter,
is proven in a variety of instances.
The principle is illustrated in small pox &
vaccination— measles &c &c.  Tis true, observations
subsequent to those of Mr Hunter prove that
two diseases can exist in the same person
at the same time, as in the case of Mr





Incompatibility of a plurality of actions &c
Hopkinson's child— but they are only accidental
exceptions, to a general rule. The consideration
of this is important because it frequently
happens that to change the action, is the
first & most important indication in
the cure of a disease. Again, again, & again have
experimenters inserted vaccine matter during measles
and never could both be developed without any
apparent influence of the other. All this we may
consider as proving the incompatibility of two
actions existing at the same time in the same
part of the system.

3d Lecture In our preceding lecture we have said
something on the subject of animal life. I have
explained it as approved by most of the professors
in the university— Now we go on to treat of
Mat. Med.— our branch not only comrephends
active medicines but also alimentary articles
whatever may be their nature, & the fluids which







Materia Medica

we use as drinks. In former times much was
said of diet by the physicians, but now it seems
to be consigned to the management of friends
& nurses. In many diseases proper aliment
is all that is necessary to effect a cure.
One thing I must suggest to you & you will
consider it of some importance to remember
it; that the diseases of the United States require
a more rigid diet than those of any other
country. In vain we do any thing and every thing
without without attention to this important part of the
treatment of our diseases, namely a rigid attention
to diet. You will therefore see the necessity of attending
to the articles of diet in the neighborhood where
you live, & you may rest assured that the dietetick
part of your practical duties will form an
important object in claiming your attention.
You will always be asked Dr. Shall I eat apples,
pears, peaches, oysters &c &c.  You must be able





of the Nutrientia

to answer them readily and without equivocation.
We shall now treat of the nutrientia, & under that
head we mean & include all articles employed
as food, drink or condiments. The ultimate
composition of medicines not necessary to be known.
We aim at facts & results & leave the more nice
distinctions and accurate analysis to nat. hist.
& chymistry. Aliments may be divided into veg. &
animal. And these into mild and acrid— Sugar is
very nutritious— many odorous substances also are
very nutritious as onions garlic &c— One vegetable
the mushroom can be eaten by some animals, and to others
prove poisonous. As the hemlock which poisons men,
is eaten by the horse, and the ground ivy which exerts no
active powers upon the human body, poisons the horse.
Goats eat strammonium without inconvenience while
poisons many other animals. There are certain
poisonous medicines which by exposure to heat become
perfectly innocent. Most of the med. used in diet as





A question whether man was designed et cet.

condiments possess considerable odour.
A question has long agitated the physiologists whether
man was intended for animal or vegatable food.
We are surprised at the different modes of living
among among differ people, and astonished
when we contrast the wonderful supper of Lucallus
which cost $9000, with the simple & palin meal
of Coraro. In some parts whole nations subsist on nothing
but vegatables as in Persia, in Constantinople on
cucumbers, in Asia & many other nations on rice.
Boerhaave gives us a case of a man who tried with
how little life could be supported. Dr Stark made
some expts to ascertain this &c. Dr. Hager of South
Carolina was taken in endeavouring to rescue
the Marquis L[ucullus] he was imprisoned and he eat
bread and water, & had excellent health.
Whole nations live exclusively on animal food, as in
the north of Europe. The Scythians lived exclusively on
animal food. The Tartans also live an animal






Continued

food, and we are told that the patagonians prefer
the flesh of the horse to every other kind of aliment.
The Africans on fish. So far as comparative anatomy
would throw light upon the subject we should
conclude from the structure of teeth &c that man
was intended for both animal and vegatable food.
It has been said that the intestines of carnivorous
animals are not so long, & those of granivorous
longer & from it some ridiculous conclusions
concerning chylification. But from all we
are able to discover we must agree that both
animal and vegatable food is best & that to
kill & eat was one of the privileges granted by
providence. The inconvenience attending a diet
exclusively of either is also a proof, however we
must here allow for the influence of habit.
A diet wholly animal produces eruptions on
the skin as scurvy &c which a diet entirely of
vegatables induces dyspepsia and bowel complaints.





Of Vegetable Food

But we are struck with admiration at the
manner in which nature adapts food to
climates & we may say with confidence that
of the two vegatable diet in much the best.
Sir George Stanton says that in China the inhabitants
have none of these violent diseases which
are found in European countries where so much
flesh is used & that they never suffer from
inflammation after surgical operation &c.
The same observation is applicable to Calcutta.
We cannot say that this is entirely the
result of vegatable food, but that it is in a
great degree to be attributed to it.
Of vegatable food. The parts of vegatables used
as aliments are the seeds, roots &c. As a general rule
we may ascertain the quantity of vegatable nutriment
in any article by the quantity of starch sugar soil
which it contains, but there are some exceptions as the
mushroom, onion &c. The chyle after it is elaborated





continued

contains much sugar. It was singular that Dr
Cullen should have doubted of sugar being nutritious,
how far he was right in referring so much to an
acid I shall not inquire. That the human
stomach can digest almost any thing, but that
oil & sugar are more nutritious than an acid
I am led to believe. Dr B Stark lived 14 days
on olive oil and flour & increased his weight
4 or 5 lb—oil though very nutritious is not very
easy of digestion. Dr Darwin said when not rancid
easy of digestion. Olive oil is much used in the
south of Europe where they use bread and oil as we
do bread & butter. Mucilage & gum are very
nutritious, the former is only a solution of the
latter in water. Gum arabic is the most
pure of these and as an article of diet in
bowel complaints it is invaluable, tis nutritous
& not acid, in cholera morbus an excellent
medicine mixed with loaf sugar.





Arealia

Lime water in mucilage of this gum very good
in general cures of disease— With respect to the
common remedy home water & milk, you will
often find your patients vomit, but never
when mixed with mucilage of gum arabic.
This is excellent substitute for the former.
The caravans in the deserts of Arabia exist
for weeks upon this alone. This being
premised we shall now speak of the more
important of the nutrientia as they are
scattered over our extensive country by the
liberal hand of nature

Cerealia Botanists class under this every substance that
makes bread. S Cullen says this class is useful
by the quanitity of oil which it contains &
the quantity of sugar also, but here he was very
wrong. They certainly do contain the elements of
sugar and oil but not in a seperate state.
Minute chymical distincitons are never of much





Triticum

use in estimating the operation of medicines— In the
farinacea we include wheat Rye, Barley, Corn &c
They all contain much nutriment but they differ
much in the quantity.

Triticum wheat. The natural history of this you are
all acquainted with & you also know that it
constitutes a large portion on the food of the inhabitants
of Europe & america— I shall say nothing
of the process of grinding, but shall make some
observations upon bread. The seeds of wheat are
composed of mucilage, starch & gluten. The latter
is insoluble in water ardent spirit spirit, oil,
or ether. Bread is composed of folour, water, & yeast
mixed up together; while fermentation is
going on it is baked, this immediately stops
fermentation. We raise the temp & evaporate the
moisture requisite for carrying on the process of
fermentation— Dr K has proved in a very ingenious
thesis 1790 that this is correct, and done himself





Continued

honour, & science a benefit. The yeast which is put
into the bread contains fixed air, heat being
applied the air becomes elastic, the water disappears
&c. Later chymists say that one lb of flour will
make a pound & a quarter of bread. The farinaceous
differ much in medical properties according
as they are prepared. Unleavened bread is very
ancient as we find from reference to the bible
& we find in some cases unleavened bread is
both nutritious & easy of digestion. Bread is
very useful in mixing with the saliva & nutritious
parts of animal food & carrying it to the stomach.
The very nutritious quality of bread is proved by
P Franklin, who lived 12 days on 10 lb bread.
Stark lived on bread & water, when he eat 38 [symbol fluid oz]
of bread & 2 lb water he got fat. The greatest quantity he
was able to take was 46 [symbol fluid oz] And he found that
the 38 [symbol fluid oz] agreed with him better than 46. Which
shows that even in bread & water there is a great





Continued

quantity of nutriment, & hence the propriety of
prohibiting your patients from eating too much
of it when it constitutes their diet.
Some cannot when in health digest unleavened
bread— and yet in a disease of the bowels crackers
are an excellent article of diet. Stale bread in much
more easy of digestion, this you must all remember
& never let your dyspeptic patients have fresh
bread— In all chronic cases bread must be well
baked. There is nothing perhaps more difficult
of digestion than dough. A gentleman of my
acquaintance one of the trustees of this university
eat some doughed half baked bread; & was seized
with apoplexy. Half baked and even fresh bread
have produced it. A most valuable beverage
for the sick is made by an infusion of
toaster bread in water. It becomes very useful
after blows on the head & in all those cases
when a rigid diet is indispensable.






Continued

nothing can be more important than an attention
to this. A man said he lived low when he
drank a pint of wine per day, but I tell you
gentleman, a low diet in toast & water
Some have lived forty days on this alone.

Dr Dorseges 4th Lecture At our last lecture we commenced
with saying something on the subject of the nutrientive
and said that the subject had been of late years
much overlooked. One of the class wished to know after
lecture which branch or part of my lecture was
the most important. I cannot say which, but
only tell you that the present subject is
quite worthy your consideration. However
unimportant the fermentation of bread may
at first appear to you it is far from being so
We mentioned the man who thought he was living
low when he took a pint of wine per day, & indeed this
might have been low living to him if his usual
quantity of drink & aliment was much greater.







Continued

There are some men who live almost wholly on
vegatable diet, to such when attacked with fever
we should give only bread and water.
I proceed today with the subject of bread.
It has been observed that when people live on
vegatable diet, little inflammation takes place.
The people of Asia live on unfermented rice, &
in Europe & America still a large portion of the
inhabitants subsist on unfermented bread &
they enjoy good health. In the course of my practice
I have found few evils from its use. Hypocrates
observed that unfermented bread was not so
light & easy of digestion as when it is well
fermented— I don't intend to quote him often as
authority but in this I thot, he was worthy of mention
But sailors after long feeding on unfermented bread
feel weak when they change to fermented.
To a healthy stomach either is very good.
Bread raised by leaven is acid, that by yeast is not.





Secale

Pastry or that crust made by kneading up
flour, fat or butter & water, makes one of the most
indigestable of all aliments. Pies & tarts should
always be forbid to the flatulent, dyspeptic &c.
The under crust of the pye is the most difficult
of digestion. I have known a crust of this
to remain a week in the stomach & very
little changed. Boiled dough dumplings; is very
difficult of digestion, in the philosophical
transactions a case is recorded of the death from
eating apple dumplings. Another evince is
that pastry is always served up after dinner
& hence when the stomach is almost exhausted
with previous digestion a fresh burthen is
imposed upon it.

Secale. Rye resembles wheat in its properties
but contains more sugar & more spirit, hence
its sweet taste, & you know the quantity of spirit
made from it in every part of our country.





Hordeum

wherever we find it distilled it becomes our duty
as guardians of the public health to rise the voice
of opposition against a practice so pernicious
to our country. The cheapness of the stimulus makes
it easily obtained by the lower class of people &
incalculable mischief ensues.

Rye is also more ascescent than wheat. It is also
more opening to the alimentary canal & often
nothing but this requisite to cure costiveness.
In prolapsus ani Rye mush is the best diet I
know of— Dr Physic has seldom succeeded without
this and as far as I know of is the author of the
practice. Rye flour is one of the best materials for
cataplasms. Hardeum Barley contains saccharins
matter or else it is more easily evolved than any
of the Cerealia. Dr Cullen says it is less nutritious
than the others. It make bread but not so good.
The gradation of different nutriments are
nearly as follows— Water— toast & water






Orgza

barley water or gum arabic & water with sugar.
Now all these are safe in common cases but
in violent ones— I have known fever kept up
in pleurisy by giving too much drink—
Barley water contains a good deal of nutriments
Pearl Barley is not so good as the common
& the process of preperation by no means improves
it, but on the contrary it is more likely to
be subjected to chymical changes from which
the husk protects— Orgza. Rice.— This differs
from all the others in containing less ascescent
matter. It is very nutritive & supports the people
of the most popolous empires. In Dyspepsia,
dysentary & Diarrhoea it is the best diet we can
employ when well boiled. It has been supposed
to possess astringent qualities, but for this
there is little foundation. Dr Percival exposed
the above articles to the process of fermentation
and found that all went into the ascescent





later if — but if he has
the disease   Of
Europe  in this country













 left alch.. of
I am a lot glad for








Avena

fermentation before the rice— It was slow m and more
like animal matter. There are few dyspeptic patients
but can digest rice if boiled rightly. Whatever
irritates the bowels in Dysentary & Diarrhoea
occasions purging. I know of nothing better
here than a decoction of rice it makes one of
the most pleasant & proper food for the sick.
Boiling rice flour to a jelly and sweetening
it with loaf sugar is a most pleasant aliment
for the sick, a little rose water may improve
it. Children are very fond of it. Rice is good in
soup— Rice milk constitutes one of the best kinds of
food in bowels complaints & I have cured them by
a diet of rice milk alone. In occasional
diarrhoea of the summer a table spoon full
of rice boiled in milk every hour will often
affect a cure. Avena. oats only used in this
country for cattle but in Scotland the inhabitants
use it much for bread &c. a pap made of







Fagopyrum et Zea

Oatmeal is an aperient and mostly has the
effect of opening the bowels, hence the impropriety
of using oat meal gruel in many diseases.
Fagopyrum, Buckwheat one of the luxuries of our
country and buckwheat cakes and plenty of butter
are very good, but not for the dyspeptic— the
stomach of the sick will not bear them— nor
short cakes, nor muffins. Zea Maize Indian
corn a native of america is extremely nutritious.
It is sufficiently saccharine to be malted. but
Corn when eaten whole & in a green state is
very indigestible as is proves by its passing
unchanged thro the alimentary canal.
Dr Barton said that this was the most nutritious
of valuable of all the Cerealia. Mush is a
healthy & digestable mode of cooking it and
it is so much softened by boiling that it
becomes the best way it can be used.
The best made mattresses which we have





Cycas Circinalis et Orchis Morio, Arrowroot.

are made of the inner shuck of the corn, if we
except those made of curled hair. In Italy these
are much used. Sir H. Davy has tried to analyse
all the cerealia wheat had 955 parts in 1000
of fecula. Barley & rye less— peas and beans 574
potatoes 200. Sage is the pith of the Cycas Circinualis.
It is often spoken of as a demulcent but it is only
simple gluten. When well boiled in water it
forms an eligible aliment for the debilitated.
When you prescribe sage don't give wine with it
or you will make it too stimulating. Without
wine it is safe and wholesome. I recommend
to your perusal Dr Percivel's book on this subject.
Tapioca this grows in South America. It is
obtained from the root by maceration. By much
boiling it is dissolved & makes a good aliment
but it must be boiled at least 2 hours, when
rightly cooked it is digetion.
Arrow Root, This is the product of the Maranta





Summer fruits

arundinacea & grows in the West Indies &
particularly in Jamaica. It also grows in
Georgia— Dr Barton received a letter from there
which stated its growth &c &c. It affords more
mucilage than any thing else with which we
are acqainted— In bowel complaints given
no milk with it. In convalescence particularly
this is a valuable remedy. I have now finished
the Cerealia.

5th Lecture. At our last lecture we finished what
we had to say on the cerealia, and now we go on
to speak of other vegatable aliments without
regard to their botanical affinity, as this throws
no light upon their nutritious or medical
properties. The summer fruits next claim our
attention they differ much from the cerealia, and
are composed mostly of an acid & saccharine matter.
The orange is a perfect example of them. Dr Cullen
says they are good for allaying thirst which they






Continued

do partly by their cooling quality and by stimulating
the mucous excretions of the mouth fauces & stomach.
They excite the secretions & keep open the bowels, but they
are not nutritious in a great Degree. In cases of
dyspepsia & Gout they are to be avoided. I have seen
gout and spasm of the stomach & bowels take place
from their use— this effect is to be explained by the
quantity of acid in the stomach. Besides the
quantity of acid what is in the fruit itself, the
stomach generates much acid. The pulp of these
fruits is very indigestible. Even water melon is
very indigestable in some instances, & I have
seen it vomitted up 3 or 4 days after it was taken
into the stomach and very little changed
flatulency remitting purging— cholic &c follow
the use of these if unripe.— The juice of the orange
is easy of digestion, but the pulp is very difficult.
This observation is applicable to the water-melon
pine apple, lemon &c among my patients I







Continued

find the pulp of these always occasions incovenience
to the convalescent. Dr Cullen gives a pretty
good account of all these & I shall refer you
to him. There are many among them that
should be boiled, others roasted— Stewed with rich
syrups they constitute the sweet meats of the
confectioners, and when in this state they are
best when eaten with milk. Peaches, quinces,
Raspberries make the best— In this way the
crab apple is a very pleasant fruit, which
when dried is very improper to be eaten.
One of the best preparations of these fruits as a dish
for the sick, is the common roasted apple.
It prevents hunger & keeps open the bowels.
I often prescribe it when much nutriment
would be improper. Water melons and cucumbers
sometimes the most dreadful colics and
yet are much eaten in this City in summer.
An absurd and fatal prejudice has prevailed among






Continued

people that it was necessary to swallow the stones of
cherries and other fruits, in order to assist digestion;
it arose from those mechanical ideas of digestion which
considered these as necessary to assist digestion in
tbe human stomach, as pebbles in the stomachs
of the Gallinacea— This danger of this we must be
convinced of from a recollection of the many dreadful
symptoms induced by it as witnessed in colics,
flatulency and death. Dissection in these cases has
shewn a large ball of stones so agglutinated as to
stop up the alimentary canal. The Edenburg volumes
of transactions contain an account of death from
cherry or plum stones, and Dr Physick gives a case
which fell under his notice of death from persimmons.
When such things have been swallowed we should
first give an emetic and then castor oil until
the alimentary canal is completely evacuated.
Dr Cullen gave the preference to the pulp of grapes
over all the others, but professor Barton preferred






Continued

the strawberry, perhaps the latter comes to greater
perfection in this than in any other country.
Grapes have been prescribed in dystentary but
they are very improper, except the juice
of the dried fruits. we may say that they are
good in costive habits. Many of our own fruits
dried have excellent qualities. The roots,
leaves, stems &c of several vegatables particularly
the varieties of the cabbage are much used as
wholesome aliment. Among these we may mention
the cauliflower. Many of these are indigestable
and improper for the femal stomach.
The carrot is tender and a good vegetable but not
very easy of digestion. I now hasten gentlemen
to another important article of our aliments
the  Potatoe. This as we have before told you
contains much fecula, according to the ex pts of H.
Davy about one fourth of it is composed of this. In
great diseases of the bowels it has been accused of






Animal food

inducing flatulences &c. But is certainly the safest and
one of the most valuable of all vegetables, and when
mixed with flour makes an excellent bread.
upon the whole it is one of the most valuable &
wholesome vegetables we have. I refer you to Dr
Cullen for the remainder of the vegatables and even
to say something of Animal Food. But first we
must recollect that the eccentricities of the human
stomach are very great. After the fortieth year
Dr Rush said the stomach became shy of new acquaintances.
This is not quite so correct as another observation
of his, that green peas when they first come almost
always produce Colics &c. That animal food was
intended for man is not at the present day denied,
and it has been used in all ages and in most
countries. The flesh of quadrapeds has been said to be
the most proper aliment because it is already
assimilated to ourselves. This is a bad argument &
would prove that blood is the best food for man





Continued

When we know that blood is one of the most indigestable
of all aliments. It would also reject the
ceralia as they are so dissimilar to our fluids
& solids. Now the Cerealia are among the
substances most easily converted into chyle
& Cullen must be wrong. It is not necessary
here to inquire what are the peculiar
properties or qualities of animal food the
ultimate composition is of better consequence to us
and chemistry has thrown little light on the
subject of comparative nutrition. Dr Cooper of
Carlisle has given some opinions relative to the
nutritious quality of fats &c to which I refer you
and I hope you will not forget that the
process of digestion is partly formed by the gastric
liquor. The flesh of carnivorous animals is not
so good as others. old authors have endeavoured
to account for this on the principle of
alkalescency, but this is intirely unworthy of notice.





Continued

The tenderness of animal flesh is influenced by sex,
age &c. The female is more tender than the male. The
male being more dense and castrated animals
are better than the male that can propogate his species.
We have evidence of this in our beef &c. Age also
influences the flesh of animals: it becomes more dense &
tough as the animal grows older. But lamb or veal is
more difficult of digestion than beef or mutton.
Dr  Fardyce says that veal is very indigestable.
Pork also should be eaten in small quantities. We
should use vegatable diet almost entirely for our
patients in this country. We may lay it down as a
general rule that fat animals are more easily
digested than trim ones. more gluten in one than
the other. Some harts of beef more difficult of digestion
than others you all know how this applies to
beef steak. The blood, glands, ligaments, cartilages,
tendons, &c you know are not to be digested, but
after long boiling, then they become a wholesome





Mutton et al

article of diet. By being made into a jelly by Papins
digester they are are excellent aliment. These
animal substances are good for the quantity &
quality of nourishment contained in them.
The flesh of the cow is composed of gluten and
fat but less than pork. you know how much
the flesh is altered by castration, that the
bullock is tender & the bull tough. The
capon differs from the cock. Veal when just
killed is difficult of digestion, but when kept
two or three days it loses that stringy quality
which you find at table.

Mutton should not be killed before 6 or 7 years
at this age it comes to perfection. They say
that our mutton in this country is not so
good as in some parts of Europe, but we do
not attend to the perfecting it, or it would
be equal to the English or Welsh. Pork has
its fat diffused more completely throughout





Wild Meats, Birds et al

the cellular substance, than any other meat &
is improper as food for the Sedentary, but fresh
pork with many vegatables constitutes a good
aliment for the healthy & labouring class.

The wild meats of our country are very good.
our venison is perhaps the best in the world
and easy of digestion both when fresh & when
long kept. It is not very nutritious.

Birds supply us with some of the many luxurious
articles of the table. Their flesh differs from
quadrapeds, and those that feed upon flesh
are not so good. The duck tho, it sometimes
eats flesh is very good. The turkey stands as the
head of them and in this country is very large
We have it weighing 25 lbs. The common fowl
differs little from the turkey the soup made of
them is one of the best things for the sick.
An old Cock or hen is one of the toughest things
we can find & should be boiled several hours.





Domestic fowls

An old fowl contains much gluten, the hen is
more tender than the cock and the capon is better
than either. In America the capon is almost
unknown while in Europe & India they are
very common. The goose & duck are more
difficult of digestion than those which
have been mentioned. It would consume too
much of our time to enter into much discussion
on this subject, for further information read
Cullen. Dr C has said that the blood rendered
the animal more alkalescent and has accounted
for it in this way, for the duck &c being so
good. of all these the black duck is the best
and Dr Bartan said it was because it
lived on vegetable matter.
As a general rule fowls of white meat such
as the turkey, chicken &c are more digestable
& less stimulating than those of black flesh as the
goose, duck, &c. The turkey should be nearly





Eggs

grown before it is killed, & kept a few days before
it is cooked, which renders it more tender.
The young chicken not so nutritious as the chicken
cock or hen.

5th Lecture. At our last lecture we
commenced the consideration of the subject of
animal food. Among these may be mentioned Eggs,
they are the most nourishing & least stimulating
of all animal food and as easy of digestion.
This assertion is very old & was expressed by Harvey
Aristotle said that that which would nourish
the chick must be good for men, and we
think a soft boiled egg is along with oysters &c
the best food for convalescents, and hard boiled
eggs the worst. The white of a hard boiled egg
when dry will scratch glass. The only eggs we
use are those of the hen & occasionally the ducks.

Eggs are much used in countries where religion
interdicts the use of flesh. The different ways of
cooking eggs as omelets &c are all less healthy





Continued

than soft boiling. When you use them for your
patients don't forget to cut off the hard part.
poaching eggs by putting them into hot
water is a good way of cooking them.
When boiled they should only be left in two
& 1/2 minutes after the water begins to boil.
Eggs are often used to give flavour to other
food—as veal cutlet, oysters &c.  When these
are cooked with flour, they are not so good.
But I shall resume this subject when I
get upon cooking. Eggs with brandy & wine
constitutes the most nourishing & supporting
diet we can use in Typhoid diseases.
Eggs and sugar are extremely nutritious
I now speak of both parts of the Egg. Galen
preferred the yolk I also prefer it as the
most valuable part of the egg.
But we should always be careful to have
our eggs fresh. Stale eggs are not so good.





Fishes

if they have the least odour which does not belong
to the fresh egg, they are not fit for use.
As I before mentioned they are among the best
articles for patients in diseases of a typhoid type,
& in the typhoid pleurisy which raged in this
country a few years past they where mixed with
wine & brandy forming forming what is
called Eggnog, were very efficacious in supporting
and raising the patient.

The next animal substance we shall mention
is fish. In some countries as in the north of Europe they
constitute the only diet of the inhabitants. Haller
said it was probable that fish was the first animal
used by man as food, because he would take that
one which died without a groan.
Herring & shad afford subistance to more people
than any thing else, and the quantities caught
as a haul are almost incredible. It has been said
that at the Potowmac 372,500 were caught at





Continued

one draw. There seems to be as much difference
in different kinds of fish as in flesh. Cat fish
and some others are more difficult of digestion
than perch, sheeps head &c. Mackarel, eel &
cat fish are to most people difficult, but the
palatte should govern us in their use.
It is said that a diet of fish is favourable
to generation. This is not confirmed by experience
The esquimaux & other people live almost entirely
on fish and are by no means fruitful.
From what I have learnt I believe fish are not
favourable to longevity, it appears that the people
who live on them never survive 50 or 60 years.
Fryer Bacon said that fish were antiseptic, but
but as the doctrine of putrescency in the living
body has been exploded, the conclusions must
fall with the original proposition. We do not
think that people subsisting on fish are less
subject to inflammatory diseases than such





Shell fishes

as live on vegatables. When the Catholics use them for
5 or 6 weeks they mostly become weak, it maybe
determined positively that fish is less nutritious
than flesh. Dr Cullen appoved the opinion of Haller
but we can decide pretty correctly by reflecting on the
comparative qualities of Bacon & fish.

Shell fishes. Oysters. These are a species of shellfish
more perfect in the U.S. than in any part of the
world. Some Europeans don't like our oysters at
first, but after using them for some time prefer them
to all others. The English oysters are smaller &
much inferiour in quality to ours.

There are some animals also used as condiments,
among these are oysters. The best way of using
oysters is raw or roasted. When fried they are not
so good the fat & flour that is used with them
makes them indigestable. Bread soaked in oyster
liquor constitutes one of the most pleasant and agreeable
aliments that sick people can take






Continued

Dr Physic was the first person who used it, & has
found patients take it when every thing else was
rejected— I wish you to remember this.

Clams are tougher and harder than the oyster
and used mostly to give flavour to soup.
With respect to snails &c which are eaten
in some countries, I shall say little of them, but
they are used by cancer curers— They first
kill the snail with salt and water then put it
to phagadennik ulcers. I avoid the natural
history of all these you will perceive, and include
them under the general name of shell fish.
But these last are insects. Dr Cullen has
made no distinction between the lobster & crab.
But the lobster is much more tough & has less
oil than the crab. The crab being less dense &
tough is therefore easier of digestion. We have
a soft crab in the Chesapeake which is very good.
But the lobster is the most indigestable of all





Reptiles et al

these, one of them is taken with salt, the other with
mustard & other condiments. We often find colic
erasipalous &c produced by lobsters, never by crabs,
by either of them if they are not perfectly sound.
of the amphibious animals, there are few in this
country that we eat. I wish we did not eat
snakes We have several instances of this recorded,
&. Dr Barton mentions that severel British officers
eat the soup & flesh of the rattlesnake. The viper
has also been used but I am glad to find this
loathsome reptile no longer mentioned in the
Mat. medica. The sea turtle and Terrapin are
used, the French are peculiarly fond of the soups
of these. The properties of these soups depend much upon
the condiments used with them, and they seem little
superiour to that of veal. The Terrapin is better
than the snapper, and the physicians here now give
it to their patients with safety. The Epicures say it
should be cooked with butter and pepper.







Milk

Milk next claims our attention, & the difference
between mothers milk & cows is known to you.
Milk you know is composed of Curd, oil and water.
Cows milk when fresh is nutritious, & some medical
men have said that owing to its similarity to chyle
it must be taken up by absorbents without
undergoing any change. But nothing can be more
erroneous, & as we have before said if this were true
blood would be the best food. Milk you will recollect
is coagulated in the stomach and subjected to the
common process of digestion. It does however constitute
an eligible diet for persons in early and
advanced life. In early life particularly it's
proper but in very advanced life the stomach
don't bear it quite so well it being apt to
produce acidities in that viscus. In many diseases
we are under the necessity of prescribing milk and
it is the most important remedy we can find.
I witnessed its good effect in a venereal patient





Continued

whom I saw in consultation with Dr Pheysic Rush, he
was to use his own word rotten with disease and
from Caput ad calcis was in one blotch of
loathsome ulceration. He was put on a diet of
milk and bread & in a short time was to be
so much recruited as to be out of danger.
Lecture 7th. At our last lecture we considered milk as a
diet. and I gave you some cases in which its efficacy
in removing disease was evinced when unassisted
by medicine. During the reign of the humoral
pathology milk was recommended, because they
thought it was immediately converted into chyle.
Dr Cullen has said it is good in cases where the
fluids are vitiated &c, you know we at the present
day have discarded the ideas of vitiation of the fluid
by putrescency. But you will not forget that milk
in debility induced by whatever cause is our
most important remedy. In Lues venerea and
many other diseases where the powers of the system





Continued

are exhausted and in Cancer particularly you will
find it the most important article of the Mat
Medica. A lady was under my care with cancer,
she suffered much from pain and seemed to
sink daily under the irritation produced by it.
I put her on a diet of milk and vegetables and
she was much relieved by them. I hope therefore
in Chronic Lues venerea & Cancer &c you will
not forget its value. In Thesis, milk has been
much used and asses milk is still a proper
remedy in Europe. Galen in recommending
milk said it should be taken from the beast.
A modern writer has said that asses milk is an
asses remedy (here a story from van swieten).
There are several other kinds of milk used but we
should not use them unless we are necessitated
to do so. Milk soon loads the blood vessels & has done
much mischief in inflammatory diseases and
in some stages of thesis. A diet of milk is too





Cream, Curd, Whey, Cheese c

nourishing in these cases. Whey in some cases is
very useful but we may give the milk in those
cases where the febrile action is not increased by
it. We have before mentioned that milk is a
heterogeneous fluid. The cream floats upon the top
and the greater the surface exposed to the air the
more cream we have. Butter is a highly
nutritious substance made by churning cream,
and possesses all the properties of animal fats.
Its coagulation is effected in several ways by
suffering it to stand by acid Rennet &c
Wine also coagulates it. Rennet is mostly used
after the curd is dried it forms cheese. This differs in
quality according to the different qualities of
milk from which it is made. They are all
very nutritious, stimulating &c & are proper
for the laborious. Skim milk cheese is among the
most indigestable of all aliments. Cream cheese
are easiest of digestion and resembles butter more in







Continued

their composition. I have called your attention
before to their property of checking diarrhea.
I mentioned to you a case in the Penn. Hospital
he was a venereal patient much exhausted
by the disease and weakened by diarrhoea.
Various remedies were administered without
relief. I gave him cheese in various forms toasted
&c it was very useful to him. This though very
insoluble in the stomach, is good for the working
and those who undergo much exercise.
The oil of old cheese has been applied to ulcers
of late with very promising success. A case of ulcer
in the nose was cured by Dr Physic and myself with
this remedy which had resisted Lunar Caustic.
tar water &c. The older the cheese is the more
stimulating & acrid it becomes, epicures prefer
it old & mouldy. Toasted cheese is very
indigestable. The whey constitutes by far the
largest portion of the milk.





Buttermilk & Wine Whey

Dr Young of Edenburg has proved that 7/8 of the whole
quantity of milk is water. oil sugar and several
other things are found in milk by different
chymical processes. The whey of milk is unquestionably
the most proper part of this fluid in pulmonary
consumption. In dyspepsia, frequently an
obstinate disease, you will often find milk to
disagree with your patients and here whey will
be the best part you can employ. Butter contains
much oil & therefore nourishing, and buttermilk
has been advantageously used in some diseases.
Dr Shippen used to give it to a relation of his who
was thereby much benifitted. Wine Whey is among
the most pleasant and valuable ways of preparing
this for the sick and I hope you all will make
yourselves with the manner of making it.
You boil your milk and while it is in the act
of effervescing add half the quantity of wine Madeira,
Cherry, Lisbon or Teneriffe. You then heat it again





Milk Punch

to the boiling point & strain it thro muslin. You
will also take care to seperate and take out the
curd whole and don't break it. strain it thro
a thick piece of muslin. Now if you want a
weak wine whey, to add less wine will not
make it so but you must dilute the strong
wine whey with mucilage of gum arabic, you
may put about one ounce to a pint of this which
makes a gently stimulating and very nourishing
drink. Dr Barton thought it difficult to produce
intoxication with wine whey, because the
alkohol is evaperated. Certainly much of
the alkohol does evaporate, but still we are
able to produce intoxication with it.
Milk Punch is another way of using milk
but it is improper in cases where the powers of
the alimentary canal are impaired.
It is made by mixing rum sugar and milk
together & then grating a little nutmeg over it.





Cooking

You will be cautious therefore how you administer this in
weak habits & where the stomach and bowels are
disordered, it is useful in chronic debility but in
most cases of convalescence wine whey is better.
In Typhoid pleurisy which has prevailed in our
country, milk punch has been much used and
often with good effects. The chymical history of milk
I have omitted but refer you to Cullen and others
This finishes what we have to say respecting food
from the animal & vegatable kingdom. Dr Barton
was in the habit of mentioning calcareous earth
carbon &c &c as nutritious, on these we shall
only observe that the human organs are capable
of converting almost every thing into chyle.
The physician geltleman must often go from the chamber
to the kitchen, and I shall next give you some
observations on Cooking. This process is the
application of heat for the purpose of preparing
our food. Some articles are impaired by heat and





Continued

others are not. Cabbage and Turnips are not
improved by cooking. Turnips when raw seldom
produce indigestion. Apples when roasted are
much better than in their crude state, they
become much less flatulent. The indian turnip
you all know when cooked becomes a mild exculent.
The cooking of animal food also has different
effects upon it. The object of cooking it is, to render
it more savoury, soluble & easy of digestion.
Keeping meat a few days after it is filled
renders it tender as we find in poultry and
venison. The game which is killed on the highlands
of Scotland is used in Londen for the table six
weeks afterwards. We know when it is kept to
long, by its putrid state taste or smell.
Rancidity is another thing that animal
fats are subject to, and the goose and duck
is often so from keeping. There are certain
condiments that deserve a place in our





Continued

course and the most important is salt.
It is the best antiseptic we have, and is used for
preserving our animal food from putrefation.
When I say antiseptic you will understand me
as only meaning a matter which preserves from
putrefaction out of the body. Solomon has wisely asked
"Is there any taste in the white of Egg" ? He might
have asked the same with respect to all animal
substances in their natural state. Salt meat
may be set down as the most eligible food for
labouring people. Beef venison and mutton are
often dried and smoked and used as a relish;
you will often inquire of your patients if they
are in the habit of taking much of these articles
especially your dyspeptic patients, from whom
they must be positively interdicted.

Bacon forms a good part of our diet in this country.
We have before stated that pork is more indigestable
than Beef or Mutton.





Continued

When we eat ham we are apt to take too much
food, & it also creats thirst. you may give fish
for its stimulating, but not for its nourishing
quality. You will recollect I differ with Dr
Cullen on this point. Salt provisions have been
celebrated in Cholera Infantum &c but they are
to be suspected and are often dangerous.
Mr. Goldsborough of Maryland had a child
that had been troubled with the cholera for
some time, at length he brought it to Pda I
attended the child and in its convalesent
state they seemed disposed to give it a slice
of ham. It was obviously worse by it, and
was almost killed. It had previously lived on
arrow root. Two other cases of a similar
nature have occured with in my knowledge.
so much for ham in Cholera Morbus.

Dr Rush was in the practice of giving ham as
animal food. We should where we use hams





Continued

boil them in the manner recommended by Rush
who got the mode from Mr Jefferson namely to
boil them twice— I am surprised at an observation
of Dr Willick on the subject— he says boiled hams
are not so digestable— and prefers broiling
them. This is a great error; when boiled the way
recommended by Mr Jefferson they are far from
being indigestable, and when broiled they contain
much empyreumatic oil. In a state of health and
in warm climates they should be often used.
Dr___ says much against their use, he
inveigh them like a maman— They are certanly
a proper food where the powers of the system are
unimpaired but for the convelscent and
valetudinary they must be given with Caution
Fish are salted and constitute a great portion of
human subsistance. Shad and herring are the
most common. They as we have before said contain
little nourishment but their stimulus is very good.





Pickling & Soups

Vinegar this used to excess injures the powers of the
stomach. Dr Rush has very properly compared
pickles to vinegar in a solid form.
One way of applying heat is by Boiling, whereby
the food is rendered more soft and soluable.
Raw meat is longer in undergoing the digestive
process than any— the Indian who has a long
voyage to perform prefers his meat raw and
labouring people prefer sausage &c &c.
In some cases the soup itself is better than the
meat and Count Runiford found that the
potatoe loss 1/40 of its weight in boiling.
The French carry the art of cooking to the greatest
perfection. They boil their soups for a considerable
length of time, they take 5 lbs of poor beef & 8 or 10
lbs of water and boil it 8 or 10 hours over a
slow fire. Skim off the fat, and lay it under
then expose the soup to cold till the oil on the
top congeals and you can get the whole of it away.





Beef Tea

I wish to caution you against a common diet for the
sick, Calves foot jelly as it is used is adapted to few
cases, & is in many instances used improperly.
These things may seen unimportant and illsuited
to the serious occupation of a public lecturer, but you
will find them of useful practical application
and seldom do you find a nurse who can make
soup nightly. Another thing you will observe
that is not to suffer flatulent vegatables to be put
into your soups and do not suffer them to be
thickened with flour. You want a preperation
of beef only & tell your cook so, I speak now of
cares of the stomach being disordered, or the bowels
out of order. These soups are very important for the
sick and convalescents, for old people &c.

Beef tea you will all know how to make,
cut your beef into small pieces, (choose the lean) wash the blood
out of it and then boil it taking care to skald
it first. boil it in covered vessel Van Sweeten





Chicken Broth

says the animal should fast, previously to killing
it. This a useless refinement.  Chicken broth and
soups are not to be used in inflammatory diseases,
they are not less nutritious than beef tea.
Chicken broth is often improper in yellow fever and
even fatal in some cases and in that ticklish state of the
system is one of the most dangerous things that
can be given to the sick.

Lecture 8th At our last are said something
of cooking, and of the best way of making soup
for the sick. It  is not necessary to enlarge on
it here, we shall only add that various spices
& wines are sometimes added to soup, they only
serve to render it more stimulating.
Calves foot jelly you ought to reprobate
as a dangerous article of diet for convalescents.
You know it is made up of spices &c &c and
is not just for the sick. Beef tea is much
better. The very bone of animals may be






Roasting & Broiling

converted into soup & jelly by Papin's digester
but such soups have a soapy taste and are
not savoury. A method of preparing vegatable
soup where a low diet is required, has been
practiced by Dr Physic, and in this city is known
by the name of Dr Physic's soup. Take three large
potatoes, an onion and a slice of bread, and 3
pints of water, boil it down to two. season
it with salt &c to give it flavour.
It is an excellent weak soup and is not so stimulating
a chicken broth. If you have a mind to call it
chicken broth to suit the partiality of your patient
for that you may put a chicken wing in it.

In Roasting flesh the aqueous parts are evaporated
and it is more stimulating than when boiled.
Count Rumford invented an oven for roasting
meet, it is of no great importance to the cook.
Broiling meet is a rapid way of roasting, the
juice is confined after the outside is crisped, and is






Frying & Stewing

among the best modes of preparing flesh for the
table. Beef steak, mutton chops &c are
cooked in this way. Frying, under certain
circumstances should be prohibited, particularly
in flour &c. Stewed meats are wholesome.
These are many condiments used, of salt I have
spoken, pepper mustard &c should be mentioned,
they all stimulate the toungue and are
improper in inflammatory diseases.
Our most powerful condiment is capsicum it
is important as an article of medicine, also
vinegar is a good condiment when used in moderate
qanlity. Drinks of these the most
proper is water it is proved by those nations best
health who use it exclusively. Water is often
impregnated with mineral substances &c
In this country, the water of springs, wells and
rivers is good when in the former we find lime,
salt, &c in solution, next to simple water





of Drinks— Cider— Malt Liquors

the infusion of certain vegatables in the form of
teas, as balm and sage tea & next apple water.
Then mucilages which are a solution of gum in
water. This mucilaginous matter may be called
the condiments of drink. Many other fluids might
be mentioned but as they all contain much water
it is not requisite to notice them.

From the days of Noah to the present, mankind
have been attached to ardent spirits.
The physician is found geltlemen to wage continual
perpetual warfare with this Hydra of calamities.

In America we have an excellent substitute for
them in cider. It contains little alkohol but is
not to be used in gouty habits or in habitual
disorder of the digestive powers. Malt liquors
are used much in this as in European countries
In London agreeably to a report made in 1810 for
one year 1,333,178 Barrels were made in that
city alone.





[stamped]

COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS
OF PHILADELPHIA


