[Left Page]

A water of violett leaves and elder flowres of eache
a like quantitie putt of rose water when they
are distilled: by mr Bridges
or there abowt

Take a Draime of Treakle in winter very smale
a quarter of a draime of Safferon as muche of muske
this mixed togeather with a spoonefull of runninge
water dranke before meate in the morninge: this
is a most sure thinge and maye bee given to a woman
withe childe or without, or aman or a young childe
if so be yow will give the childe butt
the halfe of ytt myngled in the composicione as
before and the residewe in the water that yow
seethe the herbes in
To be as sure as itt was before

A cake is to be made in this manner

Take of herbes sweete fennell greene saage, reedd sage,
affrimounde, whytte [?] pennye royall, annesseede,
lickerishe, a handefull and a halfe of ech herbe
happ them in a clothe: the halfe a pecke of wheatte flower
take yeast and drie ytt and make itt
in a fine meale then take the herbes and choppe them
[line obscured] in a mortar take
twoo or three ounces of ginger cutt in small
peeces sett them alltogeathar as you doe
of a common cake: this beinge well
wroughte then putt in a pownde
of salte: spread a clothe of linnen in the oven and
laye the cake uppon itt when the oven is hotte
inoughe: of egge

A Cordiall water of mr popes

The making of a cordiall compound is youre
grinder of salt a draime of mace a pennie worth of
longe pepper use of rosemarie tyme margerome
saage of eache a like quantity take half a
quarter of a pounde of suger and after putte halfe a
quarterne of an ounce or of sinament suger

To dry a breste bone or poppelye

Take of the oyle or ointment whiche
is for the eye and anoint the breste bone
lett yre [?] youngest bee ym att on daye & let
it run and drie and then anoint the youre
parte againe take a peele of leather singler [?] to like
to the tope side as if itt were the leather Alwayes
The or when yow anoint the parte: lett nothinge
touche it butt the leather beinge sett on faire and
make the plaister by ye first of ye ey hale
and bee warmed

[Right Page]

A good medisen for the stone

Take two handfull of saxifrage leaves white parsneppe
rootes a handfull or a handfull of buglosse a good handefull of
pellitorie of the wall a handfull of gromell seede
in a bagg: boyle all in a pottle of white wine and a
quarte of runninge water till halfe bee consumed of these
drinke a good draughte in the morninge first and last

for a spraine or yt smarte of sprte [?]

An oynement for the saddle, one gall of a deare of Cardes and putt
outt [?] A

A recipe for one that is troubled with the Sciatica

Take of oaken of ffrye leaves put them in halfe a pecke when as
a bushell of white ashes millen upon the barke layeth [?]
putt in as muche water as will stand over all the barke
pounde ytt untill halfe bee more or les then to it knowe them [?]
a thought a third parte of beare pepper a hogg of [?] the spice of three
ounces of oyle of peter [?] then boyle all together in
a pott or a kettle the pouder first frye of this orde
in ye fatt in ytt whiche would thinges together in a morter a sayne youre
oyle to fill it or fill it rather for your olde longe grownde olde take
you mus [?]

a very good receipte for one ague examined by mr Borley

Take a very good handfull of violettes with a pound of currence or
two And halfe a pound of their stones that pure [?]
and boyle them in a quarte of water to the halfe lett them
drinke it faste a twiste or a turtle or nott halfe more then
must itt and use youre body walkinge pleasure to them [?] rose
