28

for the Tooth Ache.

xlij.

Take a Spoonfull of English Hony, a Spoonfull of

Ginger and Pepper beaten small, a Spoonfull of Rose

water, a Spoonfull of Aquâvitæ a Spoonfull of Red or

white vinegar & ij Sage leaves Shred Small and as

much as a Nut of Roch Allome, and so boyle them on

a Chafing dish of Coales vntill they come to a Treacle

then make a Cloath like a Peascod, and lay it beetween

your Cheek and your Gumme.

For the yellow Jaundice

xliij.

Take Stale Ale half a pint, Dasy Roots a handfull

wash, & Stamp 'em together, then Take Angletouches A

handfull & Strip the earth out of them, then Strain

them, and put to it the Inner part or Rinde of a

Barbary tree, and drink them next your Heart at

Morning and Evening.

For the Dropsy in the Womb, or in the

feet, or for the Imposthume in the Stomach or

Gout in the Stomach, or for any evill.

xliiij

Take Scamony iiijd weight, Of Rubarb xijd weight, of

Spicknard iijd weight, flower of Cammomill jd weight, of

white Shuggar Candy one ounce, put them all together in

a Mortar and beat them into fine powder. Vse this 3 dayes

following fasting a Spoonfull at a time.

{page break}

29

A Drink to the same which is made after

this Sort following.

xlv.

Take Hyssop, Rosemary, Violletts, Varvain, Bittany, John

Moseares, Plantine, Avemes, Sage, Featherfew, of each

one handfull, wash them Clean and Stamp yet a little and

do it in a new Eearthen pott, and put thereto a Gallon of

White Wine, and let it Stand all night, and in the Morning

boyl it to a pottle, then Strayn it through a Strayner, and

drink thereof in a morning Cold, and in the Ev'ning hott.

You may use this 8 or 9 dayes following, and but a little

of the powder before he doth Drink it.

A water to Dissolve the Swelling in the Bowells

or Superfluity of Fatt.

xlvi.

Take two Gallons of Running water, Set it on the fire, put

into it 2 pounds of Red Fennell and 2 ounces of Angelikoe, and

a quantity of Comynne, boyl these from 2 gallons to one or less

of water, and this every day fasting in the Space of xx

dayes. the greatness of the Superfluities of Humors, and

also of the Grosness will wast.

For Biteing of a Mad Dogg.

xlvij

Take a little portion of the hearbs following, Scabies Matfolm

Night-shade with the blewflower Wild Sage, Lilly root and Leafe

Stamp & Strain them, or if you have them Distill'd, take the water of them

put it to alitle Treacle, with such Liquor as is meet to be ministerd

whether ^it be man or Beast that must drink it, and that must be given

within ix dayes after it, fortune.