50

Directions to make the aforsaid Pills

First, Beat the Ambergreece, then beat the Pearle into

fine powder, mix them on a clean sheet of paper, beat

the Tartar Vitorall into fine powder, as alsoe the

Aloes & Gum-guaicum very carefully, & then mix the

Said Tartar Vitorall, the Aloes and Gumguaicum

vpon an other clean Sheet of paper; then with a clean

Mortar and pestill beat the Amoniacum till it begin

to Stick to the pestill, then with a course cloath make

your pestill clean, and heat the said pestill a little hotter

than you can well endure your hand on it, then put a 

Quantity of 12 drops of white wine vinegar to the Amoni=

acum, then take your pestill it being not over hott,

make it clean with a cloath, then dissolve your

Amoniacum and vinegar very well, when you have soe

done put in some of the powders, Mix it well together

and when it begins to be Stiff put in some Balsome

then more powder, beat & mix them well, then put in

more Balsome, then more powder, doing as abovesaid

stirring be sure well from the bottome with a Spatula or

knife, and after all the powder is in beat it for a quarter

of an houre, then take it out & temper it between your

hands mixing the Pearle and Ambergreece in it; then

keep it for your vse in a Gally pott, & when you have

occasion to vse them, make them vp in the bigness of ordi=

nary Pills, take five or Seaven every night when you

goe to bedd Soe continue till you be well, and at any

time when you find your Selfe ill take them againe.

{page break}

51

Sir Thomas Weatherly's drink for the Scurvey.

xcvij

Take 4 pints of Rhenish wine, infuse in that, Bryony

roots Slic'd thinn two oz. Elicampane roots one oz., Orris

root halfe an oz., the outward pills of an Orange, and

a Lemon, and two Nutmeggs Slic'd, after 12 houres

infusion Strayne them, and put the Strained liquor, the

Iuices of Garden Scurvigrass, Brooklime, Water Cresses,

and Oranges, of each 4 oz. and as much Shugger as

will make it gratefull,

Take of this a quarter of a pint first every morning

and at 5 or 6 in the Afternoone.

To make Gumms grow

xcviij

Take a Quarter of an oz. of Myrrhe as much Bolal=

manak and halfe as much Salt of Prunella, make

all these into a powder & sift it very fine, then make

it into a past (not very stiff) with hony, soe spread

it vpon fine raggs the breadth of your finger, soe

lay it to your Gumms every morning & after Supper, and

let it lye an houre or two, when you take it of wash your

mouth wine, or if you can with your owne water.

A Receipt to Strenghtthen the Sight.

xcix

Take Lignum, Aloes, Storax, Sassafras barke, Amber, of each a dramm

cut Betany halfe an oz., Rosmary flowers or Rosmary itselfe a quarter

of an oz., & as much Tobacco mixt with as you put of Rosmary.

It is to be taken in a Pipe like Tobacco.