42

For the Scurvy & Dropsy.

lxxij.

Take Six pound of the leavs of Sea & Garden Scurvy Grass

a pound & a halfe of Brooklime, as much of water-Cresses;

Stamp & Straine the Iuice out, put to it 4 pound of the roots

of Briany, Horse radish 2 pound, Wintrne halfe a pound, twelve

Lemons Slic'd thinn meat & Rhine 4 oz. of Nutmeggs grossly

bruis'd let all these Stand infusing 3 days in Eight

pints of Rhenish wine, then distill it.

Take 3 Spoonfulls of it ev'ry morning & Ev'ning:

you must abstaine from all Salt meats, Swines flesh,

Butter and wine. It is very good to wash your Eyes.

A most Excellent receipt to keep the Face

from Pitting with the Small Pox.

lxxxiij

Take a pound of Butter out of the Churne unsalted

a pound of Shuggar double refin'd beaten & Searced

put these two together upon a Slow fire to melt, 

then beat it till it is thick, and keep your Face

annointing with it, that it may not be dry,

this is not to be vs'd ^till the Pox begin to crush.

Judge Ellis's receipt for the Stone

lxxxiv.

Take Saxifrage, Parsly, Thyme, Winter Savory 

Iermander, Cammomile, wormwood, Penny royall,

Hyssop, Lavender, Fennell, of ev'ry one of these a

two good handfulls, chop them Small, and infuse

{page break}

43

Them 24 hours in 3 gallons of Small Ale, Slice

2 oz 3 Nutmeggs, & put to it Venice Turpentine

well wash'd in Red Rose water to the quantity of

a Walnut, and as much live hony, put all these into

a Limbeck or Still & distill them, keep a quart of the

first running by it Selfe, & a pottle of the Second,

and a pottle of the third, as as occasion serv's drink

the water, one Spoondull of the first, 2 of the Second

and 2 of the third, with 4 Spoonfulls of White wine and

nutmegg & Shuggar, 3 days before the full, and

three days before the Change of the Moone: it is

only to be made in the Moneth of May.

For the Ricketts

lxxxv.

Take three quarts of the Strongest Ale out of the Fatt,

put to it one oz of powder of Annise Seed, one oz of

powder of Lickoris, half a pound of Figgs Slic'd, half a pound

of Raysins of the Sunn Ston'd, a quarter of a pound of the

best blue Currans, one handfull of knottgrass, a handfull

of Cumfry, a handfull of parsley roots washed & Scraped

and Slic'd verry thin, boyle all these together till halfe

be consumed away, then Strayne it all out, and put to

it one Spoonfull of live hony, & halfe a pint of Muscadine

then Sett it over the fire again, & let it continue till it begins to

Symper, then put it into an Earthen pan, & when it is

cold bottle it, you must give the child 2 Spoonfulls in the morning

fasting, 2 after dinner when it goes to Sleep, & 2 at night going to

bed. this is to be continued till the quantity be all taken,