40

A Receipt for the Convulsion fitts

lxxvij

Take a quart of white wine, put into it a good handfull

of Cowslip's leaves, boyle away a third parte, then take it

of the fire and let it Stand till the next day, then

Strayne it, and Soe drink it till all be done.

To Stay the bleeding of the Nose

lxxviij

Take a Raisin of the Sunn, Slitt it, and turn the inside

outward, then put it up the Nostrill that bleeds and

if the blood fall down the Throat, take Some Raisins

of the Sunn, Chew them, and soe hold them in your

mouth

An Excellent drink for to Cure a Fistula.

the Lady Mildmay's way.

lxxix

Take Sanicle, wood Bittany, wild Daseys leaves and 

root, red bramble leaves, Dandalyon with the redd ribbs

or Stalks in the leaves, Avenes Bugle, white Bodell or 

Ox Eye, Egrimony, Mother-worth, field Charvill, of each

a good handfull. Mugworth, Ribbworth and wormwood

of each a few Sprigs: wash all clean, & Shake out the

water through a linnen cloath, then boyle'em together, in

a quart of good white wine, over a Soft fire, for the Space

of a quarter of an howr & over, then put it 2 or 3 Spoon=

fulls of English hony, and let it Seeth or Simper awhile

after, well Stirr'd about with a Spoone in the Seething

then Strayne it hott through a Clean Cloath into Some

{page break}

41

Earthen vessell wringing the cloath well, and when it is

cool put it into glass bottells, Let the patient drink thereof

Morning and Evening lukewarm 3 Spoonfulls at a time or

thereabout, as his Stomache Serv's him. for Speedy cure you

may tent the wound or Sore, and lay thereon a Colworth

leafe. If the Patient be a woman with Child leave out

the Mugworth.

For an vlcer in the kidneys

lxxx.

Take yellow Dock-roots one oz. Slice it verry thin and

with a Nutmegg Slic'd boyl it in 3 pints of Ale, till

halfe be consumed, Skim it well, and drink it three

Mornings fasting, continue this 15 or 20 days together.

A drink to Strength the Liver and

keep one from the Dropsy.

lxxxi

Take Yellow and Redd Dock roots, white & yellow Sanders

and of the wood Goracum of each one oz. Agrimony

4 handfulls, of all these make a gross powder, put it in

a bolting bagg with a Stone to keep it down and Tunn up

4 Gallons of new Ale vpon it, let it Stand  Six or Seaven

days, and then drink it for your ord'nary drink and no

other, 6 or 7 days before one be Spent make another

proportion, till you be throughly well.