46

instead of Angellia water, put in a quart of French

Aqua vitæ and a quart of the juice of Angellica

and one oz: apeice of the Spices.

To make a Cake

xc.

Take a Gallon of flower, 6 pounds of Currans 3 pounds of Butter

halfe a pound of white Shugger, a pint of Ale yest

or barm, 20 Eggs verry well beaten tenn of the

whites left out halfe an oz. of Cloves, as much Mace,

two Nutmeggs, half a pint of Sack, a little Damask=

Rose water, a pint of Cream warm enough to melt

the butter, You may add what Sweet meats you

please. Bake it in a quick oven

A most Excellent water for the Stone

xci.

Take Six handfulls of Small Raddishes 6 handfulls of

Mother thyme, 4 handfulls of Pelletorie of the wall;

4 handfulls of Saxifrig hearb, one handfull of Phillipendula

3 oz. of Sarsafrie wood; Cut all these grossly together

and put them into a Gallon of new milk either of a Redd

or a Coal black Cow, & So let them Steep 24 houres

cover'd, the distill them in a Common Still; It will 

yeild 3 quarts of water, It must be Still'd in Maij. when

the water is Still'd Stopp it close, and Set it in the Sunn

for a Moneth.

{page break}

47

You must take it thus

When you are to take this water you must over night

take a porringer of fair ^spring water & put into it a quarter

of an oz. of the wood called Lignum nefretitum Sliced

very Small and Thin and Lett it Steep in the water 24

12 houres, then draine from the wood: & put to the

water 3 Spoonfulls of white or Rhenish wine; And

4 Spoonfulls of this distill'd water, with the Iuice

of a Lemon & Some 2 Spoonfulls of Loaf Shuggar.

Then take half a Nutmegg Slic'd very thin, put it into

a Spoon with a little of the water, Swallow it and

wash it down with the rest of the water; Take it fasting

and fast 2 houres after it; This is to be taken at the

new of the Moon three mornings together, but if

you feel no great pain, then one morning in a

Moneth will be enough; but you must use it Constantly

I do assure you those that have used this water never

had any great fitt after the taking of it.

The Duke of Monmouth's Receipt for the Stone

xcij

Take a Gallon of Haws ripe, Stamp them very well Stones

all, put them into a pott with 3 quarts of white wine to

cover them, put into them four Fennill roots, and the 

leafs, take out the pith of all the roots, and put into

them an ounce of Fennell Seeds and almost an oz. of Annis

seeds, bruise the Seeds and Steep them together a day and