38

A water for the Stomach, Poyson,

Smallpox, or any Surfeit.

lxxiij

Take of Sallendine, Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Mugworth,

Wormwood, Pimpenneld, Dragon, Scabies, Egrimony, Balmes

Centurie, Cardus, Bittony, Rosa-Solis, of each a good handfull

Angelica roots, white henband roots, Turmenvild, Hedow

Eccovith, of each half an ounce, Shave the roots and wash

them, the hearbs Shave, and Squeese the water out of them

in a Clooth, then Shred and Steep them 2 days & nights

in as much white wine as will cover them as will cover

them well, & let the vessel be close cover'd, take it out and

drink it, keep it close in a glass or bottle, and when you

vse it, give it lukewarm to the party with a little Shugger

infus'd, to a Child 2 or 3 Spoonfulls is Sufficient, and to

a Strong body 4,5, or 6 Spoonfulls it is an exprimented

Cordiall. You may use ^to this a little Methridate in it

these Simples are to be gather'd in May, and then

distill'd in the beginning of June.

Lucatellus Balsome

lxxiv

Take halfe a pound of yellow wax, Cut it in thin Slices

put it in a dish with a quart of Sack, and Set it on a Chafing

dish of coales, & when it is melted, put in a pound of Venice

Turpentine very well wash'd, in Redrose water, till it be white,

then take 3 pints of the best Sallet oyle, & put the Turpentine

and oyle into the wax and Sack, let them boyle gently

together almost an hour, then take it off the fire and

{page break}

39

put to it ij oz. of the purest colour'd redd Sanders, Sifted

through a Tiffany & keep it Stirring till it be almost cold.

Soe pot it vp.

The vertue of this Balsome.

lxxv.

It cures any green wound, melted in a Sawcer & dropt

on the wound, & a linnen cloath dip'd in it and laid upon

the part affected ev'ry day. It cures any Scald, or burne,

anointing the part if the Skin be broken, warm it and

lay a dipp'd linen cloath on it. the like for a Scalded head

it is verry good for the head Ache rubbing the Temples

with it & the nape of the neck being warm'd, In like

manner for the Gout, & Plurisie after leting blood eating

the quantity of a Nut rolled up in Shugger and after=

wards annoynting the left side there with.

Dr. Right's receipt for the Scurvie

lxxvi.

Take a pound of Sea Scurvie-grass after it is pick'd & dryed

near a fire, half a pound of Raisins of the Sunn Ston'd, one hand=

full of Roman wormwood, one handfull of dry'd Orange

peeles, one handfull of wheat brann, 2 oz. of Shavings of

Ivory, of Gallingall roots prepar'd, Coriander Seeds, of

Caroway Seeds, of Nutmegg, of each 2 dramms mix all these

into one lump in a Stone Morter, and put ^it into a bolting bagg

with 3 or 4 gadds of new Steel to hang it in a vessell of

four Gallons of Ale of a middle Strenght, after 5 or 6 days

begin to drink it, and noe other Beer or Ale.