48

A Night, and if three Quarts of white wine will not

Cover them put in more, and soe put it in your Still

past it vp and you may draw out two quarts Mingle

it together, take Six Spoonfulls of this water and Six of

White wine and one Spoonfull of Syrrup of Elder and 

drink it three days before the new Moone and three days

after, and Soe at the Full, or when it trobles you.

Sir Thomas Weatherlys Dyett drink for the Gout.

xciij

Take five oz. of the best Sarsaparilla Slic'd thinn, of

flinty China well bruis'd 3 oz. the Shavings of Sassa=

fras an oz. of Hartshorn, and Ivory of each Six dramms

infuse these twelve hours warm in Ten pints of 

water, then boyle them close cover'd, with a very 

gentle fire vntill four pints be boyl'd away, puting

to them toward the end Sage, Germander, and Ground

Pine, of each a large handfull, whole Raysins foure

oz. Red Sanders & Coriander Seeds of each Six drams,

take it from the fire and Straine it and let the Liquor

Stand to Settle, powr the clear from the bottome and to

every pint add an oz. of the Syrrup of Balsome of Tola.

Sir Thomas Weatherly's Ale for the Gout.

xciv.

Take Six or Seaven Gallons of Wort made of a Bushell 

of Malt put to them an handfull of Hopps, boyle these

halfe an houre then infuse in them the the Shavings of

Sassafras and Guaiacum of each two ozs. Liquorice

Slic'd thinn an oz. Raysins Ston'd two ozs. Grond Ivy

{page break}

49

Ground Pine, Sage, and Germander of each two large

handfulls boyle these with a very gentle fire close cover'd

vp, vntill a Gallon wast, when it is cold Strain it, and

work it vp with yest, and keep it in a ^fitt vessell, having in 

the vessell in a bag a pound of Antimony in powder

after 4 or 5 days you may draw it into Bottles and

drink it for your common drink.

Mrs. Davis's Cordiall water

xcv.

Take two Bottles of Sack & two bottles of Brandy , 4 pounds

of red Cheryes the Stones crackt, a handfull of Rosemary

flowers, halfe a handfull of Marygold flowers, a handfull

of Archangell flowers, a handfull of the tender tops of

Balm, a handfull of the tender tops of Spear Mint, Six

penny weight of Saffron, Clovegilliflowers 500 clipt, one

oz. of Cinamint one of the Nutmegs, Cloves & Mace of each

halfe an oz. put all these together all night and then

Still them off, let it drop vpon white Shugger or Shugger

Candy.

A Most Excellent Pill for the Stone or ^an vlcer in the 

kidneys or Bladder, or bloudy water. Approved by

Able Physicians. xcvi.

Gum Gua ℥ss that which is greenest & transparent is ^best

Amoniacum ℥ij the whitest & clearest

Aloes Succotrini ℥vi the reddest & most transparent

Tartor vitorall ℥iij the whitest & Tartest.

Prepared Pearle ℈ij

Amber Greece gr: 12

Balsom of Peru ʒss

directions