34

And let the Herbs abide Still in it, and so wash the

soreness and it shall ease it, probatum est.

To make Teeth white.

lxij

Take the Root of Walnut Tree, & Seeth it in white wine

then take part of it and Chew it between your Teeth to

dissolve the hardness thereof & So rubb your Teeth, and it

will make them white and this is good for the Eye Sight

also

for a woman travelling with Child to make

her soon be deliver'd.

lxiij

Take Bittonye and date Stones in powder and drink

it, and she shall be delivered anon.

A Restoritie for a Ring

lxiv

Take Rosa Solis and Steep them all night in white wine

and Still them, if a man be weak let him drink the

water alone if he be metlye let him drink it with

vinegar, this will make a whole man a lepor.

For Shortness of Breath. lxv.

Take Hartstongue, Liverworth, Bittanye, Vervaine,

Sentorye, Mugworth, Pellipodine, Sallandine of ev'ry

one of those an oz. then take Rue, Fennell, Dandalyon,

Fetherfew, and Wormwood, of each of these half an oz.

then take 4 Nutmeggs, Saffrones, Graynes & Treacle of 

every one of these parcells one half peny worth. Licoris, Annise

& Siny of every one of these parcells one peny worth, & 2d worth

of Shuggar Candy, boyle all those in white wine, and so 

straine and drink it

{page break}

35

Another for the same, and for the Ague Cure.

lxvi

Take Bean water, or else a quantity 2 or 3 Spoonfulls

and so much of running water, and drink Morning &

evening, and if thy Leggs do fortune to break or Swell

then take Smith's water & a good Quantity of Shugger

and boyle them well together, and so wash thy Leggs

therewith warm

For the Head Ache.

lxvij

Take Bean flower, & powder of Cumyne of each like

Quantity and Seeth it in Strong white vinegar till it be

thick, then lay it in a Linnen bagg to Noddack of thy

neck hehind, as hot as you may Suffer it.

A Coppy to make the Soveraign'st water that ever was

devis'd by man, which Dr. Stephens a Phisician of

great Cunning ^& of Long experience did use and therewith

did many great Cures, and all was kept in secrett

vntill a little before his death, then the Archbishopp

of Canturbury gat it from him as followeth

lxviij

Take a gallon of Gascoyn wine, then take Ginger, Gall=

ingall, Camell & Cinamint Tollianders, Nutmegs, Cloves

Annise seed, of every of them one dramme, then take sage

Mints Red Roses, Thyme of the Moore Pillotory of the wall

Rosemary wild Margerum or gamon as well called penny=

royall, Pennemountain, wild thyme, Camall, Lavender and

Avants, of every of them a handfull, then break & beat the

Spices Small & break the herbs, put all in the wine, let it

stand still & ij houres, Stirring it Sometimes, then Still it in

a Limbeck, & keep the first water by it selfe for it is best.