24

To take away red rubies that grows in the

face by reason of the heat of the Liver

XXXIII

Take hoggs Sewit well purifyed & brimstone as much

of the one as of the other with the water distilled of a

peach tree & fferne & incorporate all together with a

slow fire make thereof an oyntment in the meane time

abstaine from wine & all hott things.

for him that hath naturaly A red face.

XXXIV

Take 4 ounces of kernells of Peaches 2 ounces Gourd

Seed and make thereof an Oyle wherewith you may

annoynt his face Morning & Evening, and this will

destroy the redness.

A thing found true by Experience.

To dissolve knotts in the Neck.

XXXV

Take clarify'd Wax iij ounces, Clear Turpentine one 

ounce, Rosin 2 ounces, Pitch one ounce, Mirtharmoniake

Mastick, Olibanan, 2 penny worth of each, Galbanum

Fennegreeke, and Cummin, in powder of each one peny

worth dissolve the Gums in Wine Vinegar all night

then put them to your other things and melt them

{page break}

25

with a gentle fire stirring them often, then strain them

and in the Cooling put in the Turpentine, and work it

into rowls, & when you vse it Spread it on Sheep's 

Leather, Apply it to the place and every Morning

wipe it and lay it on again.

A Medicine for the Plague

XXXVI.

Take a handfull of Sage a handfull of herb of grace 

a handfull of Elder Leaves, a handfull of red bramble's leavs

and Stamp them together, Strayne them in a Clooath with a

Quart of White Wine, take a quantity of Ginger and Mingle

them together, drink thereof Ev'ning and Morning a full

Spoonfull, every day ix dayes together, after the first Spoon=

full they Shall be Safe for xxiiij dayes and after the ixth

they Shall be Safe for the whole year. by the Grace of

God.

And if it fortune, one to be Stricken with the Plague, or he 

have drunken of the medicine afforesaid, then take water

of Scabyon a Spoonfull, and so much water of Brittayne a

quantity of fine Treacle, put all together and it will put 

out the venome; And if it fortune the Boyle to appear

then take Bramble's leaves & Elder leaves, & Mustard Seeds Stamp

them all together, then take of it and make thereof a plaister

& lay it to the Sore, it will draw out the venome, and the

Patient shall be whole by the Grace of God.