44

Every night all the Joynts, breat and Ribbs of the Child

must be annoynted with old Sack, and layd in a blankett

extroardinary, and be kept very warme.

For the _

lxxxvi.

Take Jallap finely powder'd one dramm, Cinamon finely

powder'd halfe a Scruple, mix them & take them in a 

draught of Chicken broth, so having gently purged

take as followeth.

A pint of Plantin water, or water distill'd out of Oak

leaves, or a decoction made of Oak budds while tender,

blanch a Score of Almonds and pound them well as to

make milk, put it over the fire and give it a Scald

together, then take it of & put one dramm of powder'd

Mastick, and three drams of Shugger of red roses, Let 

the Liquor be neer cold. then take five Spoonfuls or more

every morning first, and last at night twelve or 14 

dayes together.

To make Hayre grow.

lxxxvij.

Take an Egge, rost it in the embers till it be hard

then take the Yolk, and halfe Soe much fresh butter, 

and as much Pepper as will lye on a knifes point, Add

as much hony as will make it into an oyntment, 

and Soe annoynt the head with it

{page break}

45

An Excellent Cordiall water for 

Dizziness & Swimming in the head.

lxxxviij.

Take four pownd of black Cherries, bruise the Stones of

them, then put them to th the cherries into a Glass bottle, and 

into them a good handfull of Balm & a handfull of Rose=

mary tops, Cinamon, Nutmegs of each halfe an, then pour

vpon them all two quarts of Sack Stop it Close and

let it digest 24 hours, then distill it of, in Balneo,

distill so much of it, that it be weak, like ^weak aqua Mirabilis

Sweeten it with white Shugger-Candy to your tast, and 

drink a little wine glass full of it in the morning

fasting and at night goeing to bedd.

Aqua Mirabilis. Sir Kellam Digby's way

lxxxix.

Take Cubbells, Gallingall, Cardimon seeds, Mellilott flowers,

Cinamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, of each two dramms

the Iuice of Sallendine a pint, of the juice of Spearmint

and Balm of each a pint, one pound of Shugger, the 

flowers of Cowslips, Rosemary, Bourrage, Buglass

Marygolds and Clovegilly flowers, of each two oz. three

pints of the best Sack, and one pint of the Strongest

Angellica water, bruise your Spices & Steep them all together

with halfe a pint of red rose water, one night in the 

Sack, Still it in an ordinary Still or glass, & lay Hartstongue

leafes in the bottome of the Still, and to this the weight 

of 12d in Saffron, make four times the proportion