32

A water for the Liver & burning Feaver

liv

Take Hartstongue, Liverworth, Maydenhear, distill them

together, and vse to drink of this water which will purge and

purifye the Liver, and quench the burning of an Ague

or Feaver.

To make hard Lyggs soft and small, if it be 

never so hard.

lv

Take Milldust, Barely flowre, Wheat flowre and 

Seeth them in Milk, put thereto Sheep's Tallow, Hony, Barrow's

grease, and boyle them very thick and lay it

thereto.

An Oyntment for the Morphew, be it white or Black.

lvi.

Take a pound of good Verdigreese, & one ounce of 

white Brimstone, make them into small powder, then

take out the brains of two Sheep's heads, put the heads into

a pott, Seeth them without Salt then take the grease

thereof and put into the powder ^thereto and temper them together

and it will be a good Oyntment for the purpose

To expell Poyson out of a Man.

lvij

Take the black Claws of a Crawfish, & beat them

to powder, then drink them and it Shall help

you that are poyson'd without doubt.

{page break}

33

A Salve to draw a heale

lviij

Take a quarter of virgin wax, two ounces of Sheep's 

suet, melted them together a little, then take them from

the fire, and thereto an ounce of Frankinsence and Stirr 

it well together.

For the Tooth Ache.

lix

Take xx Ivye leaves, a little long pepper, boyle them with

a handfull of Salt in Old wine, then put the Liquor, when

it is well boyl'd, into your mouth, on that side that is 

vex'd with Ache, and you you shall prove that the Ache

is destroy'd. probat. est.

A water to keep the Teeth from Stinking & also white

lx.

Take long Pepper, Purslowe, Astrologine, Rotundum

Salgeme, Seeth them in Wine, and vse to wash your

Teeth with this water, for it will keep them white and 

Clean.

A Speciall Medicine for the Tetter or Canker.

lxi

Take a Quart of the Strongest Ale you can gett, put there=

to a handfull of Sage, and a handfull of Herb of grace, a handfull

of Rosemary, a handfull of Columbine leaves, seeth them togehter

till the one half of the Liquor be consumed; then put there=

to a Spoonfull of English hony, and as much Allome as 

a Walnut, then let it seeth together, and let it be cover'd