52

Water for the Teeth

c.

Take Rosewater halfe a pint, Cynamon, Cloves,

burnt Allome, of each two dramms, put all into a violl

of a quart, fill the violl full of comon water, and boyle

it together vpon the hott ashes till the third part be

consumed, then keep it for your vse.

Barley Cream.

ci.

Take a handfull of French Barley, boyle it in 3 or 4

waters, till it be pretty tender, then sett a quart of Cream

vpon the fire with some Mace & Nutmegg and when it

begins to boyle put in your Barley and boyle it till it

begins to thicken, and Season it with Shugger and Salt

to your tast & soe serve it vp when it is almost Cold

you may add to your Creame a quarter of a pound

of Almonds blanched & finely beaten.

To make Angelletts

cij.

Take three quarts of new milk and one quart of

Cream or soe much Strokings and noe Cream, put a little

Runnett to it, when it is come enough take the Curds

up Softly with a Ladle, and fill the Fatt therewith, and

as it Sinks Still fill it vp againe but break the Curd

as

{page break}

53

Little as you can, when it is full enough let it Stand

till next morning, then vnty the Fatt and Salt it on

both sides, then tye the Tatt vp againe; soe let it stand

3 or 4 dayes turning it every day, and wash the

Fatt and lay it vp againe. then take it out & set it on

a Trencher turning it evevery day till dry

To make Cream Cheese

ciij.

Take 4 quarts of new milk and two Quarts of 

Cream put the Cream into a Skillet and boyle it vp, & take

it of the fire, then let it stand a little, & put it into

your milk & put in the Runnett, let it Stand till it be Come,

then with a skiming dish take vp the Curds whole

without breaking, soe put it into the cloath and turn

it often the first day in a wett Cloath strewing a little

salt on it, the next day turn it into dry cloaths and

within two dayes you may put it into Rushes or

Grass, nettles or Ash Leafes.

For the Sight

civ.

Take of Rue & Sage of each a good hand^full and about 400

Hogg Lice puting them when bruised into a bagg with

your hearbs into a vessell of Ale of about four Gallons.

after it hath done working not before then, drink this

after it hath been Stop'd up 24 houres close, vse it as

your ordinary drink.