30

A water to wash the breasts, if they be

healed or not

xlviij

Take a handfull of Rhue, as much of Sage

two Spoonfulls of Hony, a little Roch Allomme lik

a Walnut, Seeth all these in a quantity of White 

wine, vntill they be half consum'd, then straine it

and keep it in a Glass, wash the holes with it ....

and dress them with Salve following.

A Salve for any Sore.

xlix

Take five ounces of fine wax iij ounces of Rosin a Spoon=

full of hony iij Spoonfulls of Neats Oyle, boyle all these

together, well Stir'd, keep it. It is good for any Sore.

For Bloodshott Eyes

l.

Take Plantin water, Rose water and the white of

an Egg, Mix them all together, and wash your Eyes

therewith, or else lay it upon your Eyes and it help

with God's Assistance.

A wonder^full Plaister for a Sore Breast.

li

Take leaves of Mallow's & Wormwood of each a handfull

Seeth them in Water vntil they be as tender as Butter

of an Apple, then lay them on a board, and let the water 

run from them Clean, then Cut them Small, with a

{page break}

31

knife, for they will not grind for fat, then Stamp them

with a pound of old Swines grease; and temper 

them together till you know not the one from the

other, this plaister is most pretious for sore Paps, the

rott of all others, it Matureth and Mitigateth ^not only the

payn in the Paps, but also, in hard Botches or Boyles

vnder the Throat or Arm holes, or any other place in

the body where it lyeth hard in the flesh. This must be

laid to luke warm in a double Linen Cloath changed twice

in a day; Looke Substantially on this Plaister for it hath 

no pore in such things.

For the Bynding in the Body

lij.

Take a handfull of Parsley, boyle it in fair water, and

lay it as warm as you can endure it to your Navill

and this to be us'd 3 nights together bound round

about you with a fair Cloath, then the 4th night take a

Slice of Raw beefe and lay it to your navill with a fine

Linen Cloath between one night and no more and that

shall make you moderate in your Body.

For the black Jaundice

liij

Take a pint of Malmsey, put thereto the Juice of ix branches 

of Sallendine, and a Sheep's turd strayn'd into it when it is new 

dung'd, long Pepper, English Saffron & Turmerick, put these

together & give it to the partye fasting.  probatum est