The Library of the
Wellcome Institute for
the History of Medicine
Western Manuscript
7113
Accession Number
349856

These ffor Mrs ffanshaw







K. ffanshawe
Given mee by my Mother
March th 23. 1678.





Mrs. Fanshawes
Booke of Receipts of Physickes
Salves, Waters, Cordialls, Preserves and
Cookery written the eleventh day
of December 1651. by Me,

Joseph Auerie





Physicks 1 4

To make a Suppository effectually to worke

The Lady Butlers.
Ann ffanshawe

Take two spoonfulls of honey, boyle it in a brazen Ladle
till the honey begin to wax stiffe as when you drop some of it
on a Trencher it will be hard, as it will rowle somewhat stiffly
then putt to it a pretty quantity of white Salt, a quantity of
Comyn Seeds, and also some powder of Aloes, and the powder
of dried Rew, mingle them together, and let them boyle a little,
after you have putt these into the honey, then make your Sup-
positorie, and so use it.

A Oile for e Bruise the Greene Sicknes
Mrs. Ailiffes.
A: ffanshawe

Take of the dust of the purest Spanish Steele a Spoonfull up
heapt, a Nutmeg made into fine Powder, as much weight of
Annyseeds in powder finely searsed & half so much Liquorish,
and a Quarter of a pound & two ounces of Sugar finely beaten
and searst, take as much as will lye upon a shilling in a morning
fasting in Warme Beer or warme Sacke in three Spoonfulls of
either. You must not eate in 2 houres after, but rub or saw, or
Swing, or walke very fast. For diett refrane all Milke Meats
whatsoever, and use Broths with opening herbes espetially
Penny Royall, Veale and Mutton chiefly.

For Melancholy and heavenes of
Spiretts
My Mother
A ffanshawe

Take Siena of Alexandria 4 ounces, of Salsaperilla 3 Ounces,
of Raisins of the Sunne the Sunne the Stones being taken out
one pound of Epithamum, of double Camomill Flowers, Stecadas, of
Hermodatulus of each 1/2 an ounce, of Liquorice 2 Ounces and 2 drammes,
of Annyseeds 2 ounces. Lett the Salsaperilla, Liquorice & Annyseeds
and





2

each of them be putt by themselues. Then take Sixe Quarts
of white Wine, and putt these together except the Liquorice, An-
nyseeds and Camomill Flowers into the Wine, & stop the Vessell
and let them steepe one night, then take a great Kettle &
fill with Water, and into that Water putt the Vessell wherein the
Simples are and being stopt very close when the Water boyleth,
Let it boyle so one houre and a halfe then putt in your other
Things before reserud ad so lett it boyle one houre and a halfe
more, then take it of, and straine it thorough an indifferent
fine Cloth, and putt that Liquor by it Selfe, then putt to e Sub
stance remaining in the strainer Sixe Quarts of small Alee,
& lett it be stopt and boile 3 houres, then take it of & straine
it. The first drinke must be used 3 or 4 times a day, & 4 or 5
Spoonfulls at a time, the Second drink must be used at all times
when the Patient is thirsty without drinking any other drinke
while it lasteth.

A Drinke for a Bruise
My Mother +
A ffanshawe

Take Selfe heale, Fennell, Yarrow, and Comfrey rootes, cleane
scrapt, still these together, then take a pinte of Clarett Wine
and burne it and sweeten it with powdered Sugar, and take then
putt in halfe a pint of the Water, 2 penny worth of Sperma Ceti
warme these together, Let the Party bruised drinke a good draught
and sweat after it, If the bruise be in the head leave out the Fenille.

For a Consumption
My Mother
A ffanshawe

Take Betony, Coltsfoote, Comfrey, Burnett, Red Rose leaues,
Cowslip Flowers of each one handfull, and boyle them in a pottle
of Water to a Quart in a Pipkin, straine them, & putt in a pound
of double refined Sugar, and let it dissolve in the Water, & drinke
5 Spoonfulls with 2 Spoonfulls of the best Canary Wine, warme,
in a morning fasting.
To make

5
3

To make an Excellent opening and purging
Drinke for the Liver
My Mother X
A ffanshawe

Take Sassaperilla, sliced and bruised, Polypodie of the Oake bruised
Scena of Alexandria a little bruised, of each 4 ounces, Yellow Docke
rootes, washed, scraped bruised and the Pith taken forth of them, one
ounce and a halfe, of Rhubarb, halfe an ounce, thinne sliced Nequo-
quium, Egrimony and Maydenhaire, of each one handfull, Anniseeds
Sweet Fennell Seeds & Caraway seeds a little bruised of each one ounce.
Liquorice scraped and bruised one ounce and a halfe, Mixe all these
together, then take Greene Scurvy Grasse leaues cleane pickt a pecke,
Brooke Lime & Water Cress of each halfe a Pecke, beate the  hearbs to
a greene Sauce, & mixe them with the former ingredients, put a piece
of Lead into a Bagge to sinke your bagge into the bottome of the barrell
houlding the mouth out of the Barrell, then putt in Your hearbes & tye
the bagge close, & let it sinke to the bottome and tunne it up in three
Ale Gallons of Beere or Ale in a Stone stand, and for the first day
squeeze the juice out of the Bagge into the drinke 3 or 4 times, letting
the bagge hang in the drinke continually, then let them worke together,
and when it is 3 or 4 dayes old drinke a good draught 2 houres before
dinner & another 2 houres before supper. If you can a pinte Use this
daily as you find it to worke with you more or less. This drinke is
to be taken in the beginning of May, or at the fall of the Leafe. Tis
Excellent for the Liuer, or for any dropsicall humour, or the Scurvy,
or Foulnes of the Blood

A Glister for the Bloody Fluxe
My Mother X
A fanshawe

Take a Quart of new Milke, a pound of sheepes suet, shred it very
small, sett itt upon the Fire, and boyle it till it come to a pinte, then strain
it and so administer it to the Patient twice a day till the Flux be stayed.

An Excellent Medicine for the bleeding of a Veine inwards
My Mother X
Ann Fanshawe

Putt hott boyling water into a Pewter pott, Lett it lye so till the pott be exceeding
hott





hott then poure out the waste, then put in the pott 2 handfulls
of red Mints bruised, and presently after while your pott is so hotte
milke in a pinte of the milke of a Red Cow, and let it stand so
about one half an hower, then adde to it of the Sirrupp of Cinnamon
& of the  Sirrup of Quince each a spoonfull, & a quarter of an Ounce
of Vinegar of Roses, Let him drinke it so warme in the morning, & as
much about 5 or 6 of the Clock in the afternoone.
Lett him wear a dried Toade dried in May in a Sarsenett Bagge
bout a Quarter of a Yeare on his brest till he find himselfe perfectly well.

A Medicine for the Yellow Jaundies
M Mother A. Fanshawe
Take Green Broome, and burne it in a cleane oven as much
as will make a quart of Ashes, and then putt the Ashes into a pottle of white wine, then slice into it 2 Nutmegs and take 3 ... waight
of Saffron, and dry it well, and bruise it very small, & putt it into ye wine.
if it be for a Man or a Woman, lett them drinke 1/2 a pinte of it, if for
a Child, let him drinke a Quarter of a pinte eleven mornings to-
gether, every tyme they drinke of it they must shake it together,
and putt in a little Sugar, drinke it cold and fast 2 hours after it,
and either walke, or use some Exercise this is also good for the Dropsey

To staunch the bleeding of a Veine inwards
My Mother A. Fanshawe
Take a Quarter of a handfull of Fellonwort  and boyle it in a Gill
of whtie wine, and then sweeten it wtih a little white Sugar Candy
& let the patient drinke it bloodwarm when he goeth to bed & if
this doe not cure him with twice taking of it, then putt to it the
third time the bignes of halfe a Nutmegg of bole Armoniack

A drinke to be taken in the Spring to purge the Blood
The Lady Butler  Ann Fanshawe
Take 10 gallons of small Ale well brewed, when it hath done wor-
king putt to ti 3 ounces of Rhubarbe slices, a handfull of wormwood
7 oranges cutt in halfes 3 stuffed with cloves, a Quart of the juice
of Scurveygrasse clarefied 2 pound of Raisins of the Sunne stoned
putt






6
For a Glister for the Collicke
of any other Paine in the Gutts com=
ming of Cold
My Mother
A Fanshawe
Make a pint of Possett drinke with a handfull of Pellitory
of the wall, and as much of Mallowes, Fennellseeds, Anniseeds
and Cummin seeds halfe an ounce of each, boile it to halfe a pint,
then putt in a quarter of a Spoonefull of Salt, a great Spoonefull
of Course Sugar, oile of Violets and oile of Roses of each a spoone=
full, if it be for a Child a Quarter of an ounce of Seeds will
serve. This is an approved good Medicine and cured me in a
desperate feuer.

A Caudell for the Bloody Fluxe
My Mother: A Fanshawe
Take a pint of Red Wine and the Yolkes of five new laid Eggs,
a little Cinnamon, 2 Spoonfuls of Loafe sugar, half a quarter of
an ounce of the peele of Pomegranates dried and beaten to fine
power, boil these in a Platter upon a Chaffendish of Coales,
until it thicken. Let the patient eat it morning and Evening,
and if you will oftner, and it will suddenly cure you.

A Most Excellent Vomitt
My Lady Beadles
Ann Fanshawe
Take of Crocus metellorum made into fine power one ounce,
Let it stand infusing in a quart of the best sack for a day or two
jogging it, or shaking the Glasse twice a day. Then let it stand
24 hours untoucht. When you use it draine out very gently the
Wine; that it may runne pure from the Crocus Powder. To a
stronger Body you may give an ounce and a half, to a weaker
Body one ounce, After every Vomitt let e patient drinke warm
Posset Ale with Butter in it, Let them neither sleep or drink
warme drinke till their vomit hath done working.

An approved Medecine for the Convulsion fitts
Mrs. Newce
Ann Fanshawe
take as much Assafatida as a white Pea is, dissolve it in a

Spoonfull of Posset drink 3 or 4 mornings and let the pati=
ent wear some Assafatida about his Necke too.

A Diet Drink
Mrs. Newce
A Fanshawe
Take a peck of Scuruy grasse, water Cresses half a peck, 2 good
handfuls of Brooke Lime, Liverwort, Longwort, Scabrous, Agri=
mony, Horebound, Hartstongue, Saxafrage, Pimpernell, Tamaris,
Broad Plantaine, Wood Betony, Angelica, Cardias, Wormwood,
Rosemary, Red Sage, Endive, Succory, Borrage, wilde Marjoram of
each a good handful. You must boyle these herbes in wort half an
houre, One ounce of Nutmegs, one ounce of Ginger, one ounce
of liquorice, one ounce of Anniseeds, Red Dockroots 6 ounces, sweet
Fennell seeds half an ounce, bruise your seeds, slice your Nutmegs
and Ginger and Dockrootes. you must put all these Seeds and Spices
in a Bagg and hang the Bag in the drinke. You may drinke of it
6 or 7 dayes. This is an excellent Drinke for any Rheumatick
Body that is inclined to a Dropsie.

An Excellent way to make Suppositors
My Lady Bedles
Ann Fanshawe
Take 2 ounces of Gumm Dragon, steepe it in Damaske Rose wa=
ter a night, putt it into a Morter, then have ready beat of the best
Roch Allum, as much as will make the Gumm into a Past, beat it well in
the Morter, then take it out, rowle it into the fashion of Suppositors,
and when they be dry putt them up in a Boxe & keepe theme for your
use, they will keeep seaven years if you doe not use them

Against the biting of a Mad Dogge taight by Sir Kenelm Digby
Sir K. D.
A. Fanshawe
Crabbs clawes taken in June or the beginning of July, & beat to
power, & therof as much as will lye upon a shilling drunke in 1/2 a
pinte of warme Milke is a most excellent Receipt for any body that
hath bene bitten by a Mad Dog.

A Medicine for the Jaunders t by Experience I haue found most Excellent
My Lady Bedles
Take a





8
Take a good faire Pippin and cutt of the topp of it, then take
out the Coare very cleane, then putt int oit as much Venice Tre=
acle, as a hasell nutt, as much Saffron finely beaten and seared
as will lye upon a two pence, then fill up the Apple with sweete
Butter: and putt on the topp of the Apple upon it again close: then
roast it tender, and when it is roasted mingle them all together like a
Conserve: then take as much as a Walnutt 3 mornings together
fasting.

The Wound Drinke and for the Kings Quill
My Brother: Warwicks
A Fanshawe
Gather these Hearbes in May.
AvensMugwortFive Leaved Grasse
BugleMinceViolet Leaves
ComphreyPlantaineWild Angelica
Drake rootes and leavesRibbworstWood Betony
DandalionSanicleWhite Bottles
EgrimonyScabiousWormewood
HoneySucklesSouthernwood
Strawberry Leaves

Bramble Budds, Hawthorne Budds, Oake Budds, these 3 must be
gathered in Aprill. but of all the several Hearbes a like Quantity,
when they are dry, mingle them well together: then take 3 handfulls
of the, putt them into a Quart of White Wine, and a pottle of Spring water,
and boyle them together till halfe the liquor be wasted. Then straine
the Liquor from the Hearbes, & putt it to a pinte of the best Honey,
sett it over the Fire, & let it boyle but till You have scummed it,
when it is cold, putt it into Stone Bottles close stopped & keepe it very
coole, drinke 6 Spoonfulls every monring fasting, & fast 2 hours after
it, & as much at 4 a Clocke in the afternoone.
Among these Hearbes adde to halfe an handfull of white Angelica,
& halfe an handfull of Smallage and a Spoonfull of sweet Fennell

9
Seeds. So boyle these things as You used before in your other drinke a
mong these, Let the white Angelica be well blosomed if You can gett it.
These things may be all gotten at the Apothecaries thereabouts, what You
can gett out of the Fields, though Aprill and May be past You may keepe
them dry by You.
Putt in these 2 halfe handfulls every time You boyle the Water.

A drinke admirable against a Cold or
Consumpsion.
My Broth: Warw:
A ffanshawe
Put into an Earthen Pipkin 3 pints of Spring Water: 2 good hand=
fulls of unsett hysope: 2 or 3 slices of good English Liquorice, sliced ve=
ry thinn, 2 handfulls of Raisins of the Sunne stoned, a quarter of a pound
of Figgs sliced small: one ounce of Anniseeds bruised, halfe an ounce of
Sweet Fennell Seeds bruised: 7 or 8 dates sliced. Then stopp up the Pip
kin very close, and let them stew on hott Embers 24 houres, & then straine
the Liquor well from the other Ingredients: putt this liquor into a glasse
or Stone Bottle being close stopt: take 9 Spoonfulls of it when you lye
to rest at night it being a little warme, and every morning fasting doe the
same. Thus continuing a reasonable time, and the Patient will find good
of it. For it is an approved Medecine.

Opening Pills
My Br. Warw:
A ffanshaw

Take of the Extract of Gentian two Drachmes: of the Extrait of Centorie,
of Galens Hiera Pura of each foure Scruples: of Trochisks of Eupatorie,
of Dialacca, of Diacurcuma, of Salt of Scurvey grasse, of each of these two
Scruples: of Salt of Wormewood halfe a Scruple with as much Syrrup of
Rheubarb with Succorie or Syrup of Succorie with Rheubarb as will make it
up in Pills. Make every dram in Sixe Pills. Five of them are to be taken
at a time, with a Draught of some proper convenient drinke an houre after
them; and so to continue a weeke or longer, the Body being prepared before by
purging: they doe remove hypochondriack obstructions, open the Spleene and
purge gently: they also doe strengthen the Stomach, & the Liver, & purifie the
Blood.
For a Canker
My Mother
A ffanshawe
Take Unguentium Aegyptiacum, & Mel Rosarum, of each halfe an ounce. Warme
them in a Sawcer very hotte, dipp a little Lint in it (fastend to any fitt Instruments)
and rub






10.
the canker with it has hard as You can well Suffer it. This doe 3 severall
dayes. Then take only Mel Rosarum warmd, and apply it 3 or 4 times
a day to heale the Canker, which perhaps the other application though
it hath cured may seeme to have made worse.

A Medicine for the Head Ache
Earle of ClevelandTake in oranges cutt them in Quarters, then put them into two
Ann FanshaweGallons of scalding hott Spring Water, & let it stand till You can
put Your Feet in it, then rub the Soles of your Feet with you Oranges,
this will refresh You and in 12 houres will take away your Cold,
& much sooner your Head Ache. This is good also after a journey
to refresh you.

A Medicine for the Stomach Collicke
My MotherXTake a new laid Egge, open it and putt into it 2 graines of Am-
A Fanshaweber Greece, stirre it about till your Egge is thorow hott, But no
more, then eate it fasting two houres after it. This doe mor=
nings together, and it will cure You.

An Approved Medicine for the Itch
and to coole the Liver
Lady BedlesTake Endiffe, Succory, Sorrell, Strawberry Leaves of each
A Faa handfull, Borage, Buglosse, Hartstongue, of each 1/2 a
handfull, French Barley 2 handfulls, of Blew Currants one -
ounce. Seeth them all in a pottle of running water to 3 pints
Before you take it from the Fire putt in a good handfull of Bor=
age Flowers, 2 ounces of Scena Leaves, a quarter of an ounce
of Anniseeds, Seeth them againe a little, take it from the
Fire, and cover the Pott, & let it cooke, Straine it hard
through a Strainer and putt in 6 Spoonfulls of Vinegar 2 spoon=
fulls of Powder Sugar, drinke thereof every day lukewarme - 5 oun=
ces & fast 2 hours after it. If you have more then 4 stooles a day take
it

11)
it but every Second day. You must end the drinking thereof by ye
midst of Aprill


A Plaister to kill the Wormes
Lady BedlesXTake of Wormwood & Rue of each a like Quantity, Stamp & straine
A Fanthem, & putt to the juice 6 drops of the gall of a Bullock, & putt there
to the Powder of Aloes and make a Plaister thereof, & lay it to the
Nable the Breadth of a Schilling, If the Child have the Wormes ye
Plaister will abide still if not it will fall from the Nable.

A Vulnerary Liquour
Sir K. DigbyTake an ounce of Crabs Eyes (oculi canerorum) beat them to
A Fansmall Powder, putt them into a deepe Jarre Glasse, poure upon them 6
ounces of the Strongest white Wine Vinegar, It will presently
worke up to a great height and loyle strongly, when it allayes wor-
king stirre it with a Stick or Spatule to the Bottome to quicken
the operation after an houre or two or more You may poure the
Liquor through a reasonable fine Linnen Cloth, & give thereof
to the Patient 2 or 3 Spoonfulls at a time in the morning fasting
in ye Evening an hour & a halfe before Supper, & at night an houre
before going to Bed. It is singular good for all Ulcers, for broken Bones,
for Women in labour, to void grauell, & it is a great strengthener of the
inner Parts.

A FanA Possett for one an innard Bruise
Take a Possett drinke made of white wine a little Balme, a
pretty quantity of Venice Turpentine, stirre it together & drink it
warme, also to putt in either Slate, or Stone Pitch or Parma Ceti
is excellent for a Bruise.

A Glister for a Child that hath Wormes
A Fantaught by Doctor Bayly
Take Wormwood, Rue, Sothernwood, Camomile, Lavender Cotton, Mallow,
the





12.
the hearb Mercurie and Violett Leaves of each 1/2 a hand=
ful, boyle all these together in 3 pints of Water, when it is 1/2
consumed straine it and putt to it a Spoonful of honey of
Oyle of Camomile Violets and Rue of each 1/2 an ounce, & the
quantity of a hasell nutt in Salt, stirre it well together, and so
give it. With this Medeicine I cured a Child of mine y had a
desperate Feaver caused by the Wormes.

Mrs. Coply's drinke.
A Fan Take a naile pinte of unslakt Lime, putt it into a great Stone
pott then putt to it 6 quarts of Spring Water, cover it and let it
stand 24 houres, then put to it 4 Ounces of ye best Liquorish
scraped, and sliced, and 2 Ounces of Saxafrage sliced, 2 Ounces
of Anniseeds bruised. Let it stand 24 houres more, then straine
it, drinke of it thrui in a day a Quarter of a pinte at a time,
or more if You find occasion. The time is in the morning,
fasting, at 3 of the Clocke in the afternoone, & at night
when you gos to Bed. It is good for any ulcer in the Body o=
ther in ye Kidneys, Bladder, or mother. It is good to strengthen
the Liver. It hash cured the Dropsie, & is a great cleaner of
the blood from any putrefaction that is in it.

An Excellent Receipt for any weakenes in the Back
Lady Bedles
A Fan
Take of white Amber well prepared, and of Sugar of Roses of
each 4 Ounces, of fine Nutmegs in powder 2 drachmes, mixe t
hem well, and putt them in a Boxe for your use.  Drinke in a
morning fasting 2 Spoonfull of this powder in a good draught
of Milke warme from the Cow, and fast 2 houres after.

A Cooling Broth for one that is in a Feaver
My Mother A Fan  Take a Chicken, and boyle it in 3 pints of water, putt into it Time,
13.
 Rosemary of each one slip, Cinquefoile and Straw Berry Leaves
of each 1/2 a handful, a little bunch of unripe Grapes the bottome
of a Manchett, Let it boyle untill 1/2 be consumed, then let it settle,
& drinke the Cleare as often as you have a mind to it.

A Strengthening and Cooling Broth
My Mother A Fan Take a good bigg Chicken, and the Bones of a Knuckle of Veale,
boyle them in a pottle of water to somewhat lesse than a Quart, putt
therein 10 Raisins of the Sunne stoned, 5 Leaves of Buglosse & 2
Leaves of Succorie, 5 Leaves of Endive, & 2 Sprigs of Time & one
Sprigg of Rosemary, & one of sweet Marjoram, together with the
bottome of a Manchett, and when it is boyled enough straine it and
let it settle, Then poure out the cleare into a pott, & give the same
as often as the sicke Party requires it, & make as often fresh as You
need.

A Rare Medecine for a Thrush in the Mouth for a Child or Old Body
My Br. Warw A Fan Take stress of the purest Scarlett you can get & with a Shouell made
redd hott burne it in it, & with ye same Quantity of Homemade into
fine powder mingle it rubb the Party's Mouth till it bleed & in few times
using it, it will cure it, be it never so dangerous.

A Purge for a Child
Mr. Battersby A Fan Eight graines of Aloes is a fit quantity for a purge for a Child, taking
one houre & a halfe after it, a glister made of 3 quarters of a pinte of
Milke, and 2 great Spoonful of honey dissolved in it.

for a Child that hath the Rukets
To anoint their Limbs with Dog Grease every Evening, & in very short
time it will cure him.
Another
A Fan Take a handfull of red Sage, a handfull of Tops of Rosemary, a handfull
of





14
of Harts horne putt them in a pipkin with 3 pints of the best
Muscadine you can gett, boile it till it come to something more
than a pinte, & noint the Childs Limbs morning & Evening

A most Rare Glister for the Spleene
X
Lady Nicholas
A Fan
Take a quart of Posset drinke made of Ale, or a Quart of thinn
Veale Broth, put in a handfull of Buglosse Leaves, a handfull
of Burnett Leaves, a handfull of Mallowes, boile it till it come to
a pinte, straine it, putt to it 3 Spoonfull of fine Loafe Sugar, 3
Ounces of Syrrope of Violets, and so give it warme, and no more.

A most Rare Receipt for onne that
can not hiuld their water


15
For the Scurvy
A Fan
Scuvy grass of both sorts, safe of each 4
handfulls: wormwood, Horseradish roots
of each halfe a handfull, pund this together
straine the fome and drinke three or foure
spoonfullss so long as it lasts

A Vinegar to wash the Teeth for the Scurvy
A Fan
You are to take 4 good handfulls of the tops of Firree and you
are to take a pottle of the best white wine Vinegar you can get.
You are to boyle the said Vinegar till it comes to ye 3rd part these
tops of Firre are not to be had in any place in England but at
Roe-Hampton neare Putney. When you have boyled these together
You are to wash your mouth Evening & mornning but in the day as
often as you please.

A Medicine for the Wormes
A Fan
Take Lemmon, mingle it with Saffron in powder, to every 3 Spoon=
fulls of ye juice put the weights of 6 pence in Saffron, to a Child of a
year old you may give 3 spoonfulls at a time 3 Mornings fasting. To
one of 7 or 8 or older 3 or 4 Spoonfull.
This Medicine also is very approved for ye Wormes
A Fan
Take Aloe rosatum made up into pills somewhat bigger than the big=
est pease. Take them fasting 3 pills every day one or two houres
after you have taken your pills make a Glister of a pint of new
Milke with 2 Spoonfulls of honey, set it on ye Fire till it be hott &
ye honey dissolved stirring it all ye while. And when it is so cold
that





16
that you can endure it upon your Eye then administer it
to the Child or Party & it will bring away Wormes in abundance

The directions of doctor Bowles
A Fan
In the first place I comend this diet drinke
for your life, at meales as well as out of meales,
but at least twice a day morning & after ~
noon,
taking it for a quarter of a yeare
at a time, the hot months excepted.

A diet drinke for ye Scurbute
A Fan
Comon dockroots cut into thin slices  ounces,
sassfras 6 ounces, 4 Orenges cut in
quarters, 2 handfulls of dryed eldern
fflowers, halfe a handfull of Woormwood
bruized; 2 pound of Raysins cutt. put
all these into a Bag to hang in 4 gallons
of small Ale woort, After 4 days drinke
of it as aforesayde. In the Winter adde
2 quarts of the juyce of Apples, in ye spring
3 pints of the juice of Scurvey-grass, ~
Water Cresses, succory, or dandelion, some =
times,
all, or any of these. when you will
make it purgatiue adde 6 ounces of Sena
to the bag

An excellent water to be used con=
stantly
all winter for the
Scorbute.
Ann Fan
Scuruey-grasse bruized three pound,
horse Radish rootes cut sliced & torne
one pound, 12 Oranges cut into thin
slices, put those into a glasse Still, ~

powre in so much sack and white wine
as will cover them 3 finger deepe, stop
the glasse close, let them stand 24 howers
on digestion, the next day distill a water
from hence
Take a Wine-glasse full and at pleasure,
Sweetned with syrrup of eldern flowers,
or Orenges, or wood-sorrell, or Clove
gillyflowers.

Pills for the Scorbute
An fan
Polypodia Rootes dryed and reduced into
powder, halfe an ounce; Cassia lignea,
and Cream of Tartar of each 4
scruples; saffrom in powder, 10 graines:
Make these into pills wth syrrup of mayden
hayre, a dragme to be taken every
morning for 40 days twice in a yeare,
Spring, & Fall.

A Gargale for the Scorbute
A Fan
Syrrup of the green husks of hazell
nutts, the decoction of pomegranat peeles;
of each this decoction halfe a pinte, besides 2 spoonfull
of the syrrup. 9 drops of the spirit of
Virtriol, 2 spoonfull of the Juice of Scur
vey-grasse

An excellent Cordiall gurd against
the Scorbute in all Fevers (especti
ally malignant) Small pox, Mea
zells.
A Fan
Orenges 100, more or lesse, cut them





18
into most . thin slices in a capacious
earthen pan, presse them downe
with a spoon that the juice may
rise, and the Rines drinke in their
owne juice, every day shirring them
from the bottome that thiy mouldie
not, & prissing them; doi this 5
or 6 days till the Rines acquire the
first degree  of putrifashon, ifh yu
shall judge by the tendernesse of them
cast these into a Shill, and distill a
water from here  Besides this afore=
said Varhies, it is very pleasant and
wholesome a spoonfull in a glass of
wine at your pleasure, espeshally when
you are hott.

This forr Doctor Bowlis.

19
For Any Flux
A: Fan
Take 10 grains of Rhubarb; 5 of Nuttmeg, and
as much of Cinnamon. Mingle these togeather
being small grated with as much Conserve Of Roses
as will make them up into a mass. Everie morning
take this, and evening too if the distemper bee
stronge.
Take plaine glisters of milke made with 2
ounces of syrop of wioletts and the yolke of an egg
and the quantitie of an egg in butter never salted,
no sugar; in the evenings before, if you take the
medicine only in the mornings.

If the flux be with torments in yi
gutts or blood.
Drink as great quantities of new whay, as
you can, and as often.
When you intermitt your whay, take the
Rhubarb medicine ut subra.





20
An Excellent receipt for a Child
that hath ye ricketts
A  Fan
The Bath
Take a black sheeps head put to it 3 galons of
running water, red sage red mint, . speedwell
of each a handfull put in a handfull full of linnen raggs
boyle these till ye flesh com from the bons of ye head
then put it in an earthen pott & stop it close & bath
ye child from ye wast downeward all ye the reines
his back  with ye third part of this liquid which must
not be strained but  ye ingredients & all so warm
as ye childe can endure it this proporsion is for 3
nights together & you may make it twice a month at
ye beginning  & ending if the childes weaknesse be much

The oyntment belonging to it
A Fan
Take a pound of butter out of ye churne beat ye
milke clears from it then take speedwell, wormwood,
rue alehoofe, featherfew, red sage, red fennell camomell,
mayden hysop, cleaves, hartes tongue,  millelott, Lavander
Dill, vervane, fox ferne, setwell, brooklime, water-Cresses.
cleane all these Very well & bauing bruis'd them
boyle them in ye butter, when it begins to boyle, put in
halfe a quarter of an ounce of Mace & halfe a pint
of the strongest muskedine, boyle it on a soft fire  for
an houre, then streine it through a course canvas
& keep it for ye use, close stopt when it is gold with this
oyntmt. you must anoint ye sides, ye back bone, the
thighs & ye Anckles, during ye time you annoint ye child
which should be ever after bathing, you must keep the
child rapt in a thin white cotton Cloth made like
a large long smock to cover ye infant,  it is likewise very
good if ye child uses motion by being swung, or otherwise
as is proper to ye Age therof.






22.
XTo make conserve of Wormwood
A FfanTake a pound of the young toppes of worm=wood,
steep them twelve howers in two quarts of Hyssop
water, squeeze the wormwood gently from the water
with your hand, then putt your wormwood into
a mortar with 3 quarters of a pound of Loaf=sugar,
& half a pound of Rasins of the sunn stoned; beat all
these to a conserve, and tye it close up in a Pott
and keep it for your use.
You must take as much as a nuttmeg hereof, every
morning Fasting.

An exellent Receipt for the stone
or stoppage of the urine
A FfanX
Take the kernelle of Ash keyes, when they are ripe,
which is about Michaelmas, dry them & when you
administer them, you must beate them to a fine pouder
and give one spoone full of them in broath.

X For the spleen;
Boyle thime ash Bark and tamaris of each an oune
in a possett Drink made of white wine and
small ale drink it fasting in a morning
& at 4 of the Clock in the afternoon for 9
days


23

for the Stone
The destilled watter of Clivers or Beane
Shells; or time taken as much and as Often
as you pleas; allso Eatting of Endiff with all
things is Extream good to breake the Stone
by which medecin Ould Do: Amey presarved
him Selfe maney yeares and voyded hundreds
of stonns.

for aney heatt in the blather
or sharpnes of Eurin
Putt too Spunfull of Serape of marsh
Mallows in to a small droft of milke
watter; in the morning when you
just wake and last when you goe to bed
until the pane sesses;





24
For a burn or scald
Beat whites of eggs til they bee all froth then
put in as much Oile Ollive as whites of Eggs beat
these well together til they are incorporated then
put in as much fine flax as wil cover the place
thin over dip if very wel in the salve before you
lay it onn & apply fresh morning &, night until
the place bee well; under God this wil Cure without
leaving any scarr if applied in lime.

A Medicine for e wormes.
Take one pill of Aloes rosatum in the morning
early, & four houres after take a Glister of
three quarter of a pint of new milke with for
Spoonfuls of Huney warmed over embers, if yo
give it to a man or wooman yo must double the
quantety of all.

To Care a bloudshe hixek Contracted
by Could
Take a handful of Ale hoofe & 20 or 30 rasons
of the Sunne stoned boil them in a quart of
ale tile halfe bee Consumed, drinke if the first
thing in a morning & the last at night til
yo find yr selfe Cured.

For the pain in e head
take two halfes of a Smale rose Cake put upon
thme too nutmegs Grated & Lay them into a dish
pour upon them as much Elder Vinegar as will
make the rose Cake soft, then lay them on your
temples and let them ly as low as they wil reach


25

A poultes for any Soar or wound that
is Inflamed,
Boil a pint of Milke with crumbs of whit bread,
a handful of Mellalot flowers, halfe a handful of red
rose leaves, when these are well boiled together put it
into a porenger, & stir into it halfe an ounce of Oile
of St Johns=wort & halfe an ounce of Oile of roses,
this quantety is too much unless the sore bee very great
therefore you must proportion it as yo see ocasion

An Excelent Receapt
for any pain in the bake
espetialy the whites.
Take of white amber well fine pared & suger or roses each
4 ounces, of Nutmeg in a fine pouder 2 drames, mix them
wel & keepe them in a box for your use put a full spoonful
of this pouder into a draught of new milke warme from
the Cow, & drinke a pint of it every morning fasting &
at foure of the Clok in the afternoon.

Another for the Same
Fil a stil with Clary as hard pressed doune as you Can
then pour to it as much whit wine as wil soake in
Let it stand 12 houres then draw it offe with a soft
fier, the next day fil yr stil as before with Clary only,
then pour the distiled water upon it & let it stand six
hours then draw it ofe again with a soft fier and keepe
for yr use; bee sure yr bottle bee drie & sunn yr water
drinke it 2 houres before dinner & supper a quarter of a pint
sweetend with whit sugar candy.

the Oyntment for e same
boile Ground moss in Creame so much as wil make it thick
as an ointment, & anoint the raines of yr back therewith
the first thing you doo in a morning & the last thing you
doo at night.





26. A pleasant remedy for wheazing
and spopage in the stomak

Mr C: Hinton. Take halfe a pint of the best Cinamon water
and put to it, for ounces of Oximell of squills,
keepe it in little Glass bottle and take now
and then acording as you find Ocasion a spoonful
of it, and shake the Glass uery well eury time.

For the Stinging of a snake or
Adder

My Mother. Immediately when you are stung heat a
knife very hot in the fier, and clap just
upon the place that was stung and hould
it a Good while til it have burned it out,
or else, lay the intrails of the same ader
or snake that stung you, or of aney other,
and bind it fast on upon the place.

For an Fgeu.

L. Lowther. Cutt the yellow Rind of Ciuall Orranges very thin, dry
it before the fyer, and then beat and tearee it, and
take a Good spoon full of the powder into spoonful
of tack an hour before your fitt and ly worme,
doo this three times whether the fit leaves ye or no
and again before the next full of the moon three
times.

27





28

31
Sorcleary of ye coru =1
Turn over are ye nettle loam from
ye field gathered, put tramron to
your kettle,  crushed in
your uncreambile Then thuprey snowel
Ye added in number two crushed
Likewise - then not sometime one
to poot -not
James Schurley





32

19
33
Dones of ye Petales
[image]
Pluck say of the petals
Near from the stem of e oyt[...] [...]
Idea[..] as Nere [.]ull
that the Same resl[..]es produce for
Sour Longfits.





62.

63. 30
Salves, Plaisters, Oyntments, Oyles, Poultisses,
Powders, for severall Occasions.
The King of France his Balsome.
My Mothers.
A Fan
Take Red Sage, and Rue of each one pound, of Young Bay Leaves
and Wormwood of each 1/2 a pound, doe not wash them, but picke, wipe
and cutt them very small, and beate them well in a Stone Morter, take
3 pound of Sheepes Suett hot from the Sheepe, mince it small & breake
it wth those herbes till it be all of one coulour; then putt all into a faire
boule with a pottle of the best oile Olive, worke all together till it be-
come alike, then putt it into an Earthen pott well stopt with Parch-
ment and waxe for 8 dayes. Then seethe all in a panne with a soft
Fire. When it is sodden putt to it 4 Ounces of the oile of Spike. Then
straine, it thorow a Canvas Strainer into a pott, cover it with parch:
ment, and with a Leather upon that; In the boyling of it take heed
that it burne not, for the avoyding whereof putt 2 or 3 drops still in a
Lancer, and when it is greene as the Emrod it is enough.
This is excellent for all Aches, or paines of the Head t come of Cold
black wooll being dipt in it, and stopping the Eares, for shrinking of
Sinewes, or Ague Cakes being haft in agt the Fire, & a Cloth dipt
hott in the same applied to the Place.
The Flowre of Oyntments.
Lady. Butler.
A. Fan
Take Rozen and parozen of each halfe a pound, Virgine Waxe & fran:
kincense of each a quarter of a pound, of Harts Tallow a quarter of a pound of Camphire two drams, of Mastick
one two Ounces melt that which is to be melted, and make powder of that which is
to be made in powder, boile it well & straine it into a Pottle of white Wine
& all the other Stuffe together. Let it coole a while, then putt thereto of
Turpentine a Quarter of a pound. Stirre it well together till it be cold. Keepe
for the best oyntment or Salve on warrantize.
The Vertues of this Oyntment.
'Tis good for all manner of wounds, for the Head Ache, for e singing in the
Braine-






64.

Braine, for all Imposthumes in the Head or Body, for Sinens
paper covering  it draweth out any thorne or broken

To make a oyntment  Playssfoe?
Take 3 ouncis of ye oyntment putt thereito one ouns
of vinis Suspinfine 2 ounces of Bees wax with
them and worke them vy as others playstirs
end of added paper

bruise proved by me of a woman, that has lost her Eye
by a bruise, and recovered it againe.

Lady Butler
A Fan

Take a pinte of Sallet oyle, steepe therein Elder Flowers, &
change them two or three times, as you doe any other oyle, to keepe
it and when you need annoynt the brise often therewith warmed,
and lay the Flowers on the place bruised.

An Oyntment for an Ankle
My Mother
Take Rosemary topps and flowers one pound, Stampe them well
in a Stone Mortar with 2 pound of Capons grease, then putt it into
a Stone pott, and shutt it very close, & sett it onto a Kettle of water
on the Fire 24 houres, then take it of the Fire & straine it
from the Flowers, and putt it into a broad mouthd glasse, & sett it
in the Sunne 4 dayes, then reserve it to your ale.  This is a
good Oyntment for a Sciatica, ar any other Ache so you sweate
upon it

A Poultis to breake a sore Breast
My Mother
Take halfe a pint of honey, halfe a pinte of Creame handfull
of Rose Leaves, & as many Crumms of wheate Bread as will thicken
it with boyling all together.

To breake a sore Breast
My Mother
A Fan
Take - Mugwort, & Holyoake Leaves, & whitwort, & small Oat=
meale


65
meale, and Linnseed well pounded with a few Figgs. Boile all there well
together to a poultis, and in the end, adde two Spoonfulls of Oyle olive, and
apply it to the Griefe.

An Excellent oile to comfort the Braine
My Mother
A Fan
Take of Lignum Rhodium 20/8 waights, Damaske Roses 2 Bushells,
Lavender topps 1/2 a peck, & Marjoram 4 handfulls Sparemint as much,
Take all these together and beat them, and put them into a Vessell, adde
20/8 waight of Bay Salt & so much Fountaine water as will cover them.
Let them stand a month close tied up with Parchment and waxe, Then
distill them in a Limbeck with an indifferent Fire, and take of the oile on
the topp and keepe it for your use.  Tis excellent for any Paine of
the Head that comes from cold, especially for Apoplexies

A present Remedy for an old Ache
My Mother
A Fan
Take very strong Aqua vitae two spoonfuls, & 2 spoonfulls of the juice
of Arsesmart, and anoynt the Place grieved every day 2 or 3 times for it
will speedily helpe you.  Approved by Dr.  Lopus.

A Medeicine for an ache or shrinking of  ye Sineuses.
My Mother
Take the tendering of Rosemary and Mash Mallowes of each an hand=
full more or lesse as You will, gather them when they are drie, beat them in
a morter very small, them take May Butter well strained, & putt it into Yr
hearbes, mingle them well together, then let them stand 4 dais, then sett
them over the Fire, seeth them till the strength be gone out of ye hearbes
then take a little of it in a spoone, and let it drop it on your naile, &
if it be greene as the Emerod it is perfect.  put it up in an earthen
pott, and so when you have occasion use it anointing the place grieved
by the Fire.

To make the true Weapon Powder
Sir K.D
A Fan
Take of Vitrioll 4. worth, which will be halfe a Spoonefull, putt it
into a Quart of water, Stirre it with a knife twice or thrice, if there
be Vitrioll enough your knife will be colourd Copper, then take ye Cloth
which







64

Braine, for all Impostumes in the Head or Body, for Linens
that be shrunke or sprained, it draweth out any thorne or broken
bone from a wounde., It is good for the biting of any evill Beast,
for Festure, Canker or Mole Me tangere, it draineth out all ache
from the Liver; Spleene or Reines, it breaketh the Imposthumes,
good for swelling in the Members, easeth the flare
and of the Emrodes & healeth them very fine, and is spetiall
good to make a Seare Cloth.

An Oile for a Bruise in y Eye, or for any other
bruise proved by me of a woman, that had lost her Eye.
by a bruise, and recovered it againe.
X

Lady Butler.
A Stan


Take a pinte of Sallet oyle, steepe therein Elder flowers, &
change them two or three times, as you doe any other oyle, so keepe
it and when youneed anoynt the bruise often therewith warmed,
and lay the flowers on the place bruised.

An Oytment for an Ache

My Mother

Take Rosemary toppes and flowers, one pound, stampe them well
in a Stone Moartar with 2 pound of Capons grease, then putts it
in a Stone pott, and shutt it very close, & sett it into a kettle of water
on the fore 24 houres, then take it of the fire & straine it
from the Flowers, and putt it into a broad mouth glase, & sett it
in the Sunne 14 dayes, then reserve it to your use.  This is a
good oyntment for a Sciatica, or any other Ache so you sweat
upon it.

A Poules to breake a sore Breast

My Mother A Stan

Take halfe a pint of honey, half a pinte of Creame, a handfull
of Rose Leaves, & as many Crumms of wheate Bread as will thic
lem ot with boylingall together.

X  To breake a sore, Breaste

Mother & Stan

Take Mugwort, & Holyoake Leaves, & whitwort, & small Oatmeale



65

meale, and Linnseed well pounded with a few Figgs, Boile all them well
together to a poults and in the End, adde two Spoonfulls of Oyle Olive, and
apply it to the Griefe.

An Excellent oile, to comfort the Braine

X

My Mother & Stan

Take of Lignum Rodium 20/8 waights, Damaske Roses, 2 Bushells,
Lavender topps 1/2 a peck, 1 Marjoram 4 handfulls Sparemint as much
Take all these together and beat them, and put them into a Vessell, adde
20/8 weights of Bay Salt, & so much Fountaine water as will cover them.
Let them stand a month close tied up with Parchment and waxe, Then
distill them in a Libeck with an indifferent Fire, and take of the oile on
the topps and keepe it for your use.  Tis excellent for anyPaine of
the Head that comes from cold, especially for Apoplexes.

A present Remedy for an old Ache

My Mother & Stan

Take very strong Aqua vite two spoonfulls, & 2 spoonfulls of the juice
of Arsemart, and anoynt the Place grieved every day 2 or 3 times for it
will pleasibly helpe you.  Approved by Dr. Lopus.

X    A Medecine for an ache or shrinking of your Sinuses.

My Mother & Stan

Take the tendering of Rosemary and Mash Mallowes of each in hand=
full more or lesse as you will, gather them when they are drie, beat them in
a morter very well, then take May Butter well strained, & putt it into y
hearbes, mingle them well together, then let them stand 4 ddaies, then sett
them over the Fire, seeth them till the Strength be gone out of
your hearbes then take a little of it in a Spoone, and let it
drop it on your naile, & if it be greene as the Emerod it is perfect.  put it up in
an earthen pott, and so when you have occasion use it anointing the place
grieved by the Fire.

S. K.D & Stan

To make the true Weapon Powder

Take of Vitrioll 4. 28 worth, which will be halfe a Spoonefull, putt it
into a Quart of Water, Stirre it with a knife twice or thrice, if there
be Vitrioll enough your knife will be colourd Copper, then take y Cloth
which







66.
which is wrapt about the wound, and putt into the water. keep
the wound cleane washs once a day. if the wound be very great
you must make new water,  & put in fresh wound  Clothes
once a day. If you adde any Salues that are not of a vexatious
Nature they will not be contrary to this Powder but may
hasten the Cure.
Mr. Stones Searecloth
Sr. R. Stone
A Fan
Take 2 ounces of fenneresk, 4 ounces of Frankincense, 1/2a
pound of Virgin Waxe, halfe a pound of Burgundy Pitck, melt
all these together in a great Pipkin upon a slow fire, & stirre
them all together, then poure them into fairewater and rub
your Hands with oyle, and take them out of the water & worke
it well with your Hands, and then make it up in long rowles
when you use it you must spread it upon Leather, then pricke
it full of holes, & lay it on a Bruise or Ache as hott as may be
indured, and there let it sticke till it fall of, and you need
never feare it; this is the best Plaister that ever was for a Bruise.
An oyle for the Stomache
My Mother
A Han
Take a pretty quantity of Capons grease, 2 or 3 flakes of Mace, a little quantity of Saffron, a spoonfull of Agua vita
; putt them all together, and sett them on Coales, letting them dissolve a while, then take a piece of new Flannell, & dipp it
it in the same, & lay it to the stomach.
==An Excellent oyntment for a Brest with
which I have done great Cures.==
My Mother A Han
Take sothernewood, selfe heale, smalledge, sage, Herbe=
grace, Plantaine, Ribbwort, Herbe Bennet, Orpen, Housegreene,
Parsly, Marygolds, Wormewood, Mercury, Bittony, Seabius, Va
Lerian,

67.
lerian, Comfrey, Lyonstooth, bucks=horns of each a handfull, wash
them very cleane, and put them in a sieve to dry, & when they are
dry, choppe them very small, and putt therto sixe pound of May Butter,
as it cometh forth of the churne unwashed, then boile all these herbes
in the Butter till one part be consumed of Foure, then straine one
part to make an oyntment, & putt it into a pott, & after thats done,
putt to the other two Parts as much Rosine & Waxe as the Quantity
of 2 Eggs to make it stiffe for Plaister Salve, boyle it well, & then
straine it.
Balsone Christi
f..... La: Butler A Hon
Take oyle of olive one part Canary Wine 2 parts, Boyle them
together in an Earthen pott till the Wine be  consumed, & that you
may know by  casting a little of it into the Fire, and if it make no
more noise then oyle usually doeth it is enough. This Balsome hea=
leth all kind of wounds laying Lints dipped in it upon them.
==A Spetiall Plaister for the Sciatica or
Gontish Humour which hathe done many
Cures.==
My Mother
A Han
Take a pont of the best Sallet oyle, 4 Ounces of Red Lead, 4 Ounces
of white Lead, 2 Ounces of Beer Waxe, One ounce of frankincense,
one ounce of Masticke, 2 ounces of Burgundy Pitch, let all but [th]e ...:
Masticke and Burgundy Pitch be beat & seared, boyle the
red & white Lead together fo 1/2 an houre with oyle, continually
stirring it. Then take it of the Fire and putt in your waxe stirring
it as before, then sett it on the Fire againe to boyle a little while, then
take it of and putt in the Masticke, stirring of it as before till it
hath done working, then let it boyle a little again then stirre in
your Frankincense of the Fire, then doe as before with the Bur-
gundy Pitch; then boyle it up till it be as black as Pitch: take it of
& stirr it till it be cooler, oyle a sheet of Paper and poure it out upon it,
rowle it up in rowles putting Papers about & so keep it for your Use!
When you use it spread it upon thicker floth.







68
For a stroke or Bruise in the Eye
Lady Bedles

Take a Pigeon, & let her blood in the great veine of a
wing, & let the blood spring out of the veine into the
Patient's Eye. You must dresse it 6 or 7 times.
AhHon

An Excellent Medicine for any sore Mouth or Throat
Lady Butler A Hon
Take as much Bole Armeniack as the weight of a groat,
mingle it with 1/2 Sppoonfull of honey. Let the Patient
take it when they are a bed: let them lye iupon their back &
keep it in their mouth, till it is dissolved & so sleepe. If yc mouth
or throat be very Soare you may take six penny weight.

An Oyntment for Burning with Gun=
powder or Sealing with Water
Lady Bedler A Hon
Take a quart of Boares Grease, 2 Handfulls of Groundsell,
& 2 or 3 Heads of Horseleek, stampe them together, then
putt to it 2 handfus of new Sheepes Dung, 2 Handfulls of
GOose DUng, stamp them all together and fry them, & straine
them when they are hott through a Cloth into an Earthen
Pott, & with the Liquour ansint the burns or scalded place.

For the Stinging of a Snake or Adder
either in Man or Beast
Lady Bedles A Han
Take as many black Snailes as you can gett, slitt them in
the midst, putt them in a thinne Cloth, & apply them to yr
Place, & it will give present ease & remede

The Vulnerary Liquour
Take an ounce of Crabbs Eyes (oculi Canororum) beat them to
smell Powder, putt them into a deepe Jarre Glasses and pure upon
them
69
A most admirable Receipt for a Fistula

Lady Parkhurst A Hon
Take of  Par Rosine a pound, and of Sheepes Suett the Bignes of a
Turkie Egge, and if you make it in Winter putt them in a panne, &
sett them over the Fire till they be ready to boyle, then powre it into
another panne of cold water, rubb Your Hands with Butter that it may
not cleave to them, worke it till it become as small as pack threads, then
scrape it on a Cloth, and spread it very thinne, then cutt it out small &
narrow, and when you use it rowle it like a Tent.

The Powder belonging to it.

Take an Oxe Horne & lay it 9 daies in water, shifting it every day
then take it out, and fill it full of blacke Soape, then putt it into a
Frying panne, hold it over the Fire, & the Horne will melt away &
turne to Powder, & when You dresse the Sore, dipp the aforesaid Tent
the End of it in this Powder, and so tent it.

The Water belonging to it

Take Allum, and white Coppras of each a like quantity, beat them
into fine Powder, and mingle them well together, & putt them into an
Earthen panne, and sett them on a soft Fire, & let them boyle till they
be so hard that they will boyle no longer. Then beat them to Powder
2 Spoonfulls will make a gallon of Water, but let your Water seeth first
before You putt it in, Then take it of, at the first sprinckle a little of  ye
powder into it, least it flame up, & after by degrees wett a faire Cloth,
and dresse the Sores twice a day. Sometimes scringing it with this
Water, and being tanted as aforesaid wett a Cloth 2 or 3 times double, &
lay on it still as you dresse it, and so let it lye till you dresse it againe. If
greene Coppras be used two pound must be putt to a pound of Allom. If it
be not deepe the Water only may be used without Tenting.
To make a Poultis for any inflammation or swelling.
My Mother A Han Take 1/2 a pint of the Grounds of Beere, and as much Milke, putt in that of







70.
Camomile and Marsh Mallowes of each a handfull cutt small &
also putt to it 3 white lillie Rootes and a handfull of wheat Meale,
and 3 or 4 Figs, cutt the Rootes and the figs small, and boyle all
these together to halfe a pinte, or till halfe be dissolved, and then
apply it hotte.

A Rare Medecine for a Sore Brest
Lady Parkhurst A Hon
Take Wood Lice, dry them upon a Tile in an oven, take
every morning in Grout Ale or new Ale as much as will lye
upon 3t & apply morning and evening a Cloth the
bignes of your brest tried in Goose grease and layd on double
This hath done many very great Cures both with Brests
that have had Agues in them and Brests with a Fistula.

to make the Ulcer Water
Sr.K.D

Take a dramm and a halfe of pure Chrsitalline Venice Mercury
sublimate, and grind it to impalbable powder upon a Porphyre or
Marble stone with a Mallet of the same; then in a glasse morter
with a glasse pestill, incorporate it well with 2 ounes of faire
water. And so putt it into a Phiole glasse to keepe till you
make the mixture.
Take 3 pintes or  4d of Aqua Caleis vine; put it into a large
bolteshead of glasse with a long Necke; and then by holding it in one
Hand with the other poure the sublimate water into it after
you have shaked it very well, that both the liqours be well mixt
together; then sett the bolteshead to settle with the necke inclining
as much may without running out, & in three or foure
dayes all the mudd will be setled to the bottome; powre of the cleare
& keepe it in a glasse, when you will use it warme it in a purslane
or strong Earthen vessel (for it will corrode any metall) & foment the
sore; with double linnen dipt in it as hott as you can; & then bind
linnen
71
linnen soakt in it, and doubled 3 or 4 times upon the sore. Where
you cannot come to the sore, inject it by a syringe; in healing it will
harden the brimmer of the sore, but the inward part will looke very
cleane, and of a good coulour; you may putt neere halfe a spoonfull onto
a vulnerary potion & it will helpe it much.
It is also good to heale exconitions in the prostates, & other parts in go-
norrhea's, being first well temperd with Plantaine water, so as to
cause no sharpnesse in the sense when it is injected.
The Aqua Calais is made by taking two or three pound of Quicke Lime
fresh from the Kilne, and pouring a gallon of faire water upon it & min-
gle them well together, then let the lime settle for two or three daies
and powre of the cleane water whiche keepe; every surgeon or barber ma-
keth of it.

An excellent Medecine for the stone
approved and given by Mr. Rowzell Apothe
cary of London
A:Han
Rx Marsh Mallow roots thin sliced 2 ounces ye  youngest leaves
of mallows a good handfull, liquorice sliced half an ounce, 6 figgs
sliced, a sprigg or two of time, boile these in 3 pints of clear posset
drinke, made with small Ale till a third part be boiled away and
straine it. Let the Patient in 4 draughts of this Posset drinketake a good
spoonfull of the syrup of Althea and the juice of a lemmon. It is
to be drunke 3 times a daye which is in the morning, at five in the
afternoon & when they goe to bed at night. Let them take this
constantly 3 or 4 daies before the full of the Moon, & at any time
when they complayne.





72

73
The red powder good for miscarrying

 A ffan
Take of Dragons blood one dram̄, powder of red corall one
dram̄, amber greece the weight of 3 barly cornes; bezoar stone
the weight of 2 barly cornes, Make all these into powder,
and in a little burnt Claret wine give as much of this powder
as will lie upon a pennie at morninge and night first and last
3 or 4 times will serve. Make some broth wth plantaine rootes
and shepheards purse and knotted grasse, burnett and bryer leaves,
and th drink this at pleasure. put in to the broth joust
as you drinke it the treds of 9 Eggs;
I haue found good Experementalley of
this medicin.





74

To make e famous oyle called e
Queens oyle. Madrid 8th Dec 1664.
to make hayre grow, rubbing the
rootes thereof at night, with no more
of e oyle, then you just take vp wth e
dipping e fingre therein, putting a capp
or quoife imediatly on e head.

A ffan X

Take 2 pound of e best oyle olive & put it into
a glasse bottle in which you must put 4 Lizardes aliue,
2 ounces of flyes, 4 Ounces of white wine, 4 ounces of
new honye, shake these togethre, & let them stand 15 dayes
in e hottest sun, take in e bottle out of e Ayer every
night, then put it all into a scellett & make it boyle,
wch soe soone as ever you perceive, take it of e fire,
& strayne it through a cloth, then put to it 2 ounces
of Benjamin, & 2 ounces of storax, then sett it on
e fire stirring it softly, till e Benjamin, & Storax
be well melted, then straine it thorough a cleane
cloth, then put it into a glasse, & when it is cold
stop it close so preserue it from ayre, & keep it for
your vse, this oyle is best made in e Months of
Iune, Iuly, August.

75
X

A Mendesin for a Cough in the Lungs;

Take Elecompany roots well scraped & washed
Steep them 12: hours in fountain water shifting twice
then boyle them in damask-rose water untill
they be tender then take them out of the water
& weight of the pap of rosted apples & double
the weight of both of Double-refined sugar so boyle them
up with red-rose-water to a conseru & keep
it for your vse. you must take the bigness
of a Nutmegg therof fasting  in the morning
at 4 of the clock in the afternoon & when
you go to bed at night.

X A Eccelent Receipt for a  Cough

Take a Quart of milk & 2 Large Onions
boyle it a quarter part away then run it
through a hair siue put to it a quarter
of a pint of red-rose-water & sweeten
it with sugar of Roses as you like it
this must be drunk fasting & e same
Quantety warm night & ... for your
suppers & mornings for 3 days & nights
together;

X to Clenge puterefied Lvngs

swelter aboue halfe a pinnt of Witte Wine
with 2 spunfull of liue huney and 2 spunfull
too spriges of Balme take this fasting
warme Eury morning for thurty days;







76
37
77





78
A Receipt of a Diet Drink
for the Stone

Take half a bushell of mualt and and make
4 gallons of wort put therin the kernells of asken
keys with sarsifrage roots and prosper of each a
good handfull, as much parsly ; Eringo roots scra-
ped 3 ounces, bruse all in a morter and let them
boyle half an hour in the wort, let it stand till
it be cold then strayn it and work it and sun
it, it will be ready to drink in ten days you
you must drink a pint in a morning fasting;

38
79





94





99





100





[Note] This appears to be a diagram of a plot of land. There is an indication of a road on the left side,  trees along the upper and lower edge of the property. A square in the lower right seems to indicate a garden, possibly vegetables. The handwriting is difficult to read.

A Aniston Esq

dry Land

Lawn

House
dilling lane

Bendon Road

Barlf Hall facing South

Saxturn





[Note] This is a diagram with notations. The handwriting is difficult to read.







134

57
135
To maske Gascoigne Powder.
Sir K Digby
A ffan

Take 4 Ounces of the blacke tipps of Crabbs clawes taken when e
Sunne is in Cancer in June, or the beginning of July (for then they
haue much more Vertue then at other times) and one Ounce of Magi-
stere of Pearle, both made into fine Powder: then take Snake Skins
cutt in pieces as long as ones finger, putt them in a Pipkin filld with
fountaine Water, haue another Pipkin stand by with fountaine wa-
ter upon the Embers, & as the water of Snakes consumes still supply
it with the other, let it stand ouer the Embers 36 howers, & when it
will jelley then take it of, straine it through a strainer, & when it
is cold make up your powders with it, and haue by Saffron strained in
Orange flower water, and as you make up the little Balls, dipp your
Fingers in the Saffron water, so make them up and keepe them for
Your use.

Mr Mathias his Cordiall.
A ffan

Take sixe spoonfulls of Clarett wine, 6 spoonfulls of Red Rosewa-
ter, 2 Spoonfulls of Syrrup of Gilliflowers, a spoonfull of Cinnamon
water, as much Alchermes as a hazell Nutt, mingle them together, &
putt them in a Glasse, this is a good Cordiall to be taken for the
weaknes or faintnes of the Spiritts two Spoonfulls at a time sha-
king the Glasse first.

A Cordiall to be giuen at the beginning
of a Sicknesse.
A ffan
My Mother
Dioscordium e Bignes of a hasell nutt, the Syrrup of juice of
Lemmons one Spoonfull, Cardus Water a quarter of a Pinte, drinke
it going to Bed and sweat upon it.

A good Restoratiue after a long Sicknes
or to preuent a Consumption.
A ffan
Take





136.
My Mother.
Take Colesfoot, Red Rose Leaues, Burnett, Betony and
Comfrey Rootes of each a handfull, picke & wash them cleane
& flue the Rootes, boyle them all in a pottle of water to a
Quart, then straine it & putt to a pound of Sugar, & boile it
to a Syrrup, drinke it first in the morning, & last at night, 6
Spoonfulls at a time.





76
179

The Lady Allens Water for
the Stomacke Small pox
or Surfett.

Allan
Take of Sage, Sallendine, Rosemary, Rue,
Woormwood, mugwort, Pympernell, dragons,
Scabious, Egremony, Balme, Scordium, Century,
Cardus benedictus, Betony, Rosasolis, of each
a good handfull, Angelica Rootes, henbane
rootes, turmentyle, Zedourpe, Liquorish, of
each halfe an ounce, slice the rootes and
wash the hearbes, & shake them & dry them
in a Cloth & shred them, put them alltogether
in a gallon of white wine, & steepe them in
it 2 dayes & 2 nights close couered, and
then put it into an ordinary Still, & so
still it, & when you take it let it be luke
warme, & put some sugar in it 2 or 3 or
4 spoonefulls to a childe of the stronger,
& 6 of the smaller, & to an elder more.

The Receipt for the precious
Water of Wallnutt.

Allan

Gather green wallnuts a good quantitie from
the Tree in the beginning of June, breake
them in a mortar, and distill them in a
Stillatory of Glasse, & keepe that water by
it selfe, & a fortnight after distill the
like quantitie, then distill these together in
a glasse Limbeck, & keepe it safe & close in a
glasse.

1 one drop in the eye will cure and heale all
infirmities in the eyes.







180
2 It is good for woomen that through
weakness beare no children, taking
one spoonfull in the morning
fasting.

3 It cleanses the face if  ye wash
it therewith.

4 It helpeth the palsey being drunke
wth wine fasting.

5 It procureth sleepe wetting e temples
therewith.

6 It wonderfully healeth botches and wounds.

7 It dryeth all infirmities out the
body being used moderately wth wine.

8 It preserveth life to e utmost nature.

9 It reviveth wine being dead if you
put it into e Vessel & stop it close.

Its calld the Brightnesse of all
Waters

77
181






102

A ffan

An especiall water preseruatiue
against the plague or any
Ague or surfet or suddaine
Sickness to keepe it from
the heart

Take sage, salandine, hearb of grace worm-
wood, Rosemary, Balme, pimpernell, Egre-
mony, Scabine, dragons, Liuerwort, Harts-
tongue mugwort, carduns, maydens Haire
of each of these a handfull & take a pottle
of the hearb  Rosa solis, a quarter of an
ounce of turmantill rootes, a quarter of
genetia, & a quarter of an ounce of
Angelica roots.  then stampe & bruise
these roots a little & the aforesaid herbs
must be washt & shaken cleane from
the water in a cleane dry cloth, and
then shred them grossly, then put into
these a gallon of white wine or Ale into
some stone or earthen vessel bring coue-
red close and so let it stand 2 days &
2 nights, & then still them in an ordina-
ry still, you must keepe the last running
by its self which will be smaller than the
rest, tho strong you must mix all to-
gether ina great vessell, & when it is
mixt put it in little glasses & cover it
close, you must not wash the Rosasolis.

When you have use of it give 6 or 7
spoonefull of it warmd to drinke, for
a child _ halfe so much will serue, & let
them couer themselves warme to sweatt, &
if it be for any suddayn sicknesse put
into a little treacle, if you use the

smaller you make take 10 or 12 spoonfull at a time; & you mustallways keepe it from it from
the Ayre in the warming of it, the best time to distill it is in thelatter end of May,
for then all the herbs is are to be had.

78
103

To make Citterne Water

Lady Wilmot
A ffan

X
Take your Citerns and wipe them very clean with a wett course
Cloth, and dry stem againe very well another dry Cloth, then cutt
your  Cittrons in long pieces, but touch not the meate, you may keepe t
to make Syrrup which is a very cordiall thing.  Pare of your yellowrind
of your pieces of Cittron  very thinne and putt them into a well glased
Galley pot and putt to them as much of the best Canary as will couer
the Rindes.  So stopp Your pott very well that nothing may gett into
it.  Then pare your pieces over againe as long as you can see any of
the Strength of Your Rinde left, & putt t into another Galley putt
by it Selfe and couer it with Sacke, and stopp it very close, & let it all
stand 24 houres then sett your glasse into a Limbeck into a pott well
bodied with hey, then putt in those parings and sacke which you did
pare last into the Limbeck, and so putt the yellow rindes & sack that it
may be uppermost in the Limbeck, then powre in some more Sacke ac-
cording to your discretion, and sett on the Head of the Limbeck past it
up close, then fill your pott with warme water and make a soft Fire
under it, and let it heat by degrees, then make the glasses ready to re-
ceiue your water in and putt some Amber Greece finely ground, & an
Ounce of white Sugar Candy to euery pinte and so lett your water
dropp upon it, and when your glasse is full change it & with your
Bodkin stirr the Sugar from the bottome of the glasse, and couer it
with single paper untill it be thorough Cold then stop it close.

In the like manner you may make Orange or Lemmon water.
I use to take to 5 great Cittrons three gallons of Sack, to a hundred
of Lemmons the like quantity, & to a hundred of Oranges 4 gallons
if you please you may putt halfe white wine in stead of sacke.

The Great Palsie Water also for the Apoplexie.

Take of Lavender Flowers stripped from their Stalkes and with
them

Sr H Fensh: Lady
A ffan






184

them a large gallon Glasse, and powre to them very good
Spiritt of Wine, of perfect Aqua Vitae.  Then circulate them
for 6 weekes together close stopped with a Bladder, & see no-
thing breake out, & let them stand in a warme place,
then distill them into a Limbeck still with its cooler.  Then
putt into the Water of Sage flowers Rosemary flowers, Be-
tony flowers of each a handfull, Borage flowers, Bugloss
flowers, the flower of Lilium Convadium, of Cowslipp flowers
of each a handfull, steepe these flowers in good Malago or
Aqua vitae.  I doe steepe euery flower and hearb in good
Spiritt of wine, every one in their Season till all may be had,
then putt them being all sundry digested together, putt
also to them Balme, Motherwort, Spike flowers, Bay Lea-
ues, the Leaues of Oranges so they may be had, and their
flowers, of each one ounce, Cutt them all small and putt
them into the aforesaid distilled wine, and putt them all to-
gether and distill them as before, being steeped the space of 8
weeks, then putt into this distilled water, Cittron pills dried
the yellow pill, or else of Lemond pill and Peony seeds hulled
of each 8 drachmes, Cinnamon 1/2 an Ounce, Nutmeggs
Mace Cardomones, Cubebes, yellow Saunders of each 1/2 an
Once, Lignum Aloes one drachme, make all these in
powder and putt them in this distilled Water. Close your
Vessell with a double Bladder, Let them digest 8 weekes,
straine this hard with a presse, and filterate the Liqour,
and putt into this liquour prepared pearle 2 drachmes, prepared
smaragdus a Scruple, Amber Greece, Muske, Saffron of each1/2
a Scruple Red Roses dried, and sweete smelling red Saunders &
yellow of each one ounce, hang these in a Sarsenett Bagg in the
water well closed that nothing breath out.

The Vertues of the Palsie water is as
followeth.

This

70
185

This water is of Excellent Vertue in all soundings, in weakenes
of heart, and decaying of Spiritts, it is of great Vertue in all Apople-
xies, Palsies, Epilepsies, also in all paines of the ioynts comming of  Cold,
all Bruises outwardly bathed, and dipped Clothes in it and and layd to them,
= The Vertues are more then a Man would conceiue, this strengtheneth
and comforteth all the Animall Vitall and Naturall Spiritts, & cleareth
e externall Sences, strengtheneth the Memory restoreth lost Appetite
all weakenes of the Stomacke both to be taken inwardly & outwardly ba-
thed, take a Quarter of a Spoonfull and fast after it an houre, it ta-
keth away Giddinesse of the Head, helpeth the hearing, bringeth a plea-
sant Breath, & there can be no better Remedy in all Palsyes & Apoplexies
both to helpe in the fitt, and to preuent, If you take morning & Eue-
1 quarter of a Spoonfull with Crums of Bread and Sugar, It hel-
peth the lost Speech, helpeth all Cold Dispositions of the Liuer, & a be-
ginning Dropsie, helpeth all cold Diseases of the Mother. None can
sufficiently expresse the Vertues of this incomparable Water.

+ A Water for the Canker

My Mother. Take Ouesfoote, Archangell, huice with the Berries, Young red
A ffan Brier topps and Leaues, white Roses the Leaues and Budds, Sage
Celendine, Wood bind, of each a like quantity, cutt or chopp them,
putt them into good white Wine with clarefied honey & breake into
it Allome, glasse, and a little of the Powder of Aloes, & Hippaticy,
then distill these alltogether in a Limbecke of Glasse, one that Aqua
vita hath been distilled in. Keepe this water close and it is not
only good for the Canker, but if 2 droppes of it be daily putt into
the Eye with a little Fennell water:

+ A Water for Sore Eyes

My Mother Take Red Rose water, Plantaine water, and Eyebright water a
A ffan like quantity, putt into it Lapis Tussia fine Powder, as much as to
make it of a good thicknes when it is stirred together, when you doe





186. use this use it on this manner, shake it in the glasse
untill it be thicke, then putt it into your Eyes dropping
it in and close the Eye after it, & a Cloth 2 or 3 times
double wett in the same Water, on the Topp of your
Eye lid, and bind it with a fillett.

A ffan To make Water of Life
A Hon. Sr. H. Finch. Lady.

Take Balme Leaves and Stalkes, Burnett Leaues &
Flowers, Rosemary, Turmentill Leaves & Rootes, Rosa
Solis, Red Roses, Red Fennell Leaues and Rootes & red
Mints, of each one handfull, putt all these hearbes into
a pott well glased and putt therto as much white wine as
will cover the hearbes, Lett them soake therein 8 or 9
daies, then take Cinammon, Ginger, Cloves, Saffron
and Nutmeg of each one Ounce of Annyseeds, Raisins
of the Sunne & of Sugar of each one pound, of dates stoned
2 pound. The hinder parts of an odd Rabbet, a good flesht
running Capon, the flesh & sinews of a leg of Mutton,
4 Young Pigeons, a dozen of Larks e yolkes of 12 Eggs, a
loafe of white Bread cutt in slices, 3 gallons of Muskadine,
or as much as suffiseth for the distill, all these in a lim-
beck at one time, and putt therto of Methridate or per-
fect Treacle 3 Ounces, Distill it with a moderate fire,
& keepe the First Water by it Selfe, & e second by it
Selfe, when there cometh no more water with Stringes
take away the Limbecke and putt into the stuffe more
Wine & distill it againe and You shall haUe another good
Water
Of the First Ingredients of this water you must keepe in a
double glasse warily, for it is a restoratiue to all principall
Members, and defendeth against all pestilent Diseases, as the Palsie
Dropsie,

80

Dropsie, Spleene, Yellow or black Iaundices, and for wormes in the
Belly, and for all Agues be they hott or Cold, for all manner of
Swellings, for Melancholicke and Phlegmatick Persons, & it com-
forteth all the Spiritts & strings of the Braine, Heart, Milt,
Liuer and Stomach, by taking thereof 2 or 3 Spoonfulls, at a time
with oyle, Wine or Beere, putt a little Sugar therein, it helpeth
digestion, breaketh Wind, stoppeth a loosenesse and bindeth, it easeth.
the heartburning, it quickeneth the Memory. takeing of this water
3 spoonfulls a day, One in the morning, one at noone & one as night.

+ To make Wormewood Water:
My Mother.
A ffa

Take Roman Wormwood and English of each one pound, Liquorice
and Annyseeds of each 2 pound, cutt your Hearbes, slice your Liquorice,
and fanne your seeds, and putt to them 2 gallons of the spiritt of
Wine, Letting it steepe one night, then distill it the next day, & take
the First Quart by it Selfe, the second also & likewise the third.

+ Dr. Steuens Water
My Mother.
A ffan

Take a gallon of good Gascoigne Wine, then take Ginger, cinna-
mon, Nutmegs, Graines, Annyseeds of each a Drachme, Take Sage,
Red Mints, Red Roses, Tyme Pellistory, Rosemary, Fennell Seeds,
Cerraway seeds, wild tyme, Camomill, Lavender of each a handfull, beat
the spices small, and stampe the Hearbes and putt them all into the
Wine, and let it stand so 12 houres stirring it continually, then distill
it by a Limbeck , and keepe the first pint by it selfe, for it is e best,
keepe also the Second pint by it Selfe for it is good, but not so good as e
first. The Vertue of this Water is, it comforteth the Vitall Spiritts,
it helpeth the diseases that come of cold, & shaking of e Palsie
It cureth the Dropsie and Contraction of Sinewes, It helpeth the
conception of Women that are barren, it helpeth the Cold Cough, it kil-
leth Wormes in the Body, it helpeth the tooth Ach and comforteth the
Stomach very much, it helpeth the Stone in the Bladder, & e reines & e
backe





108

backe, it helpeth a stinking Breath.  Whosoever useth this wa=
ter sometymes and not to often, it presenteth him in a good li=
king and shall make Him seeme young very long.  This water
will be better if it stand in the Sunne all the Summer tyme.
With this water Dr.  Stevens preserved his owne Life & lay 5
yeares bedridd when other Physitians judged him not able to live
one yeare and confessed a little before His Death that if he were
sicke at any time, he never used any other Medicine but this
water.  When you distill this Water let it dropp upon Sugar
Candy, an ounce to a pinte of Water with halfe a Dramme
of Amber gris to a quart of Water.  passe it twice through 2
handfulls of your best Clove Gilley Flowres, then stop it close,
and keepe it for your use.  2 Spoonefull of the Strong or
3 of the weake is the usuall quantity taken in a morning fasting.

Cinamon Water

X My Mother
A.H

First take of Cinnamon 2 pound, Sweet Marjoram 3 handfull,
of Angelica a handful of Damaske Rose Leaves 2 handfulls
Balme 1/2 a handfull, Rosemary Leaves 2 handfulls, putt all these
together into 2 gallons of Sacke and distill it with a Limbecke
when it is distilled puts into it 1/4 of a pound of double refined
Sugar & 10 graines of Amber gris.  then let it stand in the
Sunne a weeke & then straine it and keepe it for your use.

X  Sweete Water.

Lady Wostenholt
A Har

Take Lavender flowres, Pinke flowres, Callimint sweet
mint, Maudlen, Thyme, Rosemary, Spikenard, Gallingall
Walnutt tree Leaves of each a like quantity, Rose Leaves as
many as all the other, cutt them small & stir them all together,
then take powder of yrios, & of Damaske powder to the quan=
tity of a gallon of Liquor, 1/2 a pound of each of the powder, then
take Benjamin, Mace and Cloves of each a little, beat them all in
a Mort.



109

a Morter, and mingle them with the hearbes, and putt them
all together inan Earthen pott, with as much Ale when it is in
Comes as will cover them all.  Let them stand 2 or 3 dayes stirring
them often for heating then distill it in a Limbeck & keepe it
in Glasses well closed putting a little Muske and Campher if you
please in the Glasse.

X A Water comparable to Gold.

L Butler
A Han

Take a gallon of white Wine, 4 ounces of Gentian, and 24 oun=
ces of Centaury, stamp them together, putt the Wine to them & let
them soake together 5 dayes, then distill them in an ordinary still,
& keepe the water in a close vessell, & when you afe it take 2 or 3
Spoonfull morning & Evening.
This water preserveth the Body form all manner of diseases, it put=
teth away all Imposthumes, it maketh good Coulour, it resisteth the
Plague, avoideth stiff Stomacks, it breaketh the Stone in ye reines,
it reparates & putts away watry humors, of your spleene, it purgeth your
Belly also, it purgeth all Coller & corrupt Blood,
it healest all wounds in your Belly, it healeth poysenes bitings, & it cleareth your sight
to the healing of wounds the powder of Centaury  ought to be drunke
with it the weight of 4lb or 6 lb at a time.

X  The Spiritt of Amber Gris

La Bugler
A Han

Take 1/2 an ounce of Amber Gris, cut it gros, putt it into a pint &
1/2 of pure Spiritt of Wine, keepe them close stops in a glasse for 3
months, then cant your liquour from the Frace, & put the liquor
which is your Spiritt in a Glasse, then sett it in the Sunne till it
be perfect, the clearer it is the better for your use.

X   To make a Sweet Water of Roses ye best way.

La: Bedles.
fan

Take one pound of Damaske Rose Leaves that were dried in a Glasse,
putt to it tenne pints of running Water distill then in a Limbecke,
and so keepe it for your use.  If you would have them extraoronary
you







190

You may perfume them with what Quantity of Muske &
Amber you will. 'Tis best stilld in January or February.

Receipt for Sweet Water.
+
Dr. Fraiser
A. Fan
Take Damaske Rose Leaves, picke them from the stalkes,
then have a pott of what size you thinke fitt & lay Roses at ye
bottome about 4 or 5 inches thicke, then cover them with bay
Salt so lay another lay of Roses couering them with Salt,
so doe till the pott be full, then let it stand close covered in a
Sellar till it be consumed, and distill it in a potte with a Still,
you must be sure to keepe the earthen potte close at no aire
come in to the Roses whilst they dissolve.
There will come of this water an oile with which anointing e
Temples and e mole of the Head is the greatest comforter of
the braine at is, & helpeth the paine in the Head.

To make Cherrie Water
+
Mrs. Heath
A Fan
Take 2 quarts of Clarett Wine, & putt into it 4 pounds of
Cherries Stones and all, one handfull of Rosemary, one hand=
full of Balme, 2 Ounces of Cinnamon, 1/2 an Ounce of Nut-
megs quarterd, steepe these in an Earthen pott all night, & e
next morning putt them into your still, keepe a pretty
quicke fire under it. Putt into every Quart of water distilld,
4 ounces of white Sugar Candy, & 4 graines of Amber greece
then sunne it as you doe you other Waters, passe thorough
2 Handfulls of Clove Gilly flowers before you Sunne it.

Spiritt of Clarie
+
Lady Bedles
A Fan
Take a still full of Clarie and putt to it a pottle of white
Wine, and still it in a Rose water still. You may putt to it a little
fine sugar & Amber Greece tied in a tiffany if you please.


191
To make the Water calld Aqua Mirabilis.
+
My Mother
A Fan
Take the seeds of Cardamum, Cubebes, Galingall, Melilott
Flowers, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Ginger of each a Drachme,
being made into powder, putt them into 3 pints of white Wine,
& one pint of Aqua vitae, & one pint of the juice of Salendine.
Putt all these into the Glasse still and so let them incorporate all
Night, in e morning distill it with a soft fire in Water, Let it
drop on Sugar Candy, Putt into the glasse a little Amber Greece
& of this Quantity there will be 2 Quarts, keepe one Quart by it
Selfe for it is strong, When you use it you may mingle it stronger
or smaller as you please. You may make it in the Winter with e
juice of the Rootes. You may take it when you please. The usu=
all takeing is halfe an houre before you dinner or supper, or be-
fore you goe to bed one spoonfull or 2 at a time.
'Tis of a secret Nature it dissolveth the impostumation of e
Lungs, without any grievance, it openeth Melancholy, it expelleth
e stopping of e Urine, profiteth e stomach very much, it also con-
serveth youth, and preserveth the Memory, it destroys e Palsie, &
give one spoonfull to a Person labouring for Life & it relieveth
& reviveth very much. Of all artificiall Water ther is none better
then this. In Summer use one spoonfull fasting and in Winter 2.

A Receipt for Balme Water.
+
My Mother
A Fan
Take 3 Gallons of the strongest Ale out of e fatt untunnd & 2
pound of the greenest Liquorice scraped very cleane, & bruised, take
1/2 a pound of Annyseeds rubbd in a Cloth, fanne away the dust & bruise
them, take a bushell of balme upheapt, stampe it in a morter  lit=
tle, then putt your Ale into a stone-pott with a narrow Mouth, Let
all these aforenamed be infused therin a day & a night, then distill it
in a Limbecke.

Snaile Water or Worme Water.
+
La: Bedles.
A Fan
Take a pottle of Earth Wormes gathered in the latter end of Aprill or e








beginning of May, open them cleane through & pike them cleane & wash
them seven times in white wine.  Then take a peck of
Snailes shells and all, Lay them on a cleane Hearth or Oven
Bottome made very hott with Charcole, & betweene the Snails
here and there some hott Charcoales, & cover them with a pan
that is hotte, and let them continue there untill they have done
making a noise which will be about a Quarter of an houre.
Then picke them and wash them & bruise them a little.
Then take Hartshorne newly scraped, One pound of very new=
ly raspt, Cloves 4 Ounces, Egrimony, Salensone, Scabious,
fumisory of each 3 handfulls, Rosemary flowers a pottle,
Saffron newly sowsed 1/2 an Ounce, mixe all these, & infuse
them 24 houres in 2 gallons of  good Ale, then putt it in a Lim=
beck & draw it of with a gentle Fire.  Preserve the first 3
pints by its selfe, and your smaller by its selfe being 6
pints more.
The rest will be of little Effect.  Take of your stronger water 2
Spoonfulls at once in a little Beere and Sugar an houre or 2
before dinner & Supper, and of the smaller 4 Spoonfull at
once in like manner.  It is good agst the Reestick Consumpti
on your Jaundies or any other disease that proceeds from obtruction
of the Liver.

Francisco Morenos way of perfuming
of Skinns
X

H Stan

First chuse your Skinns of Corouan or hide of Spanish
dressing without Salt, & as Spunge as you can gett:  Soake
them very well in Rose water, & rubbe it in, then perfume it in
a stove with Benjamin and Florax, and at the last a little
Pastilles.  If you meane to be as much chardge of Amber, doe
this over 2 or 3 times as the last of all when they are almost
drie rubb them on the ruffe side very limber & anoint them
with this Composition of Amber, which is made thus.

Warme



193

Warme a Brasse Morter and pestle, then putt into it an Ounce
or lessse of finett, & assoone as that is reduced to an Oile, put into
it 2 ounces of Ambar Gris, & stirr it in the finnett with the warme
Pestle till all be well incorporated, then poure in some fresh drawne
Oyle of Ben to dilate it, and likewise a little Orange flower water
till you find it so thinne that it will easily sink into the leather.
Then last of all putt in a Quarter of an ounce of Muske, & worke it
perfectly well with the rest then rubbe it by little & little into yor
Leather. doing of it over severall times, till a large Skinn have
drunke up all this proportion, or ten paire of large Gloves, or Pockets
or what you please. then let them dry upon papers on a Table in the
Shade that day, the next day sett them in the Strong Sunne, & as
they dry turne them, lying upon Papers and some wollen Cloth,
till they be thorough dry & Stiffe; then rubbe and worke them in the
Hands, till they be very limber, & so putt them up in Papers wrapd in
a warme Place in Woollen, and kept from Linnen.

The 10th day of June in Madrid.  1650

According to the proportion Perfumes may be made

Viz.

Ingredients for
perfumes & making
of Beades.

To an Ounce of Ambar, a quarter of an ounce of algalla an Ounce
of the oyle of the flower Jasmin, & halfe an Ounce of albastera.

To make Paste Beades

Viz

A Stan

Grind the Quantity of Ambar you please upon a Stone of purpose
such as the Painters use &c.  and one quarter part of algalla; & the
like of almisle of so much quantity as the amber, & then putt there=
unto a little alquitura, & boile the same together to a Mass, and thereof
make the Beades with your Hands as you please, putting throw them a
a thred with a needle, then dry them.






194
To perfume Damaske Roses.

Lady Bedles
A ffan Take Damaske Roses put them into a wide mouthed Glasse,
& stopp them close with Parchment, sett them upon Leades in
the Sunne, or some very hotte place where the Sunne comes,
shaking them twice or thrice a day till they be dry, then make
a powder thus.

Take cleare and faire Beniot, Storax, Galean, Lignum A-
loes, Amber Gris, Mace of Leuants, Lemmon peele, Cittern
peel, Orange peel, Orange flowers, Sweet Marjoram, Lemmon
Time, Myrtle leaves, bruise your hearbes, beat your powders
& take what proportions will serue your Roses, & mix the Quan-
tities as best please your sense; then putt all your powders in-
to the Glasse, tye them with paper & parchment & waxe &
a parchment ouer that, that no ayre possibly can get in, nor
sent come out; set them in the heat of the Sunne as long
as it last, & in the Euenings and nights keepe it in a Stoue;
This doe for a month or fiue weeks, then you may use it, put
into little Sarsenet Baggs, & layne amongst your Clothes, it
will last longest with woollen,  This a rare perfume putting
a little of it into your perfuming pann with Orange Flower
water or Rose water or Lemmon lime water.


84
195

To make the best Pastiles to burn
in the world, taught me
by a seruant of Franciso
Morenas, who was his nephew
& came, & made them m my house
before me, this present 17th of Nov.
1664 in or house at the siete Chimeneas
at Madrid

A ffan

Beat & searse a pound & a half of Benjamin
as fine as can be done in the finest couer'd searse
beat an once & quarter of storax in a Morter
grinding it very well, put in to a deep preseruing
pan that is round bottm'd, the storax, & thereupon
as much of the damaske rose water, as will wett
it then sett it vpon a very softe fire, stirring it
very well with a long spatila till it is almost
ready to boyle, then straw in a little Benjamin
stirring it continually, then poure in more rose
water, & then the rest of your Benjamm, & then
more rose-water, in all about 3 Wine Pints,
let ^it then stand, thus upon the fire, till wth the
heat thereof, & perpetuall stirring it become
a very thin paste, in the water, against which time
haue ready this compound thus prepar'd. Sett
a little brasse morter on the fire and with e pistle
in it fill'd a quarter full with rose water, & when
it is scalding hott, wash the Morter & pistle very
well therewith then dry it with a clean hott Cloth, sett
it on the fire again; & when it is very soft take
it off, & putt in half an ounce of Amber Greece
grinding





196. grinding it till it be very well melted, then
put in to it, halfe a quarter of siuett, wth forty
drops of e Essence of Jesmin or Orange, wch you
like best, when these are all perfectly well in-
corporated in the Morter, poure out e water
from e Paste, very cleare, & poure in vpon the
paste this mixture, leauing in e Morter what
hangs about it of this composition; mingle e
paste, & e Amber very well together wth e
fingers, till all be perfectly well incorporated,
then poure e rose water into e bason, t you
poured out before, & sett it vpon a very few
soft Embers stirring it till it be lithe enough
to be work'd, then take it out in little peeces &
knead it in e hand, then pull from t little
bitts, making them vp, between e fingers & e
thumb, e bignesse of a threepence, & e thicknesse
of a Croune peece, when you haue made them
all, heating in e morter e rest of  e compound
rub them all ouer therewth if you like it, you
may presse them wth yre own seale, as you make
them, you must keepe them in a box close
euery one lap'd vp in a  seuerall paper, when
you burne them you must wet them &  lay
them vpon very soft fire.

85
197.
 To make spanish hypocrist, which
exceeds all other. Madrid 8th Decer 1664.
A ffan
Put into a great earthen pott well glac'd 36 wine ges
of e whitest & strongest white wine & pound of loafe
sugar - beate small, 4 ounces of e best sinamon bruised
in a morter, stirr all this very well together, & lett them
stand close couer'd 5 houres, then put in a quarter of an
ounce of Cloues bruis'd, e pile of two Oranges & 2 Lemons
cut in bitts, as bigg as a beane stirr it well about till
you are sure e sugar be well incorporated therein then
passe it thorough a new cotton bagg of neer a yard long,
made about a span ouer on top, & with a point at e bottome
boyle it very well, then rinse it in cold water then ring it
very dry, then put it into a bason, & poure 3 pintes of new
milke upon it & lett e bagg lye therein, halfe an houre, then
hang it vp dropping wett, as it came out of e milke, tying
^it with a round e strings about a rounde Iron that path
a spike fastned into e wall, then put e milke into e CBatt
twice or thrice, & then e wine, & soe as you draine e wine
out of e bagg, put it into e pott, till you haue very well
mingled all together, & t it run cleare thorough e bagg,
keeping e bag always full, tis best drawne into bottles wch
must be stop'd, as soone as they are full if you please
you may perfume e sugar wth Ambar- Greece.





198
Surfett Water
A ffan
Take a Gallon of Brandy & a Pint of Damaske rose
water, one pound of white suger candy, half a pint of
Poppy water, 1 1/2 li of reasons of the sunne stoned, half a
pound of Dates stoned, & sliced thinn, j℥ of mace & j℥ of
Cloves & j℥ of sinamon, these must bee brused, one ounce
of anniseedes rubbed cleane & the dust blown out, & brused
a quarter of an sound of Licoris scraped & sliced; Then putt all
these thinges into the Brandy, with a good handfull of
red poppy Leaues, and 12d worth of ambar greece and
6d worth of muske; The sweetes must bee tyed vp in a
little bitt of Lawn & so putt into the glasse; and when
they haue steeped nine dayes togeather, strayne it out:
But bee sure you stirr it every day whilst it standes.

A ffan A Course Powder for great linnin
Lay Cleavland
Orris roots 2 pound, Callamus Arromaticus, Lignum,
Rodium, & yellow sanders, of y each one pound;
Cittern Rind, lemon Pill, drest Merioram, of each
10. ounces; Cipress roots 2 pound & a half; Benjamine
12 ounces, storax 6 ounces, Rose cakes not burnt or leaus
5 pound, Lauender flowers, Mellilot flowers, of each
8 ounces; Cloues, & Cinamond, of each 2 ounces &
a half, Corriander seeds 5 ounces.
A made into a gross powder.

86
199
Angilica Water
A ffan
Take of the leavie of Angelica 8 ouncis, of Carduns
benedictus 6 ounces of Balmi & sage of each 4 ounces,
Angelica seeds 6 ounces, sweet fennel seeds 9 ounces, lett the
hearbs bee dried and cutt small & the seeds grossely bruised.
to wch of the spices callid Aromaticum rosatum, & Diamoscha
dulce, of each one ounce and a half. Infuse them in 32 pints
of sack, then distill them in a lembeck wth gentle fire and wth
euery pint mix 2 ounces of sugar dissolved in rosewater.
Lett the 3 first pints be called by the name of spirit, the rest
by the name of water.

This is an excellent cordiall to strengthen the heart and
resist infection, & therefore is verie wholsome in pestilentiall
times.

A fine Powder for linnin
A ffan
Lay Cleavland
orris roots two pounds & a half: Lignum Rodrum
6 ounces scraped; lemon pill an ounce & a half. Cloues
4 ounces & a half: Cipress roots 3 ounces, Damask
Roseleaus dryed a pound & a half, Benjamine 1/4
storax. 2 ounces 1/4: labdanum i & ounce 2 Drachme
sweet Marjoram 3 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus 2
Drachm, Musk Cod 6 Drachms.
Make all these into a gross powder.





200 To dresse Hunsia
x
A ffan
Take a pound of old Lavander, 6 qts of strong
vinegar, a dram of muske, 2 Drams of mother
of Cloue, an Ounce of Franquisence, an Ounce
of storax, an Ounce of sharpe sinanon, halfe
an Ounce of P  halfe an Ounce of
perfum'd Pastills 2 Nutmeggs, 1/2 a Dram
of Civet, 1/2 a Dram of Amber.
The Lavand & vinegar boyle together, &
straine them, Sauing e  juncia all open in a
bason prouided for the purpose, wth e fore-
sayd things pounded & put in e bason then
put in e vinegar, & Cover it very well for
24 houres, & afterwards leave e perfume
open & stirr e Huncia in it once in 2 dayes


87
To perfume 12 pr of ordinary 201
seized gloues either for men or
women wth the same Compound of
Ambar t Franco Morena in his
life did & his seruant now doth
Madrid e 3d of Octr 1665
A ffan
x
Heat in a morter scalding hott Rose or Ambar
water, & likewise put one end of e pestle into e
fire to be hott alsoe, pour e water wch must
be about a pint into an new Earthen pott
put into the Morter an Ounce of the best
Amber Greece, grind it very well till it is
melted, put thereunto a quarter of an ounce
of Civett, 3 spoonfull of the best Essence of
Jesemin, as much Gum Dragon t hath been
steeped e night before in rosewater, as will
make it as thick as e yolke of a new layd Egge
grind this Compound very well together, pouring
in e grinding 3 or 4 spoonfulls of e same water
t was heated in e Morter then putt e
fingrs of e gloves upon a glove stick & anointe
them first wth e fingers, then e glove laying
them smooth one Upon the other as you doe them
when they are all done lay them vpon a skin
one by one in e heat of the sunne till they
be thorough dry, wch will be in halfe an houre
the same skin Upon wch lay them, you must make
all sortes of perfumes vpon, because any
other thing takes away e sent
All perfumes are best made in July.





202 To make a compound for a pome
by Fransisco Morena de Madrid
Oct 4th 1665

A fan Take a pound of e best Benjamin beat if
& searse it very fine. then put it into e
pomo, beat a quarter of an Ounce of Ambar-
Greece into a fine powder, put t in likewise
then put in half a quarter of an Ounce of
siuett & about half an ounce of Lemon pill
shred small, stirr all these well together
wth a spatila, then power in by Little by Little
as much rose water as fills it vp to e top
stirring it Continually, this is a proportion
for a pomo t holds 2 quarts, when you would
vse it sett vpon e bottom of a perfuming
pan or chaffing dish of fire for half an
hour then sett it by in a safe place till
next time you haue occasion for it e
powders must never be dry, but as e water
consumes fill it vp againe. This sent will
neuer be decay till e powder be Consumed
wch will be some yeares first.

88
203

To make Cowslip wine

A ffan +

Take three gallons of fair water, put to it 6 pound of the best powder
Sugar, or if you please lofe sugar, boyl these together half an hour, or better,
As the scum riseth take it off; power it forth and set it a cooling; when tis
Almost cold take a spoonfull of yeist beat well with six ounces of juice of citern
Brewing it up and Downe with a dish in the liquor, then take a gallon of
Pickt cowslips, breuse them in a stone morter, and put them to it; let them stand
Tow or three days, then strain it forth and put it into a cask that it may fill;
and when it works, but not ouer, stop it up close: when it is three weeks or a month
old bottle it up and put into euery botle a lump of sugar.
For want ^of juice of citern, I put in a quart of white wine.

+ A drink for a cold.

Take two quarts of spring water, and put into it coftsfoot scabious & maiden hair
of each half a handfull an ounce of liquoris scrapt and sliced, a hanfull of
Rasins of the sun ston'd and a spoonfull of anice seeds brused then let all these
Boyle softly till one pint be consumed then take it up and strain it the party
May drink as much and as often of this as they please, a little warme.

A ffan + The milk surfitt water.

Take 6 handfulls of mint, and 6 Cardus, 3 of wormwood shred these
Together and steepe them all night in 6 quarts of milke, and in the morning
drawe them in a Common still, this will make 4 quarts of good water, the
slower the still is the better.





204

89
205
A ffan + To make the red surfett water

Take a gallon of brandy, a pint of damak rose water, a pound
of white sugar candy, half a pint of red poppy water, a pound
& a half of Raisons of the sun stoned, half a pound ^of dates sliced
thin, cloues, mace, Cinamon, Anniseeds, of each an ounce; liquorice
a quarter of an ounce, Red poppye flowers a handfull two grains
of amber greese.

The Stone Water
+
Take a handfull of Phillipendula, a handfull of
Garden prosper, a handfull of Pellitory of the wall
a handfull of Mother Thyme a handfull of saxafrage
a handfull of Garden Parsly, 6 Radishes sliced, steep all
these all night in a gallon of Red Cows Milk and still
it off next day; take 4 spoonfulls of the water with 4
spoonfulls of white wine with a little Nutmegg and sugar
morning and Evening first and last two days before
and after the new and full of e Moon.

Not Many days
after you haue taken
the Medicine






206

90
207
For Putrified Lungs
Take 1/2 a pint of white wine & sweeten it with 2
great spoonfull of liue hony & drink this euery morn-
ing for a month together you may put a sprig or 2
of Bame in it if you please





208

91
63
PERFEVMES

Francisco Morenos way of Perfuming
of Skinns

First Chuse yr Scinns of Cordauan or Kide of Spannish
dressing without Salt, & as spungie as you can gett. soake
them very well in Rose water, & rubbe it in, then Perfume
it in a Stoue with Benjamin & Storax, & att e last a lit-
tle Pastilles, if you meane to be at much Charge of Amber,
doe this ouer 2 or 3 times att e last of all when they are
almost dry rubb them on e ruffe side uery limber & anoint
them with this Composition of Amber, which is made thus
Warme a brasse Morter & Pestle, then putt into it an ounce or
Lesse of Ciuett, & as soone as that is redused to an oile, putt
into it 2 ounces of Amber Greece, & Stirr it in e Ciuett
with e warme Pestelle till all be well incorperated, then
powre in some fresh drawn Oyle of Benjamin to dilate it
& likewise a little Orange Flowre water till you find it
so thinne that it wil esily sinke into e leather then last
of all putt in a Quarter of an ounce of muske, & worke
it perfectly well with e rest. then rubbe it by litle & little
into yr Leather, doing of it ouer seuerall times, till a Large
cinne haue drunke up this proportion, or so paire of large
Gloues or Pockets, or what you please. then lett them drie
upon pappers on a table in e shade that day, e next
dat sett them in e Strongest sunne & as they drie torne
them, lying upon papers & some Woolin Clothe, till
they be thorough drie & stiffe, then rubbe & worke them in
yr hands, till they be uery limber; & so putt them up in Pa-
pers wrapt in a warme plase in Woolin, & kept from
Linnen,





64

The 18 day of June in Madrid 1650

According to this proportion. Perfumes may be made

Viz

To an ounce of Amber a Quarter of A ounce of
Algalla, an ounce of the oyle of the Flowre Jasmin,
& halfe an ounce of Albatera.

To make Paste Beades

Viz

Grind the Quantity of Amber  yu please upon a
stone of purpose such as the Painters use &c. & one
quarter part of Algalla, & the like of Almisile of
so much quantety as the Amber & then putt there-
unto a little Alquitira, & boyle the same together to
a Mass, & there of make the Beades with your hands
as you please, putting thorough them a thred with
a nidle, & so drie them.

To perfume Damaske Roses

Take Damaske Roses putt them into a wide mouthed
glasse & stopp them Close with partchement, sett the,
upon leades in the Sunne, or some other very hotte place
where the Sunn comes, shaking them twice or thrice a
day till they be dry then make a powder thus.
Take Cleare & faire Beniot, Storax, Galean, Lignum
Aloes, Amber Grise, Mace of Levanto, Lemon Peele,
Cittorn Peele, Orange Peele, Orange Flowers, sweete
Marjoram, Lemon time, Myrtell Leaues, bruise the Hearbes
beate your Powders & take what proportions will seue your


92
65

Roses, & mixe your Qunteties as best pleas your Sence; then putt
all your Powders into the Glasse, tye them with paper & parch-
ments & wax, & a parchment ouer that, that no ayre possibly
can gett in, nor Sent come out, Sett them in the heat of the Sunne
as longe as it lasts & in the Evenings & night keepe it in
a Stoue, this do for a mounth or five weeks, then yu may vse it,
putt into little Sarsenett baggs, & layer amunge your Clothes.
it will last longest with woollen, this is a rare perfume
putting a little of it into a perfuming pann, with Orange
Flower water or Rose water or lemmon time buds water.

To make the best Pastiles to burn in the
World, taught me by a seruant of Francisco
Morenas, who was his Nephew & Came & made
them in my house before me, this present 17th
of Nour, 1664 in our house at the Siete Chimeneas
at Madrid.

Beat & searse a pound & halfe of Benjamin as finely
as cann be done in the finest couerd searse, beat an ounce &
Quarter of Storax in a morter, grinding it very well, putt
into a deep preseruing pann, that is round bottom'd the
Storax, & there vpon as much of the Damask Rose water,
as will wett it, then sett it vpon a very soft fire, stirr-
-ing it very well, with a longe spatila, till it is almost redy
to boyle, then straw in a little Benjamin, stirring it con-
tinually, then poure in more rose water, & then the rest
of your Benjamin & then more rose water, in all about 3
Wine Pintes, lett it then stand thus vpon the fire tell
with the heat thereof, & perpetuall stirring, it become
a uery thin paste, in the water, against which time haue
haue ready this compound thus prepar'd.






66
Sett a little brasse morter on ye fire with e pestell in it
fill'd with Rose water a quarter full & when it is Scalding
hott, wash e morter & pestell uery well therewith, then dry
it with a Clean hott Cloth, sett it on ye fire again & when
it is uery hott take it off, & putt in halfe an ounce of Am-
ber Grise grinding it till it be uery well melted, then putt
into it halfe a quarter of Siuett, with forty drops of e
Essence of Jasmin, or orange which yu like best, when they
are all well incorporated in e morter, poure out e water
from e paste, uery Cleare, & poure in upon e paste this
mixture leauing in e morter what hangs about it of the
composition, mingle e paste & he Amber uery well toge-
ther with yr fingers, till all bee uery well incorporated
then poure e rose water into e bason, t you poured out
before & sett it opon a uery feu soft Embers, stirring til
it be lithe enough to be workt, then take it Out in little pee-
ces & knhed it in yr hand, then pull from yt litle bitts ma
king them up between yr> finger & yr thumb, e biggnes of
a threepence, & e thicknes of a Croun peece, when yu haue
made them all heating in e morter e rest of e Compound
rubb them all ouer therewith if yu like it, you may press
them with yr one Seale, as yu make them, you must keep
them in a box Close euery one lade up in a paper by them
selues when you burn them you must wett them & lay them
upon uery Soft Embers.

To make a Compound for a Pomo by
Francisco Morena Madrid Octor
the 4th 1665

Take a pound of e best Benjamen beat it & searse it
uery fine then putt it into e Pomo beat a quarter of an ounce
of Ambar Greece into a fine powder putt yt in likewise then
putt in halfe a quarter of an ounce of Siuett & about half
ounce of Lemon Pill shred small, stirr all thes well together
with a Spatila, then powre in by little & little as much


93
67

water as fills it up to e topp stirring it continualy, this is a propor-
tion for a Pomo that holds 2 Quarts, when you vse it sett it vpon e
bottom of a perfuming pann or Chaffing dish of Fire, for halfe an houre
then sett it by in a safe plase tell next time You have occation for it
the Powders must neuer be dry butt as e water Consumes fill it up
againe this sent will neuer decay till e powders be consumed
which will be some yeares first.

To perfume 12 pare of Ordinary Suesed Gloues
either for men or Women with the saime
Compound of Amber that Franco Morena
in his life did, & his Seruant now doth
Madrid e 3rd of Octr 1665

Heat in a Morter scalding hott Rose or Amber water, &
likewise putt one end of e Pestel into e Fire to be hott
alsoe, pour e water which must be about a pint into a new
Earthen pott putt into e morter an ounce of e best Amber
Greece grind it very well till it is melted, put thereunto a
quarter of an ounce of Ciuett, 3 spoonfulls of e best Es-
sence of Jesamin, as much Gum Dragon t hath been steeped
e night before in Rose water, as will make it as thick as
e Yolke of a new layd egge grind this compound very well
together; pouring in e grinding 3 or 4 spoonfulls of e
same water that was heated in e morter then put e fingers
of e Gloves upon a glove stike & anointe them firrst with
e fingers then e glove laying them smooth one upon
another as you doe them when they are all done lay them
upon a Scin one by one in e heat of e Sunne till they
be thorough dry which will be in halfe an hour e same
Skin vpon which lay them, you must make all sortes
of Perfumes vpon because any other thing takes away
the sent

All Perfumes are best made in July.





68
To dresse Hunsia

Take a pound of Ould Lauender, 6 Quarts of Strong
Vineger, a dram of Muske, 2 Drams of Mother of Cloue
an ounce of Frankquisence, an ounce of Storax, an Ounce
of Sharp, half an Ounce of half an ounce
of perfum'd Pastills, 2 Nutmeggs, 1/2 a Dram of Ciuett
1/2 a Dram of Amber
The Lauender and Vineger boyle together, and straine them,
hauing e Hancea all open in a bason prouided for e pur-
pose with e foresayd things pounded & putt into e ba-
son then putt in e Vineger and Couer it very well for 24
houres and afterwards leaue e perfume open & stirr e
Huncea in it once in 2 days,

A fine Powder for linnen,

Oras rootes tow pounds & a hafe Lignum Rodium 6
ounces scraped, Lemon peele an ounce and a half, Cloues
4 ounces & a half Cipress roots 3 ounces, Damask Rose
leaves dryed a pound and a half, Benjamine 1/4, Storax
2 ounces 1/4 : labdanun one ounce one Drachme, sweet
Marjoram 3 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus one Drachm

69
Storax 6 ounces. Rose Cakes not burnt or leaues 5 pound,
Lauender Flowers Mellilot Flowers of each 8 ounces, Cloues
& Cinnamond of each 2 ounces & a half Corriander seeds
5 ounces. All made into a gross Powder.





68
To dresse Hunsia
Take a pound of Ould Lauender, 6 Quarts of Strong
Vineger, a dram of Muske 2 Drams of Mother of Cloue
an ounce of Frankquisence, an ounce of Storax, an Ounce
of Sharp..., half an Ounce of ... an ounce
of perfum'd Pastills, 2 Nutmeggs, 1/2 a Dram of Ciuett
1/2 a Dram of Amber
The Lauender & Vineger boyle together, & straine them,
hauing e Huncea all open in a bason prouided for e pur-
pose with e forsayd things pounded & putt into e ba-
son then putt in e Vineger, & Couer it very well for 2
houres, & afterwards leauee perfume open & stirr e
Huncea in it once in 2 days,

A fine Powder for linnen,

Oras rootes tow pounds & a hafe Lignum Rodium 6
ounces scraped, Lemon peele an ounce & a half, Cloues
4 ounces & a half Cipress roots 3 ounces, Damask Rose
leaues dryed a pound & a half, Benjamine 1/4, Storax
2 ounces 1/4 labdanun one ounce one Drachme, sweet
Marjoram 3 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus one Drachm
Musk Cod 6 Drachms make all thes into a gross Powder

A Course Powder for great Linnin

Orris rootes 2 pound Callamus Arromaticus Lignum
Rodium & Yellow Sanders of each one pound Sittern
rind Lemon Pill drest Merioram of each 10 ounces,
Sipress rootes one pound & a half Benjamine 12 ounces,


94
209





210

95
211





212

96
213





214
X To make Gooseberry wine.

A ffan
You must take your gooseberryes before they bee
ripe, Pick them and beat them in a Morter
to mash then put them into as much spring water
as you think the ^quantity of Gooseberryes you haue, will make
very strong of the Gooseberry; let them stand a Day
or two till they shall heate, then runn it through
a Ielly bagg; and when you haue gott all the Liquor
sett it over the fire till it bee very hott, then take it
off, and let it stand till it bee cold. but when it is over
the fire you must putt in as much good sugar ^as you thinke
will make it fitt to drinke. when it is cold, bottle it up
stopping it very close, but not fill the bottle too full.

For Cherry or Currence wine.
A ffan X
You must take your fruite, pick them off the stalkes
bruise them and straine them. Lett the liquor stand in
a great bottle that will hold a great quantity, stopt up
close for a weeke, then open it. But be sure you do not
shake it. poure off all the cleare, bottle it up wiht a lump
of suger.

215
A ffan X  To make a Whip't Sullibub.

Take a pint & half of very good thicke creame, Put
to it a Pint of white wine, a wine = glasse of sack,
the Iuce of half a Lemmon, a Little peece of Lemmon
Peele, and a sprigg of rosemary: Sweeten it to your taste
Whip it round with a Birch rodd peeld, or a Peece of a
Whiske, in a creame pott till it bee thick, then Lowre it
as high into your Glasse as you can, for feare of
spilling it; Cover it & you may keep it a Day or two.

A ffan X  To make sweet water.

Take a good quantitiy of Damaske Roses a ffew cloves
and a very Little Lavander when tis young; Pick your
Roses, bruse, your Cloves, & Cutt your Lavander about a fingers
Length; Then Lay some of your Roses into your still.
Then some of your cloves, and then a Little Lavander
then Roses againe, so doe till you haue filld your Still.
Putt but a gentle fire vnder it. When the fire is out of it
Stopp it close with a Corke. spread with Civett & muske
on it, tyed up in sarsnett. (If you please you may
hang some in a little Bagg in it) then tye it over
with Leather. The Cake is very good to lay amongst
Linnen. This Water is best when a yeare old.

The best whit wax  Candles were Sold In the yeire
1663 at lisbone for 5 uintens the pound, and their
pound is larger than ours





218
X  To make Almond milke. for the fase
A ffan

Take as much water as you designe to make
milke, boyle as much ffrench Barly in it, as will
make it very slippy, shifting it till it Leaues cooleing
the water; when it is a Boyleing blanch some
bitter almonds, according to the quantity you desire
to make: If a quart, a small handfull or lesse will doe,
Beate them in a stone morter very small, and as
often as you beat them, dash in a little of your barly
water as till tis a boyleing, to keepe them from oyleing
when your Almonds are beat enough, and your water
is white and slippy, Putt your Almond into a thin
Cloath, and straine your water with them, wringing
hard, that the milke may come out of the Almonds
Let it stand till tis cold; then Putt it in a glasse; If
you would haue it fetch off scurfe, putt a pennyworth
of salt=peter, into Quart glasse, and power your milke
vpon it. Alwayes before you use it, shake your Glasse

To make Puffes.

A ffan
Take the Curdes of three pinte ^quarts of milke, putt to them neare
a whole nutmegg greated, e yolkes of 4 Egges, & e whites
of 2, putt into ^this about 2 Spoonefulls of suger, and a very
little salt, and mingle it with so very much fflower, as will
make it, pretty stiff not hard, when all this is mixt togeather,
It must bee putt vpon a slice, and then cutt off from it in
little rowles into a ffrying pann, with 2li of clarified butter which
must boyle, or bee very hott, before you putt in the Puffes, Thefire
must bee a quick wood fire; They must bee fryed brown & turned,
And when they are soe, you must tosse them in e Pan, & when
you Dish them up; Putt a little butter beaten thicke & with a little
water, & nuttmegg & suger upon them; & strew a good handful
of sugar on them

98
217
+ To make black Cherry wine.
A ffan

Take six pounds of black Cherryes, Bruise them
well in a stone mortar, and straine them through
a Linnen strainer; then putt them into a Jelly=bagg
and let it runn through, so sweeten it with half a
Pound of Loafe sugar, and putt it into a stone=bottle, &
vse of it about two spoonefulles att a Tyme, Once or
twise a Day or oftener if occasion: It is good for the
wind, or Convulsions in Children.

+ to make Cherey Brandy

Putt in to a Gallen Glass as maney
Morelea Chereys; or kentish Chereys
as will Halfe fill the Glas and upon them
putt one pound of Witte Suger Candey
Beeat to pouder. fill up the glass with
the besst Brandy. and stope it Closse
and tey it with a wett parchment; sett
the Glass in the Sonn. all sumer at mike-
llmas it will be fitt to drinke;






218
Mrs Gadfords Cakes;
Take a pound of the best flover dryed
& Searced, mingle into it halfe a quarter
of an ounce of beaten mace, & rub in
a pound of new butter til you Can not
deserne the butter & flower asunder,
then put in a pound of loafe Sugar beten
& Searced; then breake in Seaven eggs
leauing out to or three of the whites,
mingle them all together, & take a pound
of the best Currants & when they are wel
washed & rubed put them in a puter dish
& plump them ouer a Chafen dish of Coals
& put them to the rest, & put them into
your pans when they are butered, & bake
them a quarter of an hour, when you set
them into the ouen leave Sum Sugar
ouer them, they wil be better at a
months end then at the first if you
keepe them dry.

99
219





100
To Make Liqued Laudinum

Take two ounces of Opium and one ounce of safforn two drahms
of Cloves and 5 drahm of mace 5 drahm of cinnamon and a
Pint of good Canarey: Slice e Opium very thin and pull e safforn
in small peaces: n put all these ingredients into a long Gally pot;
make yr wine scalding hot and pour it on m then tye it close
and let it stand 52 hours, then set ^it in a skillet of Cold watter, and
keep it boyle ing tell tis half Consum'd: it will be 6 or 8 hours a
boyleing you must keep it very close ty'd down with a blader and
double paper over that; to keep in e sperrits all e time tis upon
e fire: and alsoe take care that there is watter enough in e skillet
to come above e Laudenum; but not so high as that any can get into e pot and when tis cold strain it of

you may make a smaller sort with these drugs afterwards
by puting a quarter of a pint of Canary and infuse it as before
mentiond
MS.7113(part)





272

126
273

Cookery  To make a Pye

Take sweet Hearbes Cloues and Mace and Cinnament, Capers
Shred, hard yolkes of Eggs, oysters stewed rowled up in Stakes or Col-
lups of Veale.

The Sauce

Take a little Clarett wine, the liquour of Oyster, 2 Anchoues, a
Lemmon sliced a piece of Butter, beate all these up together, & putt
it into the Pye when you drawe it and shake it well.

To make Beane Pottage.

Lady Butler Take a peece of Mutton and a peece of Bacon, sett it on a boyling, scum
A ffanit well, putt in a Fagatt of sweet Hearbes with a little Spear mint &
let it boyle well. Your Beans must be very young & boyled by themselves
else they will make the Broth looke redd but when they have boyled a
pretty while take about a Quart and putt them into the Broath; and let
the rest boyle while they be tender then boyle them all to peeces &
straine them with some of the Broathe through a Cullinder, & thicken
the. Broth through a Cullinder & thicken the Broath let it boyle a
little while & serve them up without meat with a peece of sweet Butter
& a drop of Varges.

+
Lady Butler A Good way to make Water Grewell.

Sett on 2 quarts of Water or more, sett it a boyling with a Crust of
A ffan Bread, a Fagott of sweet Hearbes, A little bitt of Butter, let it boyle
one Houre then scumme of the Butter, take out the Bread, mince a
good handfull of ^Sorrell & putt in, then pound a great handfull of Spinage, &
putt in the juice and lett it boyle a quarter of an houre; then take
the Yolkes of 4 or 5 Eggs and beat them very well take your skillett
and putt them in. Stirre them together & it will be thicke. You may
season it as you please. With Sugar Butter Verges or juice of Lemmon.

A very good way to Collar Beefe.

La: Butler Take a peece of the thinne End of the Breast ^Flanke of Beefe about 20 pound
A ffan Bone it, lay it in Clarett or white Wine & vinegar & salt 24 houres

then





274
then season it with Cloues, Mace, Nutmeg, Peppar beaten small
a little more salt. bind it up as You doe Branne, putt it in a
Pott fit for it and putt in the Wine and Vinegar that it lay in,
with halfe a pint of Water. Cover it ip close & let it stand 8,
or 9 houres in the Ouen: then take it out of the Ouen, let it
stand while it is very cold, then serue it up with Mustard & Sugar.

In Sommer You must season it with all manner of sweet hearbes.
With time, Sweet Marjoram, Winter Sauery, Spinage, Parsly
Rosemary minct all together & rowld up in the meat, in stead of
Spice & pickell to keepe it made with Wine and Vinegar and
Water and Salt Sweet Hearbes a little whole Peppar 3 or 4 Bay
Leaues, Rosemary, boyle all this together one hour or more. You may
keepe it as You please.

To hash a Shoulder of Mutton

Lady Butler. Take a Shoulder of Mutton halfe roasted first sliced into small
peeces, then take 1/2 a pinte of Clarett and 3 Spoonfulls of white
Wine Vinegar, 2 Anchoues, a Lemmon, a Quarter of a pint of
Capers, 2 Onjons, 1 Nutmeg, a Quarter of a pound of Butter. Stew
all these together, with a Bundle of sweet herbes, & when You see
it fitt to be disht up, shake it up with the Yolkes of 3 Eggs &c.

An Excellent Receipt to make a Cake

X
La: Butler. Take 3 quarts pints of Flower, two pound of Currants, a quarter of
 A ffan   a pint of Yest, i0 Egs putt out 6 of e whites, aboue a pint
of Creame but warme, 2 Ounces of Loafe Sugar, aboue 1/2 a
pound of Butter which must be rubd into the Flower first so fine
as it cannot be distinguisht from the Flower, The Currants
must be pickt & rubd very dry & mingled with the Flower also
a little Mace, Cinnament, and Nutmeg. Then the Creame
Eggs and Yest , when it is bakt Candy it. the Ouen need not be
so hott as for Manchett.

A good

127
275
A very good way to make Ielly
x
  La: Butler.
 A ffan

Take a Knuckell of Veale and a paire of Calues Feet, Flay the
Skinne of the Calues Feet then breake them all to peeces with the
Veale wash them very well in warme water then take all the fatt &
Marrow from them if You can: let them ly all night in water then
wash it well, and sett it a boyling in 6 or 7 quarts of Water in a Pott or
Pipkin so that it may be coured close scumme it very well then putt in
20 Ounces of Hartshorne & let it boyle 3 or 4 houres very softly as
halfe a poud  may be, in that space it will jelly, You may try a little of it in a spoone
of Hearts Horn then take it of the Fire and straine it and scumm of the Fatt; then
let it stand till it is cold, then if You see there is more fatt of it warme
it a little, & scumm it with a Feather; then putt it in a Pipkin if
there be 3 quarts put in a pound & halfe of double refined Sugar 3
Nutmegs sliced, a race of Ginger, a good spoonfull of Cinnament Wa-
ter, a good Spoonfull of Coriander seeds bruised, the pults of 6 Lemmons,
2 graines of Amber Greece, sett all this upon a cleare fire, & let it
boyle with 1/2 a pint of Rhenish Wine a quarter of an houre; then
take the whites of 10 Eggs; beat them very well, & putt them in with
a Sprigg of Rosemary, then runne it by the Fire side through a Cot-
ton Bagge, putt it in Galley Potts or Glasses, See Your Bagg be very white

To make Nectarella

X
  La: Butler.
 A ffan

Take of the best Malligo Raisins & picke the Stalkes from them very
cleane, but they must neither be washt or rubd, put your Raisins in a
deepe Vessell that hath a Fossett in e Bottome, & to every pound of
Raisins You may putt 3 pints of Spring Water, putting in at the same
time of the Leaues & Flowers of Egrimony more or lesse according as
You will have it taste of it. the like You may doe to any other hearbs
You have an affection to twice a day or oftener You must stirr Your Rai-
sins gently with some sticke made flatt for the purpose and so con-
triue





276

tinue daily stirring them till You perceiue Your Raisins are fully
broke, then draw of Your liquour from e Raisins into a Vessell, pre-
sently botling it, but fill not Your Bottles topp full, & be carefull
Your Corkes be good, and close stopt, and strongly tied downe, Least it
runne, or loose its Spiritts, in the heat of the Summer, It will be ripe
in a fortnight but not so soone in cold Weather. After you haue
bottled Your first Liquour You may putt in more Spring Water to
Your Raisens though not so much as formerly, & let it stand for 3 or
4 daies & the liquour will be as good as the former if it be ordred
as aforesaid. This drinke is made but only in the Summer time.

To make Rice Pan Cakes
X
Lady Butlero
 A ffan

Take halfe a pound of Rice cleane picked & washed, then
boyle it in faire water untill it be a Ielly, when it is cold then
take a pinte of Creame, 8 Eggs the threds & Skinns being cleane
taken away, and beate them with Your Creame, & when they
are well beaten mingle them with youre. Rice, put in some
Salt and Nutmeg if you please. Then stirre in 1/2 a pound of
fresh Butter, melt it, and as much fine Flower as will make it
thicke enough to fry. Then beat all these together very well, &
fry them with as little fresh Butter as You can possibly.

To make Taffaty Tarts.

X
Lady Butler
  A ffan

Boyle Your Water and let it be cold, then take a quart of very
fine Flower, 4 Yolkes of Eggs the Skinns being cleane taken
away, and halfe a quarter of a pound of Butter melted, & a
little Salt, then make it into  a reasonable stiffe part. This
quantity of Past will make 10 Tarts. One pound of Sugar
diuided into 10 parts will be enough for them. Take your Pippins
sliced very thinne, & lay them euen in Your Tarts peece by peece,
then bake them in a temperate Ouen which You must try by
throwing of Flower into the Oven, if the flower doe sparkle it
is too hott, but if it only browne then sett in Your Tarts, which
must
128
277

must stay so long in the Oven untill they haue done boiling then
drawe them and ice them, & sett them into the Ouen a little to dry
Be sure in the baking You sett not up the Oven lidd

To Boile a Rumpe of Beefe

La: Butler.
 A ffan

Take a Rumpe of Beefe 3 dayes powderd, boile it untill it be halfe
enough in Water, then take it out of that Pott, & putt it into a lesse
with halfe the Liquour, & halfe white Wine, putt into it Carretts,
Turnops, Colliflowers, Greene Onyons, sweet Hearbes, Lettice, Spinage
& Sorrell, boyle all these together till they be enough, then take up e
Beefe, powre the Liquour through a Cullinder that You may take up
the Hearbes and Chop them small, then cutt & mingle with them pic-
kled Coucumbers, Broome Budds, Capers, then mingle all these with
the Liquour it was boyled in, If it be not sharpe enough putt to it
leaman Vinegar and a good piece of Butter, & so lay Your Beefe in a dish with
slic't french Bread, & so powre the Sawce upon it & send it up.

To make a Fresh Cheese and Creame
La: Butler. X
A ffan

Take 1 gallon or 2 of milke from the Cowe, and beate 3 Eggs, & when
Your Eggs are well beaten, put them into your Milke & a Blade or 2
of Mace, and make them boyle, then putt to it a quart of Creame, &
putt them together, & putt them into a broad panne, and let them stand
24 houres till it be clouted Creame, then take 5 quarts of new milke
and sett it on the Fire untill it seethe, then take it of & putt to it a
pinte of Creame, then coole it untill it be blood warme, then putt to
it as much runnett as You thinke will turne it then take e Curds
& lay them in a Cloth. Lay the Cloth in a Cullender, & when the
whey is cleane from them temper them with Almond Milke, that is
only drawne out with Orange Flower or Rosewater, putt into it a
Spoonfull of Cinnament water and as much Sugar as is to your li-
king, season your Cheese with this Almond milke, then make it
round with a panne or Porringer, then serve it in with raw Creame
at the bottome, and couer it with clouted Creame ouer
att






278
To make Cheese Curd Creame
La: Butler +
A ffan

Take the Cheese Curds being runne with Creame & Milke take
the whey cleane from the Curd, then rubb it through a Cullender
Season it with Sugar, You must rubb it through into thick raw
Creame, first season it with Sugar & Amber.

To make Sacke Creame

La: Butler: +
A ffan
Take a pottle of Creame, sett it to boyle, & when it beginns to
boyle putt to it as much Sacke as will turne it like a possett. then
putt it into a T^hinne strainer till the whey be runne from it
Then rubb the Curd through the Strainer into a dish and sea-
on it with Amber and Sugar.

To make Codling Creame

La: Butler: +
A ffan

Take Codlings,  w and coddle them very soft, then take very
thicke Creame, but first beate your Codlings very soft with a
spoonfull of Creame, putt as much of the Codlings to it as You
thinke will make it thicke, if your Apples be sharpe putt
some Sugar to them before You putt them to your Creame, or else
it will Curdle, if not putt in your Sugar after.

To make Spanish Creame

La: Butler + Take 2 gallons of new Milke and a quart of sweet Creame
A ffan & make it scalding hott, and putt it into 3 milke panns, & ha-
uing stood 6 houres then skimme of the top of 2 panns, & 1/2 e
third, & putt it into a dish and beat it with Sugar, untill the knotts Clods
be broken. If You like the taste putt it into e Dish You intend
to serue it up in, & take the topp of the reseru'd pann thicke
Scumme & lay it upon it.

To bake a Hare

La: Butler: +
A FFan

Take 1 2 Hares and Flea Him ^them wash Him them and parboyle Him them then

129
279
picke the Flesh from the Bones, mince it small and beat it in
a stone Morter, season it with all sorts of Spices & some Salt, beat
it fine with the Liuer and eight yolkes of Eggs, so lay one quarter
of the Meat into the Pye: then putt in some Lard. this doe at 3 times.
your Lard must be as bigg as Your little Finger and 3 times as long, &
your last laying putt in some thinne Slices of Lard on the topp
Butter, and close it up, being bakt liquour it with Butter. You may
doe it thus without eggs.  and Lay Bay Leaues at the bottom

To make a Sacke Possett

La: Cotterell +
A ffan
Take to 2 quarts of Creame 10 Eggs and make the Creame boyle,
take all the yolkes of the Eggs well beaten and putt them into your
Creame being of the Fire, when it hath cooled a little then sett it on
the Fire againe, stirring it continually, Let it be scalding hott but not
boyle, then sweeten it to your taste and let a Nutmeg boyle in it then
take a pint of Sacke and halfe a pinte of Ale, couer it and let it
stand on the Fire till it be thorough hott, then sweeten it and take
the whites of Your Eggs well beaten with a little Sugar, then powre
in Your Eggs and Creame both together into the drinke, stirring the
drinke all the while, then couer it close & lett it stand halfe an houre
at e least on a soft Fire.

To Bake Venaison or Beefe in potts to keep good
all the year

Sr H Fans: Lady
A ffan
Take a haunch of Venaison & cutt of the pestle, it being e sinewy
part of the legge. leauing a large fillett as you doe of Veale, takeing
the bone cut of the Flesh as whole as you can, then take Peppar, Salt,
Mace, Nutmegs, Cloues, the least of your Spices being the sweet Spices
and the least of oall Cloues, mixe your seasoning all together stopping
Your Venaison therewith as you would Beefe with Parsley, then rowle it
up close together, & putt the fatt side of your Venaison downewards into
the potte couering it all over with 2li  of fresh Butter, then couer it with a
platter






280
platter, and stoppe it up close with your paste, then putt it into
the Ouen, it being as hotte as for Venaison letting it stand in e
Ouen an hower longer than you would a pasty of Venaison,
Then drawe it out and open the potte & lay a Trencher on e
toppe of the meate as it swimmeth sinking it downe with a
weight, till the Butter couer the Trencher, so let it stand till
it be cold, then lay on your platter againe, and keepe it so.

+ To make Mince Pyes of Neats tongues.

Sr Th: Fansh: Lady
A ffan
Take 2 Neats tongues and a halfe, boyle them & when
they be cold paire and mince them very small, take 4 pound
of Beefes Suit, and mince it very small by its Selfe, putt in Nut-
megs 2 ounces, Currans a pound, Raisins of e Sunne ^stoned and shred & a
little Sugar, a little Rosewater and Verdijuice, & an apple or
2 minced very small, put in a few Anny seeds, & a little Orange
peele and if you will Salte.

To make a Neats Tongue Pye cutt in Slices

My Lady Fanshaw
La ff

Take the Neatstongue being roasted and pared, & cutt it into
thinne slices and steepe it all night in Verdijuice, and season it
with a little Nutmegs, Cloues, Mace & Cinnamon, then lay it
in the Pye with a great deale of Butter, & when it is almost
enough, take it out of the ouen and cutt it, if You haue made no
Vent, and putt in some Clarett wine & sugar so much as You shall
thinke fitt, then sett it into the Ouen againe & let it stand till it
be enough then serve it up with a little scraped Sugar.

To bake a Chine of Beefe.

Take a Chine of Beefe  the lesser end of it unsalted, & beat it very
well with a rowling pinne, but first sprinkle it well with wine
Vinegar, & let it lye so one hours or two or more, after joynt it in euery
joynt & season it as you doe a red Deare, & lett it lye in e seasoning

130
281

12 howrse, & make a deepe Square Pye of course paste, & lay in
your the Meate with good Store of Butter, & strawe on it a little more
of the seasoning under and ouer it, & let it bake 6 or 7 houres, then
serue it hott or cold as you like, if you serue it hott a little thinne
Galendine of Clarett wine, Bread Crumms, Ginger, Cinnamon & a
little Sugar, stirre them well together untill the Sugar be melted,
open the Pye, powre on a good deale or most part of the Butter, & putt
a little of that Butter unto the Galendine, then poure your Galen-
dine upon e meate and so serve it.

To boile Mutton Neck or Brest.

Strong Broth, Mace, and grosse pepper, Spinage, Lettice & Parsly,
whole toppes of thyme, & a little onyon minced, boild Asperagus, when
it is boild minced Lemons, thicke it with sweet Butter, serue it with Sops,
putt in juice of Sorrell, cast Goose berries & Limonds on it, & so for e Chickens.

To fry a Loine of Veale.

My Mother Cutt it in thinne Slices & beat it with the back of a Cleaver, fry it on
a panne untill it be somewhat browne in Butter, then putt away the
Butter you fry it with all, putt the meate into the panne againe, putt
to it Strong Broth, Onyons, Capers, Topps of Thyme minced small, Sorrell a
little cutt, Anchoves a little Cutt, Peppar & Nutmegs, Salt, hold it ouer
the Fire, & stirre all the things together, then putt in Vinegar, minced
Lemond, serue it away upon Sopps.

To boile a Carpe.

My Mother + Cleane scale him, wash Him and dry him, drane Him & saue e blood
A ffan wash it cleane out with Clarett wine, cutt it into two, putt Him into a
Pipkin with e foresaid Blood, Clarett wine and Vinegar, large Mace, gross
Peppar and Salt, a Bundle of sweet Hearbes, a little onyon minced, a
bitt of sweet Butter, no more then will couer it, a little minced Lemmon,
garnish the Dish & serue it with Sippetts in e same Liquour: ad halfe
a pinnt of Veal broth.

To Fricasse a Calues Head

Sir Edw: Stowell  + Take a Calues Head halfe boyled in water and Salt, then take it out
A ffan and






282
& bone it, & cutt it in thinne Slices, & putt it into a frying pan
with the Braines & Eyes, and fry it with fresh Butter.  When it is
fryed enough take out e Butter, & ^putt  in 1/4 of a pint of Creame,
mingle with 3 Spoonfull of Verges, & 3 Spoonfull of Clarrett Wine,
[..................]
[.......] so shake it well & serue it up with Sippetts.

+ To Fricasse a Chicken.
Madam Cardonell
A ffan
Take 6 Chickens t be fatt & young, flay them & cutt them
in pieces as bigg as Wallnutts with Liuer Gizard & Head, wash
them and putt them in a frying panne, couer them with water, &
when they be parboyled putt in a quarter of  a pound of Fresh Butter
& turne them often in the panne, & fry them till they be almo' enough,
haue ready  [........] 2 Spoonfull of Verges an two On-
jons whole, a little leaues of Time, & Marjoram [......] 3 yolks of eggs
[..............] Beat your Eggs very
well, & powre all this into the Panne, & shake them well together,
but not ouer the Fire for fear they curdle. If You fry them right
there will be no liquour left before you put in the Egs, but very moist
which they must be. If You will You may fry Oysters with your
Chickens.

+    To Fry Hartichocks.

Sr Edw. Stowell Take 4 Hartcholkes cutt of all the Leaues then cutt the bottoms in
A ffan  little pieces as bigg as a great wallnutt, putt them into a frying pann
with some fresh Butter & fry them till they be enough the which
You shall knowe by their being soft, then fry some parsly with them
t they may only be crispe so serue them in with the Parsley upon them.

X    To Fricasse Pigeons

 Mrs Cardonell   Take 8 Pigeons scald them cutt them in little pieces no bigger then
 A ffan a Wallnutt with Liuer Gizards & Head, so fry them according to the
foregoing Receipt for Chickens. Thus you may fry Lamb or young Rab-
betts.

Mrs. Cardonnells Receipt to sowce Pigge or Turkie.

+
o Take a fatt Pigg of a Month old scale it, & gutt it, then cutt of
the Head close by the Eares & the feete, cutt it in e middle & bone
it, then lay one side upon another & Sprinkle a little Mace & Salt
betwixt, then rowle it up as you doe brawne & bind it with filletting
or sowce it in a Cloth. To two Piggs you must putt 3 pintes of white
wine & a ^gallon pinte of Water, putt in a handfull of Salt, a pennyworth
of Mace, a pennyworth of Cloues & a whole nutmegg, boile it till
you putt a knife through it, then take it of & let it stand a night
or a day in sowce, and so eate it with Vinegar;

For the Turkie you must only cutt of the Leggs & the Pinions, & take
out the Brest bone, If your Turkie be not fatt you may if You will
lard it.

+ To Sowce Eeles

Iene Dickinson o Take the biggest Eeles you can gett, rubb them very well in Salt,
A ffan then wash them very cleane, severall Times, till the slime be quite gone,
cutt of their Heads & slitt them, take out e String in e back & their
gutts, and scrape them very cleane within, cutt of their tailes, then lay
Lemmon, Mace & Salt in them all along as much as you thinke fitt, &
rowle them up like a Collar of Brawne, & bind them with filletting,
To 6 Eeles take a pint of white Wine, a pint of water, & a quart of
Vinegar, Bay Salt, a Handfull of Rosemary, Time and Marjoram, Bay
Leaues, Pennyryall, Winter Sauory of all a great Handfull, boyle all these
with the Eeles, till you can thrust a straw through them, then take
them up and putt them in a stone pott. After 2 daies sowcing they
will be fitt to eate. If they be right done the Sowce drinke will be a
hard Ielley.

To make a Cold Hash

A ffan X Take a cold Capon, slice it in little thinne slices as bigg as a Beane,
then take 2 Lemmons, rinds and all, & shred them very small, 1/4 of a pinte
of Capers shred 1/4 of a pint of Broome Budds, 3 Anchoues shredd very







284
small, as much Pepper as you can take up betweene your Fingers &
your thumb, as much Salt as you please, & as much oyle as will
wett the meat, & a little Vinegar, & pickled Heart Cherries &
Oliue strowed upon the Dish, & pieces of Endiue or hard Lettice
serued about the Dish for Sippets, you may rub your Dish with
Garlike or Onjon as you please, & slice scrape  in a little Horse Reddish.

To make a thistle Sallet.
+
A ffan Take the longest Stalke in the midst of e Leafe of e great
Sow thistles when they be young, scrape them & wash them, then
boile them in water & Salt, & when they be very tender take
them up & lay them in a Dish to draine; then beat Butter
thicke and powre upon them and serue them up.

To Stew Oysters.
X
My Mother: Take the meat of the Oysters picke & wash them very cleane
A ffan in their owne Liquour, and lay them in a Dish, to a quart of
Oysters putt 1/2 a pint of white wine, a quarter of a pint of e
cleerest Oyster Liquour, a Nutmeg cutt in two, a whole Onjon
a little whole Peppar, when they are enough take them of e
Fire; powre out 3 parts of the Liquour, putt in as much Butter
as will beat them & be thicke, & so serue them up.

To make a Quaking Pudding.
+
Lady Cleueland. o Take 8 Egs, a pinte of Creame, 4 spoonfulls of Flower, a
A ffan Nutmeg sliced thinne, a little Rose water, what quantity of
Sugar you please, take the Cloth you intend to boile it in, wett
it, then flowre it, and let it boile two houres.

To make Butterd Loaues which is an
Excellent pudding as any is.

+
Lady Cleueland. Take 3 Quarts of new Milke, & putt in as much Runnit as will
A ffan

turne


132
285

turne it like a Cheese, wring the whay cleane from it through a
Cloth, then stampe your Curds very fine in a Stone Morter, putt into
them 6 yolkes of Egs and one white, a handfull of grated Bread & 1/2 a
handfull of Flower, a little Salt, mingle them well together, then
rowle them with your Hands into little Loaues & sett them on a buttered
Paper, & wash the topps ouer with the yolke of an Egge & a little beere
beat together, 3 quarters of an houre will bake them in a quick ouen,
Take halfe a pound of Butter, 5 Spoonfulls of Rosewater, 1/2 a Nutmeg
sliced thinne, a little Sugar, sett this on a quick Fire and stirre it conti-
nually till it be melted, then draw your Loaues & cutt of e topps, stirre up
the Crumme & powre in the Butter, and serue them in upon a Plate.

To make Fine Pan Cakes.
+
Mrs. King. Take 12 yolkes of Egs & 3 Whites, beat them well, & mingle them
A ffan with 5 Spoonfull of fine Flower, 1/2 a pint of faire water made blood
warme, or as much as will make them thinne, then putt a little Yest, 1/2
a Nutmeg a little Mace and Salt, & so fry them in Butter powring
them very thinne into the panne & serue them up.

To make Cheese Cakes.
+
Lady Hatton. Take a quart of Creame, sett it on the Fire, & take 12 Egs, & 2 yolkes,
A ffan beat them very well, putt them into the Skillett to the Creame, stirring it
  continually till it Curdles, then take it of & putt it into an  Earthen pann
or siluer Bason, & putt to it whilst it is hott 1/4 of a pound of Currants
plumpt, & halfe a quarter of a pound of Butter, a quarter of Sugar, a
Nutmeg sliced thinne. For e past take a quart of the finest Flower, &
as much Cold water as will make it paste, then pull it 4 seuerall times
in little pieces, & beat it euery time with a rowling pinne, then diuide
your paste into 6 parts, rowling them out very thinne, & cutt them
round, & lay little pieces of Butter round about them, then turne them
up once againe, & doe the like, then turne them up & putt in e meat.
They must be bakt pale. If You make them right it will make just sixe






286
To make Sugar Cakes.

A Ffan +

Take 2 pound of Butter, one pound of fine Sugar, e yolkes nine
Egs, a full Spoonfull of Mace beat & searsed, as much Flower as this
will well wett making them so stiffe as you may rowle it out, then
with the Cup of a glasse of what Size you please cutt them into
round Cakes & pricke them and bake them.

A Sillabub.
Lady Grey. +
A ffan

Take a quart of white wine, Milke as much Curd as the Wine
will make, taking it still of as it riseth, then take some of the Curds
& lay all on a rowe in the Bottome of the pott, then strew some
Sugar finely beaten, then upon euery spoonfull of Curd putt a
Spoonfull of Creame. Doe thus in order till you have laid in all
your Curd, then with a Spoone beat it till it be well mingled,
putt a little Sprig of Rosemary into the middle of it, & let it stand
without stirring 4 or 6 houres before you use it.

To make a Bambury Cake.
 A ffan

Take a peck of fine Flower, 2 Ounces of Mace, 2 Ounces of
Cinnamon and 2 ounces of Nutmegs, Y 2 pound of Butter, 10 Egs,
putt out 4 of e whites, a pint of C Ale Yest, beat your Egs verry
well & straine them & your Yest with a little warme water into
your Flower, & stirr them together, then putt in your Butter
Cold into little Bits, Your water you knead with must be scal-
ding hott, make it good past, then lay it to warme & rise in a
Cloth about a Quarter of an houre, then putt in ten pound of
Curronts rubd very dry, strew in as much Sugar finely beaten as
you thinke fitt, Breake the Past into little pieces into a Kimnell, or
Bowle, & lay a lay of Past broken in pieces & a lay of Currants till
all


133
287
all your Currants be in, mingle the Past & e Currants very well but
take heed of breaking the Currants. You must take a piece of paste
after it hath risen before you putt in your Currants, to couer the Topp
and the Bottome very thinne, & wett them with Rosewater & close
them at the Side, at e bottome, or at e Middle which you like best,
pricke the Top and the Sides with a small long pinne, when your
Cake is ready to goe into the Oven cutt it round about an Inch deepe,
If your Cake be of a peck of Flower it must stand in the ouen 2
houres. The Oven must be as hott as for Manchett. If you will
You may putt in 3 graines of Muske, & 3 of Amber Gris.

To make a Gooseberry Foole
+ o
Take a quart of Gooseberries, a quarter of a pint of white Wine,
& stew them on the fire untill the Gooseberries be soft, then take e
A ffan Yolkes of 3 eggs, & the white of one of them, a good quantity of Su-
gar, then straine them thorow a haire Siue & so serue them up.

To make a Creame Caudle

Lady Hailes.
A fan

Take 2 Spoonfulls of Sack, & one of small Ale, & let it stand on
the Fire till it boyle, then putt into it 1/2 a pinte of Creame & a
spoonfull of Sugar, stirring it till it boyles, then take it of e Fire for
it is enough. This is but for one Messe, but if you will haue more
you must double the Quantity.

 To make Creame Tarts.
+
My Sister Newce.
A ffan:

Take 2 quarts of Flower, a quarterne & halfe of Butter; halfe a
pint of Creame, the yolke of an Egge, mingle the Butter, and e Flower
cold, then kneade your Past up with cold water, diuide this Past for 3
Tarts, then take the fayrest Pippins you can, pare, quarter them, &
Core them, Then with a very little Yron made in e shape of a larding
Yron draw little slices of Orenges through the quarters of e Apples,






288

3 or 4 in euery quarter. You must first boyle your Orange peele in
2 seuerall waters, to take away the bitternesse, then cutt the
Orange peele into thinne shreds, an inch long, the bignesse of a
pinne, then lay them in quarters in your Tarts, & putt but so
much Sugar to them as you thinke will keepe them moist. Heate
e Ouen indifferently. When they have stood in 1/2 an houre draw
them, & cutt upon the Lids, & powre in your Creame.

You must take 2 quarts of Creame, the yolkes of 8 Eggs, breake
them euery one seuerally into a Spoone; cutt it with a knife in e spoon
& you shall see a Skinne which conteines the yolke t take away
beat your yolkes well together, putt them into the Creame cold;
then sett them on the Fire, stirring the Creame till it be scal-
ded, then take it of & putt in so much Sugar as will make it very
sweet. If you will haue any Muske or Ambar you may put it in
when you putt in the Sugar. You must let them stand in the
oven almost halfe an houre after you have put in your Creame.

If you would yce them you must doe it when you drawe them to putt
your Creame in with the white of an Egge beate very well and Rose-
water. Wash the Lidds over with a feather; then searse fine Su-
gar thin over them. The Tarts must be drawne 3 houres &
a halfe before you eate them.

How to make Sawcedges. without
skines
+
A ffan:

Take a Legg of Veal cutt of the fatt cleane then shred it as
fine as you can and shred two pound of Beefe Suett as fine
& mingle them together with a good handfull of Sage shred
small and the Yolkes of 8 Eggs & 2 whites 1/2 an ounce of Pep-
par 2 Nutmegs and season it with Salt to your owne tast then
rowle them up like Sawcedges that length & thicknes & fry
them with Butter.


134
289

How to make thinne Cheese.

Lady Bedles + Take 5 Quarts of new Milke warme from the Cowe boyle
A ffan a Quart of Creame, haue a pinte of Creame more, warme it
upon the Fire but not boyling: You must have a quart of
water boyling, then powre all the Creame and water into the
Milke, then putt in your runnett & couer it & when it is com
putt the Fleeting Dish downe in the middle and let it stand a lit-
tle and after whay it by degrees with as little breaking as you
can then putt it in a Morter & lay seven pound weight upon it
& three pound more but no more You must tunne it with fine
Clothes and they must not be dry & e 3d day after it is made it
must be layed in Nettles & turned every Day till it is ready to eate.

To make Barley Creame.

A ffan + Take a handfull of French Barley, lay it in water all night,
then boyle it in 2 or 3 waters: then take a Quart of water & a
handfull of Strawberry Leaues, as much of Sorrell Leaues & as much
of Succory Leaues: and boile them taking the Barke out of the last
water: Boile the water with the foresaid Hearbes till one Quarter
be consumed; then take out e Barley and stampe it with a hand-
full of blanched Almonds straine it with e Barley water till it be as
thicke as Creame, and then boile it a little with a little Mace
Sugar and Rosewater.

To make a Dainty Calves Foote pudding
A ffan +  Boyle 2 Calues feete very tender, being cold cutt of all e meat
and mince it very small: slice a penny Loafe, scald it in a pinte
of Creame, shred Beefe Suett sixe ounces 5 yolkes & 2 whites of
Eggs well beaten, a good handfull of plumped Currants, a little Sugar
with Muske and Amber Greece in it, Nutmegs Mace, Salt a little
of each: mixe all these well then fold a Cale of Veale like a sheet
of paper






290
leauing one End open:unshewed fill it well with e Stuffe
& bigg pieces of Marrow, so serue it up & lay it in a Napkin cloth
& boyle it 2 houres in a pott of water; then take it up Cale
& all, & lay it upon a Dish with beaten Butter with Vergis &
a little Sugar. If you will you may sticke it with slices of
blanched Almonds so serue it in

+ To make Broth of Calves Feete.

A ffan Take your Feet wash and picke them cleane then sett them
on couered with faire water; then putt as much French Barley
as will thicken the Quantity of Broth you make. Putt to it 3 or
4 Blades of mace a little time & Sweet Marjoram tied toge-
ther & 1/2 a pound of Raisins of the Sunne will be enough
for 4 Feete, boyl the Feet very tender before you send it up
& lay Sippetts about the Dish.

To make a Fried Pudding.
+
A ffan Take a Quart of new Milke and putt to it e Crumme of a
2 penny Loafe; then sett it on the Fire that it may boyl till
it be soft all alike then take 4 Eggs & a Nutmegg sliced thinn,
4 Spoonfulls of Flower; a little Salt 1/2 a pound of Beefe
Suett    stirr these well together: then haue ready over
the Fire some Butter in a Frying panne, & when it is warme
then putt it in with a Ladle that contains 4 or 5 Spoonfulls, lay
it into the panne round about in the fashion of little Cakes tur-
ning them with a Skimmer till they be enough & putt them in a
Dish & keepe them by the Fire till the whole quantity of Butter
be fried; then lay them in a Dish alltogether & scrape some Loafe
Sugar on them and so serue them up.

To make a hash in Cabbage
Lady Browne. Take a pound and a halfe of Veale the skinne being taken away
& 1/2 a pound of Suett, & 1/2 a pound of Bacon, shredd all these together
verry


135
291

verry well; then season it with Pepper and Salt, & in hashing your
meat fling in a Dozen of whole Cloues, with a little grated Nutmeg,
& so mixe them together with 4 Young onyons shredd very fine & a
handfull of Parsley, then temper it with 3 yolkes of Eggs & one white,
putting some pieces of marrow dippt in the yolke of an Egge about it.
To prepare your Cabbage fitt for this, you must first boyle it in wa-
ter pretty tender, then take it out and open all the Leaues, till you
come to the middle part; of which cutt of a little and hash amoung
your meate, putting the greatest part of the hashed meat in the middle
of your Cabbage, & so close up the rest of your meat within the leaues of
your Cabbage, & so tye it up crosse with a String to keepe it close, so putt
it into your pott to boyle, where there is some meat with it, it will take 2
houres boyling, then serve it up with some of the uttermost of the Broath.

X A Receit for to make a great Cake without Fruite
Lady Bedles o
A. ffan

Take 3 Quarts of fine Flower 1/2 a pinte of Creame a pinte of Ale Barm
1/2 a pound of Butter 1/2 a pint of Rosewater 8 whites of new laid Eggs 3
of the yolkes. Let your Rosewater & Creame be warmd & your Egs well bea-
ten; putt all these into the Flower and make a paste & when it hath layen
warme 1/2 an houre worke in a pound of fine Sugar 1/2 a pound of Caroway
Comfits, 3 graines of Amber Gris in powder mingled with your Sugar, make
it up as fast as you can, & sett it into the Ouen, you must use a Quart
of Flower in the working it up after the Sugar is in, whilst it is baking
take 1/4 of a pound of double refined Sugar wett it with 1/2 faire water &
1/2 a Rosewater and 1/2 fair water, and boile it to a clear Candy, & with
a feather wash your Cake over with the Candy, then sett it in the
Ouen againe till it be thoroughly dry.

X  The best way of making Jumbals.

Lady Bedles Take very fine Flower and putt it into a Pipkinn & with your hand
Ann ffan thrust it downe as cleare as you can filling the pipkinn full; then putt it
into an Ouen with small Manchett & there let it stand all night; then searse
it & take a pound & a halfe of the Flower & a pound of Sugar after it is
beaten






292.

beaten & finely searced, putt to these the quantity of an Egge of
sweet butter, rubb the Butter well into the Flower & Sugar, t it
cannot be discerned putt in 6 Yolkes of Egs 3 whites 4 graines of
Muske and 4 of Amber Gris made into fine powder, 6 Spoonfulls of
Orange Flower water or Damaske Rosewater 6 Spoonfuls of Cream
mingled together & putt into your Stuffe as much water & Creame by
little and little as you find will make it into a Stiffe paste mold these
together a Quarter of an houre, then pull it to pieces againe, then putt
to it what Quantity You like of Coriander Seeds rubd & bruised when
e Seeds are well mingled in thes Paste make it up into knotts & butter
plates very thinne, & lay your knotts upon them, prike them & sett
them into the Ouen as hott as for Biskett, Let them stand till they
are thoroughly bakt, & whilst they are baking take a Quarter of
a pound of double refined Sugar or more, wett it with halfe Spring
Water & halfe Rosewater, boyle it to a cleare Candy & with a
feather wash your Iumballs ouer, then lay them upon the Plate
againe & sett them into the Ouen till they be thorough dry.

+ To pickle Cherries

Lady Browne.
A ffan
Take the soundest faire Heart Cherries you can gett, lay them in
rowes at the bottome of a Kettle, & putt upon them a little dill &
Mace, sprinkle a little Salt upon them, couer them with 3 parts Vi=
negar & one part water boyle them till they be tender, then putt them
in an Earthen pott & keepe them for your use. thus you may doe Coucumbers

+ To dresse a Calues Head with Oysters.

Mrs Coply.
A ffan
Take a fatt Calues Head, & boyle it with a little Salt untill it be
halfe boyled then take it out of the pott, & cutt all the meat from
the Bones into small pieces: then stew the meat in white wine & some
of the Broth; boyle it in a Pipkinn & putt in some Peppar & ........
..................................., a whole Onion, a little time,
...................., or Lemmon, a dozen of Oysters; when this
is enough take a dozen of the fairest Oysters You can gett and lett them
bee


136
293.

the eggs and butter
are best put into
the Meat, so beat
up all together
in the pipkin.

bee ready stewed; then putt your meate in a Dish, & powre upon it
halfe a pound of sweet Butter thicke beaten with the yolkes of 6 Eggs
well beaten, & the aforesaid stewd oysters. Then beat them all well
together betweene 2 dishes. Then dish it up with the great Oysters
on the topp and Sippetts about. If you loue them 'tis best to beat an
Anchoue or 2 with your Butter and Eggs.

+ To make Sr Kenelme Digby's Pudding
A flan +
Take the finest manchett of 2 dayes and slice it in slicesdipp it in
Muscatell or the best Canary wine, then lay them in a Siluer Bason
or a deepe siluer dish, then lay a lay of great peeces of Marrow, then
strow a powder upon your marrow & Bread make of 1/2 a pound of refined
Sugar halfe drachme of Ambar Gris, & 2 drachmes of cinnament
beaten and searsed, then lay another lay of Bread dipped and marrow
then strew the powder as afore, so doe till the Dish is full, then haue rea-
dy a Bullion made of Veal Chicken or Mutton, or all together, fill your
Dish up to the Brimme with the Broth, then couer it close with the
Dish, and sett it upon a Chaffing Dish of Coales or a heater, then let it
boyle till your Bread hath soakt up all the liquour as is very soft; then
take the yolkes of 8 eggs skinne them and beat them very well, & putt to
them 3 pints of the sweetest and thickest Creame you can gett when you
have beat them well together, powre it equally upon your Bread & Marrow
then sett in a gentle ouen for halfe an houre, so serue it up

A flan x To Escaueche Sole, Trouts, Besugo or Sea breame
Sardine or Pilcher

Take a pottle of the best .... Alle vineger a Pottle of the clearest
running water, a pottle of the ... . ounces of cloues, halfe halfe
an Ounce of Mace, a few Bay Leaues, a ...hearbes, boyle this well
together with a handfull of Bay Salt, as you take it of the Fire, slice in
a couple of Lemmons, rinds & all, then take your Fish, lay them in oyle ve-
ry well, the best you can gett then lay them upon a sheluing Board, till
all e Oyle and Liquour be drained from them, & they be very dry, then
lay





294
lay a lay of Hearbe & Spice & then a row of Fish, & then
spice and Hearbs againe, and so till all your Fish is in, then
powre the 3d part of your Liquour in being cold, 3 dayes after
powre in halfe that which is left, & on e sixt day if there be
roome putt in the rest, if not within 2 or 3 dayes longer there
will be roome for the Fish will drinke up all the liquour, & then
stopp it up close, the lesse Ayre comes in it the better, & after 8 or
10 daies it will be fitt for your use, then put in 2 penny worth
of Saffron.  and 3 Cloues of Garlicke if you will

X To make a Beefe Pye.
Lady Lucas.
A ffan

Take 4 pound of the leane of Buttocke Beefe 3 pound of e best
Beefe Suett, shredd them small with a shredder, then beat it well in a
Stone Morter; then season it to your liking with Pepper Salt & Mace
beaten, then make it up with your Hands either Square or round,
then sowe it up in a Cloth streight in that fashion you would haue
it, & steepe it a night in Vinegar; next day presse it sixe houres
with good weight upon it, then take it out & putt it in your Pye
with Butter under, & so bake it, and when it is cold fill it up with
Butter; it will keepe 2 Months.

+  To Drye Neats Tongues.

Sir K. Digby.
A ffan

Take your largest Neats Tongues that are perfect & free from
bruises, cutt of the Fleshie part of the roote of the Tongue. rubbe
them well in a Course Napkin with Salt, slitt them in e great
Veyne in the middle about an inch deepe and a Fingers length, put
in halfe an ounce of Salt peter if your Tongue be very large. if not,
then proportionable. then lay them in a Barrell that does not leake,
a rowe of Tongues with a little Salt Peter sprinkled upon them; then
another rowe and a little Salt Peter, and so till you have filled up
the Barrell. then putt a round Board on the topp t will fall downe
close upon them. lay a heavy weight upon the Board to presse your
Tongues


137

in the rome
of the Sallt
petter must
be putt pott
bay and witt
Salt, and all
the rest in-
serted as in this
receat

Tongues close. after 4 Dayes standing thus tye the top of the Barrell
with Napkins & Clothes close coverd for 6 Weeks in a wett Larder that
is not under Earth. then take them out, rubb them verry cleane, and
hang them up in the Corner of the Kitchin Chimney, not in the Smoake
4 Dayes; but before you hang them sowe up the Places where you putt in
your Salt Peter. after 4 daies take them out, & hang them in the middle
of the roofe of your Kitchin. If they be well done they will last good
2 yeares.

To make Hoggs Liuer Puddings.

Take 2 pound of grated Bread, 3 quarters of 1li Hoggs Liuer boyled
finely grated and searsed.

+ To make Biskett

A ffan Take a pound of fine Flower with a pound of the best Sugar, and
mingle them, then take 4 yolkes and 3 whites of Eggs, & beate them
together with 4 Spoonfulls of Rosewater, then put it together, & stirr it
till it be well mingled, then butter your plates and strew some Sugar
on them, and so bake them. .

+ To make Orange Biskett

A ffanTake sower Ciuill Oranges the freshest and freest from Spotts you
can gett, grate of a little of the yellow rind, then cutt them, and take
out their meate cleane, so water them in Conduit water 2 daies, shif-
ting the Water twice a day; then tye them up in a faire Cloth; & boyle
them till they be very tender; then take them of & let them stand till
the next day; taking them out of the Cloth, and then weigh them, and
take their weight in the coursest refined Sugar you can gett. beat each
asunder a little and then putt them together & beat them till they be
as fine as Marchpane past, then wring in a little juice of Lemmond &
put in a few Cardimony or Carroway Seeds bruised, & then lay it in the
Shape of Naples Biskett upon sheets of glasse & stoue it till it be dry,
turning






296

turning it when it is fitt to turne, in e drying You must beat
Muske and Ambar Gris with your Oranges, allowing after the al-
lowance of a graine of each to a pound.
There is a series of ink dots (roughly 14) that trail from the word "pound", and may be caused from the large X on the facing page bleeding over.

X The Hippocras.
Lady Worslane
A ffan: Take of the fine opening Rootes anazif, Caper & Tamerisk
barques anazif, make cleane your rootes and bruise them, then
putt them into a pottle of faire water in a Pipkin close couered, &
let them so boile on the Fire, till a pinte of humidity be consumed,
then put into it Ceterack, Tameriske, & Hartstongue & Succorie,
let them so boile againe till there remaines but 3 pintes of the
humidity in e Pipkin; then take it from the Fire, & let it stand
steeping in the Chimney corner two houres, then wring the Li-
quours close out through a Course Cloth; & to a pint & halfe of
this Liquour decocted; adde a pinte and halfe of the best white
Wine, mingle them well together, and putt them in a cleane
earthen bottle or Iugg, and adde unto it 3 ounces & 1/2 of Cinnamon
bruised, Nutmegs bruised, a dramme, & Cloues bruised, let these stand
a day & a night exceeding well stopped in the Chimney Corner, then
adde unto it a quarter of a pinte of good new sweet Milke, & mingle
it very well together, which will make the Decoction & Wine, coa-
gulate together, and will by these meanes make it runne cleare,
then adde unto them the Syrrope of Bizantinus & Scolapendria anazi,
dissolue them in a little of the Liquour, & then putt them into e Iugg,
& likewise 2 Ounces of powder Sugar; these being all well mingled toge-
ther powre it in your Hippocras bagg, and when a good Quantity is
infiltered through, put it in againe & againe untill it runne as clear
as you would haue it, and put it in a Glasse well closed.

+ To make Creame.

A ffan Take 3 quarts of Creame & set it on the Fire and when it boi-

leth


138
297
leth take it of and putt in as much juice of Lemmon as will turne
it; then putt it into a Diaper Napkin & hang it up all night; then
lay a lay of Creame, & a lay of Sugar till the Dish is full. One
Lemmon is enough if it be great.

An Excellent Receipt to make tender
+ Biskett Cakes.

Lady Bedles
A ffan

Take 5 Eggs both yolkes & whites that be new laid; & as neere
as you can all of one Bignes, take away the treads & e Skinns
of the Yolkes, beate them a little while put in halfe a pound of
Sugar, searst, but neuer cease beating all the while; You must
beat them no longer then your Ouen is heating. When your Ouen
is hott take sixe ounces of Flower dried and searsed; stirre it as fast
as you can, all one way, till all the Flower be in; then fill your
Plates and sett them into the Ouen, & as soon as you see them risen
& pretty well couloured which will be quickly draw them, & take them
of the plates & lay them on a Cloth that day, if you please you may
putt in Coriander seedes bruised which must be put into the Flower
You must have all things ready prepared before you beat your Egs &
your plates ready butterd. You must beat your Egs all one way.

+ To make a Blood Pudding

Lady Branford.o Take Sheepes blood, a porringer full, stirr it till it is coole, putt to
A ffan it a 2 penny Loafe grated, or more, a peece of Butter melted e Bignes
of an Egge, halfe a pinte of new Milke, Time, Penny Royall, Siues
or young onjons, a little Marjoram, a handfull of parsley & sorrell,
shredd your Hearbes verry fine, Stirr an Egge in with them, a little
peppar and Salt, & mingle them well together; if they be too thinn
thicke it with grated Bread as thicke as other Puddings, putt it in a
Cloth & boile it an houre and a halfe.

+ To Stew Pippins.

Wipe your Pippins very cleane, cutt them in halfes, lay them in a Dish
couer







298

couer them with Water & a little Sugar, as much as will make
them so sweet as you desire to haue them, when they are tender
on both sides squeeze in some juice of Oranges, as much as you yr
Selfe like, & serue them up in a Fruite Dish.

For the Breeding of Pheasants. +
Lett this alone

A ffan A Pheasant will sit three weekes & three dayes, from e day
to be placed with Shee is sett untill Shee disclose.
experements

Let the House hen or Turkie Hen sit 2 or 3 daies to tread e
nest hard & flatte upon Hen Eggs or Ducke Eggs before you set the
Pheasant Eggs under Her.

The Henne must be sett in a Chamber, & you must pore a
Scuttle full of grauell & sett a great greene turfe in e Chamber a
pretty way of from Her, that the Henn may baske in it.

There must be a great hoope sett round about the Henn of a foote
broade whiles shee sits before She discloses, least the little Phea-
sants after their disclosing runn away & hide them in Holes.

you must neither stirr, nor give the young Pheasants any meat
in 24 houres, after they be dissolued, & then nothing but Ante
Egs for a moneth together. Looke a day or two before they disclose,
& if you see any loose Shells about them, that are disclosed, lift up
e Hen softly, and take the Shells away.

The third day after they haue disclosed take away e hoop that was
about e Henn, but let not the henn goe Abroad, in a seuen night af-
ter, & then also a warme Sunshine day.

The Henn must not sit abroad in the night with the young Phea-
sants untill they be 3 weeks old.


139
299

To Stew Pairs
A ffan + Pare your pairs, and cutt them in halfe or doe them whole
1 couer them ouer with Clarett Wine, putt in some Ambar Grice
fine powder as much as you thinke fitt when they be stewed enough
and tender and serue them up lukewarme. and as much suger
as you like;

To make Hogs Puddings white
+ o Take halfe a pound of Hoggs Louer finely grated, 3 Spoonfull of
To prepare the Suitt Sugar, 12 Egs, a Nutmeg grated, 3 Spoonfull of Rose water, a pint
for your Puddings cut of Creame, half a pint of new Milke, a Spoonfull of Cinnamon
the Leaues of e Hogg in  water, as much Hogs Sewet as you think will make them fatt
pieces as bigg as my thum enough, a little Salt, sixe ounces of Currants plumpt, and as much
fry it, & straine it & when grated bread as will make it them thicke enough to fill
it is cold put it in.
A ffan 2

+ o  To make Hogs Puddings blacke
3 When you sticke your Hogge, stirr the Blood till it be Cold with your
Hand, when it is cold take out all the clots, putt in as much Oatmeal as
will make your Blood thicke; then let it stand a day & a night, put in
some Hoggs Sewett shredd as small as you thinke fitting, put in penny
Royall, Parsley, Time, a little Marjoram, Peppar, Salt, as much new
Milke as will make them pretty thinn and fitt to be filld; You must not
fill your puddings to full for feare they breake

To make Lemmon Nautho the best way

Madrid +  Take a Quart of Rhenish wine, a pinte ^& a half of fountaine water, halfe
A ffan a pinte of Cittern water, the juice of Lemmons with little thinn
slices of the Rhine as much Loafe Sugar as will make it sweet, & 2
Spoonfulls of Orange Glower water, stirr it together, & putt in a little
Sprigg of Rosemary, ^let it stand 1 hour close stopt & serue it in, in a glass tankard, or a great Glasse
with a Couer





300

140
301
+ To make white dices.
 Affan 4

Take the yeolks of 2 Eggs and to spoonfulls
of sack, & 2 spoonfulls of Rose water, &
as much floure as will make this into paste
stiffe Enough to rowle, thin ro rowle it very
thinne, then take siluer dishes & butter
them very thinne upon the outside of
them, & lay this paste upon the backside
of the dishes, & when you haue cut this
paste of what fashion you like best, set
them into our ouen upon the dishes to dry,
when they be thoroughly dry take them
forth of the ouen & let them stand
untill they be cold & then take them off.

+ 5 To Candie these dishes.

A ffan  Take one pound of double refined sugar
beaten & searced, put to it some muske
& Ambar gris, the white of one egg, &
3 or 4 spoonfulls of Rose water, then stir it
well together till it looks very white, &
when those dishes you made be cold then wth
a feather wipe them wth this Candy on e
one side of them, then set them into then
Ouen till that side be dry, then take them
out of the ouen & when they be cold
agayne then doe the other side of them,
then agayne set them into the oven till
that side be dry allso. .





302
To make a Creame
A ffan

Take a pinte of very thicke Creame, and then take halfe
a pint of water, and in the Water boile some Coriander seeds
then strain it and put the water into the Creame and so sett
it on the fire, and let it boyle, and when it boiles put in a little
salt and orange in the juice of halfe a Lemmon and stirr
it well together, and when the Creame beginns to turne, take
it from the fire and powre it gently into a cleane cloth and
tye it up all night that the whey may runne out the next mor-
ing. With a Spoone mash it, and Season it with Sugar and
Rosewater and Ambergreece and dish it & soe serue it in.

+ To make another
A ffan

Take a cleane Skillet and rinse it with Vinegar then powre
out the Vinegar and put into the Skillet very thicke Creame
& Set it on the fire, and keep it stirring till it boiles, and
when it begins to be thicke take it of the Fire and sweeten it
with Sugar & put in Rosewater & a little Ambergreece, & so
let it boile again till it be very thicke but neuer leaue stirring
of it all the time. When you see it very thicke take it of
and dish it and so let it stand a day before you cutt it.

+   To make another
A ffan

Take very thicke Creame and put to it Some Rosewater &
Sweeten it well with Sugar, then put it into a wide mouthed
glasse and shake it till it begins to be very thicke, then dish it
and lay on the top of it some Creame and so serue
it to the Table.

141
303

To make a Hedg-hogg
A ffan

Take 3 pints of sweet Creame, and boile in it some Nutmegg and
Mace and when it boiles put in being very well beaten fiue yolkes
of Eggs white and all, and so stirr it and let it boile and when it
is turned to Curds and whay powre it into a strayner and so hang it
up to drayne for 6 or 8 houres when the whay is runne all out take
halfe a pound of Almonds blanched and very finely beaten with
Rosewater and temper them with the Curd and Sweeten it well with
Sugar, and put Some Rosewater and Ambergreece into it and soe
make it up in the fashion of a Hedgehogg and put in two Currants
for the Eyes and stick all Almonds all over the back of it, and put it into a Dish and into the Dish put white wine & Sugar.
or raw Creame and serue it to the Table.

A most excellent Receipt of Veale Ielly
A ffan +
Take a shoulder of Veale, cutt of all the fatt, lay it a soaking in
Spring water a night, then wash it in warm spring water, cutt out all
the bleeding veines, put it into a gallon of Spring water in a new or very
cleane earthen pipkin, boile it fast over a cleane fire, skimme of all the
fatt as it riseth, When it is boiled halfe away, sett some in a Spoone to
jelly, & when it cutts Stiffe take it of the fire, & runn it through a Cotton
Ielly bagg into a silver or earthen dish, and when it is cold take all the
fatt of from it; beat the white of an Egge and 4 spoonfulls of Rosewater
up to a froth. Then put it into a very cleane pipkin or preserving pan
put in your Ielly to it half a pound of double refined Sugar, the juice
of 5 lemmons, or a quarter of a pint of sharp white wine, 2 races of gin-
ger, a spoonfull of Cinamon water, 1/2 a spoonfull of Coriander seeds, 2 litt-
le sprigs of Rosemary, lemmon rind thin pared as long as you can cutt
it of from the lemmon. Sett all these upon a cleare fire; keep it stirring
softly with a spoone till it boile up, when it is turnd like a possett & the
jelly looks clear under the scumme take it of from the fire; and lay 2 or 3
Sprigs of Rosemary in the bottom of your Ielly bagg & runn your Ielly through
into an earthen bason, & the 2d. time runn it through into your glasses
for your use.





304

To make a Posset without Milke
A ffan

Take a Quart of the strongest and stalest Ale you can gett
sett it upon the fire in a siluer bason, & when it boiles put in 14
Eggs very well beat wth 4 spoonfulls of Sugar & a little sprigg
of Rosemary, stirr it continually on the fire till it be as
thick as a posset & so serue it up.

Dr. Fraysers way to dresse an Eele.
A ffan +

Slip of the Skin to the tayle, then Carbonado it on both
sides at an inch distance, rub it lightly with Salt, then boile
white or Claret wine Vinegar about a Wine glasse full & powre
it upon the Eele, hauing put it in a dish round, then couer it
with another dish, & let it lye till you haue thus prepared
your Selfe: Viz: First Onyon small minced to the quantitie of
about 2 Spoonfulls, 2 Anchouas, a piece of thin Lemmon-peele
about the breadth of a shilling, of Sweet herbest Thyme, Winter
Savory, Penyroiall, Sweet Marjoram, ana, in all of these ^about as much
as will lye in a spoone when they are minced; Round pepper un-
beaten about 12 graines, & of beaten Pepper somewhat more, one
small cloue of Garlicke, of spice, Mace, Cloves & Nutmegs a
small quantity, of parsley more then of all the other hearbs, chopt
likewise; All these Small minced together, & mingled with fresh
butter are to be milgled in the Belly of the Eeele, & into the slitts to
fill it, & then the Skinn to be drawne backe againe to cover it.
Tye the Eele to a spitt with a thread, & as it roasts bast it with
Salte & Oyle, & if you will therin Garlick. The Sauce is made
of the Stuffe in the belly adding 2 or 3 Anchouies with Creame
Butter. So taking of the Skinne dish it up. Rub the dish with
Garlicke.
If it be a pond Eele, to cleare it as well as a Riuer Eele, put
it in a Fish Trunke & let it lye in a cleaner River more or lesse as
there shall be cause.

142
305
A ffan +

To make a Cake

Take two pounds &  tenn Ounces of Flower, 3 quarters of a pound
of Butter rubbed into the Flower, two pounds & a halfe of Currants, 2
Ounces of Sugar besides the >ising, tenn Eggs, but six of the whites, a lit-
tle Mace, Cinamon, & Nutmegs about 3 quarters of a pint of Creame
Warme, a quarter of a pint of yeast, a little Saffron, It should be sett into
the Ouen when Manchett begins to coulour.

A ffan To make the Queens Cake
 Take a full quarter of a pecke of fine fflower,
a pint of Creame, 3 quarters of a pound of butter,
ten yolkes of Eggs, a pint and quarter of yest: salt
Cloues, Mace, & Nutmeg, as you like. halfe a quar-
ter of a pint of Rosewater, halfe a pound of
blancht Almonds, half a pound of fine sugar, all both beaten fine wth and amber
gris & the Rosewater. one pound & a halfe of
Currans, 1li of raysins sliced very small. knead
all these together, & let it lye an hower in the
dough, then make up the Cake, and let not the
cream be too hott, nor shutt  not up the mouth
of it, but be stirring yr Cake up & downe
3 or 4 times. lett it stand in the Ouen Scarcely
one hower, then drown it, and yea it well
with  refined sugar & Ambar. Sett it into the
Ouen againe till it be bright, & then drawe
it againe for your use.

To make a Spanish Biske

Cut up a round of Brisket Beefe into small thin peeces,
a Loyne of lamb into a little bigger peeces, 1li of
Veale into little peices, the Ribbs of a Neck of Mut-
ton in to Steakes, a Capone in 4 quarters, 3 Chickens,
3 ducks, 3 partridge, 3 snippes, 3 pidgeons, 3
Turkey chickens, 2 Cocks, 2 Rabbets, 2 dozen
of larkes, or other small Birds, the Rabbet






306
must be cutt & trusst. trusse all yr ffowl
wth the heads on, except the ducks, season
this Meate wth Nutmeg, pepper ^& Salt, put
them all into an yron pott, adde a quart
of Sack, 3 pints of white wine, 3 quarters
of a pint of Vinegar, & as much Water
as will couer it all, 2li of sweet butter
then sett it to boyle & couer it close, &
when it is allmost boyld put to it parslay
Endiffe, dates Marrow, Mace Capers
sliced lemon, Orenge, blancht Eggs, Coly-
flowres, ...... Chestnuts, a thin
slice or 2 of leane Bacon, so boyle
it up quick, dish it in a great deepe Char-
ger wth toasted bread underneath, laying
the ffowle round about apon the meate,
and garnish yr Meate & dish with broom
buds, lemons, Capers, pickled Barbaries,
Salt & pep pickled grapes this is to be
serued ^the at first dish
If you will you may beate 4 Eggs into e
liquor just as you take it up.

A Pudding.

A ffan +
1 Take one pound of light white Bread cutt
in thin slices, couer in wth Creame, lett set it
on the fire till it is through warme, beate it
well together, put in 12 eggs, beat 4 whites,
put in  beefe sewet, or marrow, Currans,
raisons, salt, sugar, uery little flower, couer
yr dish wth puffe past, set it in a quick ouen,
but not to scorch it.


143
307
A ffan +  My Lady Portlands pudding.
8

A pound of white bread crums, 2 spoonfulls
of flower, & spoonfull of sugar, a little
salt, nutmeg, parsley, tyme, winter sauery,
marjoram, peny riall, Marigold flowers,
shred them small, mingle them all together
wth the bread, put to it marrow a pound , 6 eggs well
beaten wth a little sack, a hand full of Currans.

+ To dry cherreys & make
A ffan  Cherrey wine

Take 12li of Cherreys, 3li of sugar, let them
boyle a little, let them stand till the next
day, then take them out of yr syrrop, &
put then in yr stoue or Ouen to dry, then
put in 12li more & let them stand as long,
& when you hauve put them to dry, put
halfe a pint of this syrrop to a quart of
white wine, corke yr bottles close, tye the
downe & put them in sand.

 A ffan +
69 To make an almond pudding
wth pyth of an oxebacke

Take a good quontite of pyth out of the
back of a beefe, wash it uery cleane, &
strip it out of the skin, beate it well wth
the back of a spoone 2 howers take almonds
blancht & beate uery small, & put them into
yr pyth, a spoonfull of grated bread, 12 eggs,
6 whites, all beaten, nutmeg & Mace finely
beaten & searced, refined sugar & marrow
good store, a little ambar gris. When yr gutts
are cleane sprinkle them wth, rosewater, &
let them them lye in it an houre before you
fill them.





308
A ffan +
To make the blanche Creame

Take a pint of thick sweet Creame,
put to it 2 spoonfull of sugar, a
spoonfull of Rosewater, boyle it, beate
10 Eggs, wth Cold Creame, the treads being
taken out, when you see yr Creame
rise put them in, stirring it very
well till it come to a thick Curd, take it
off, & put it through a hayre-strainer,
beate it wth a spoon till it be cold, & so
dish it.

A ffan + To make a Caule Pudding.

10 Take a peice of the leane of mutton.
or Veale, parboyle it a little, then
mince it small, put in beefe - sewet,
Parsley, spinnage, sweet Marjoram,
Winter sauery, as much of each as yu
like, shred them small; Currans, a
Manchet grated, mingle them all together
wth salt, nutmeg, & sugar, wet it with
the yolkes of 4 Eggs, make them not
too stiffe, rowle them in long rowles, then
take the sheepes Cawle, wrapping euery
one of them in a peice of it, so lay them
in a dish, & bake them, when yu dish
them scrape loafe-sugar upon them


144
309
+ To make a Neates tongue Pudding.

A ffan When your neates tongue is well boyld, & peeld, beate
it in a stone Mortar very small, season it with
Salt, nutmegs, mace, & sugar, 6 spoonfull of
Creame, & yolkes of Eggs, 3 whites, a quarter of a
pound of white bread Crumms halfe a pound of Currans
a quarter of marrow. wet your cloth, strew some
white bread Crumms upon it, tye it close, & put
it into boyling water, & let it boyle an hower.

A ffan 12 To stew Beeves Palats.
+
Take Beefe palats after they be boyled tender
with other meate, blanch & scrape them, cleane,
then cut each palat in two, stew them between
2 dishes with a peice of leane Bacon, a few mus-
rooms, sweet-breads of Veale, ^or lam strong Broth, grauie
of mutton, onyon ...... peper orenge peele. lay
at the bottome of your dish slices of light bread
softned with grauie, stew marrow with your palats,
take out your bacon & spices, & onyons, when they
be stewd enough, squeeze in the juyce of 2 or
3 orenges, & serve the meate in upon the sopp..

 A ffan To make a posset.

+ Take 5 pints of Creame, 18 eggs, beate them
well, steepe them, styr a pint of sack & sugar
to make it sweet, sweeten the Creame before
you boyle it, set your Eggs upon Coales till they
be hot stirring them continuallie; when your
Cre...







310
Creame boyles up powre into e basyn, stir it
well together, & imediately take it off. Vpon
the top of it strew ambar gris & e finest loafe=
sugar.

To fry Lamb stones & sweet-breads.
A ffan
+ Boyle Lamb stones & sweet-breads, slit them, take
off the skins, flower them & fry them in butter
till they be browne, stew them between 2 dishes
with Anchouas, Onyon, grauie of mutton, Wine, butter,
nutmeg, salt, when they have stewed enough put
them upon Toasts moystned with grauie, so serue
them up.

A ffan To make a Cabbage Creame.
+ 14

Take 25 quarts of new milke, put it into a great
kettle, set it on a quick fire till it boyle, Take 3
dozen of earthen panns cleane washt, 2li of
double refined sugar, a little orenge Rosewater or
Sack, or orenge flowr water; put it in a
little Vial, tye it with leather, prick the leather
with a bodkin full of holes, fill each pan allmost
full of milke, & let it stand till yu see a skim
come upon the top, then take a siluer dish
or a large white earthen dish put into it a
trencher plate with the bottome upward,
strew a little sugar upon it, witth a large
goo

145
311
Katharin goose feather take the skins off them pans one
after another, takong care you doe not
breake the skim, so lay it upon the
plate in what form you please of a
Cabbage. It is best between euery lay
of the skim to strew ^sift a little sugar, and
sprincle a little Rosewater, but not too
much. When you haue put your milke
into panns cleane your kettle & put the
milke into it the kittell againe. ^and when it is hott into cleane yr panns,
thus you must doe fower times. if any
froath rise upon the milke, scume it
........ off as it boyles wth a skimer.  to serue
..... that when you haue put yr milke into
yr pan yu must blowe off the top of the
milke with another empty pan, & so
doing the skim will settle whole wthout
cracking. As soone as the milke begins
to boyle it must be taken off the fire,
& imediately put into the panns.

A ffan + To make pasty crust.

Take as much flower as is proportionable
to 6li  of butter for a Buck, & 5 for a doe,
put ther to 16 eggs, cut your butter into the
flower, then with a Rowling pin worke it
ue






312
uery well together, if in sumer, then
wth cold water: if in Winter, with
warme. 6 howers is the ordinarie
time for baking of fallow, 8 for red
deere.

To boyle ducks.

A ffan + 15
Take 2 ducks, lard them, halfe rost
them, drawe them off, put them in
a pipkin with a quart of Claret wine,
Chesnuts, a pint of great Oysters, taking
the beards off, 3 Onyons minced very
small, a little ...............
thyme, Rosemary, parseley, sauery, of each
a sprig tyde all together; a Crust of white
bread grated, or baked crumms, an Anchoua
shred in, sliced lemmons layd atop, & serue
it up with sippets.


146
313

My Sister Newces receipt
to make a Cake.

A ffan +
Take 5 pound of dryed flower, fiue
pound of Currans, a pound & halfe
of butter; 20 eggs (put out 12 of
the whites), one quart of Creame,
a pint of good Ale yest; when the
Creame is boyling hott put in the
butter, & when it is melted mingle
it with the flower streining ^it thorough
the cloth with the yest put in a
quarter of a pound of sugar finely
beaten, & cinnamon nutmegs &
Mace according to you discretion in
fine powder.

A ffan
+o 16

To make almond puddings in Gutts
.......

Take a pound of Almonds beate small,
with a quarter of a pint of Rosewater,
a pound of marrow cutt, a quarter of
a pound of fine Sugar, put this into
a pint of Creame, & put to it a pound
of Crums  of white bread grated, a
quarter of a pound of Currans plumpt,
11 Eggs, a Nutmeg sliced, a little ambar
gris, fill it into Hoggs s.... & boyle
them.
bulloks guts are larger & better





314
+ To make a fine syllabub

Take a glasse of white wine of 3 quarters
of a pint, a quarter of a pint of sack,
4 spoonfulls of the juyce of lemman,
put to it a quart of Creame, a nut-
meg grated small, a grain of musk,
a sprig of Rosemary, as much sugar
as will sweeten it to your liking; these
must be put into a deep stone-pott,
you must beate it with a birchen rod
all one way: when you think it is thick
enough take out the Rosemary, & powre
it into syllabub glasses or a pott. It
must stand 12 howers before it be ea-
ten, but it will keep 3 days.

 A ffan + 17   To make a puff.

Take a quarter of a pound of double
refined sugar being beaten finely, &
finely searced, with 2 grains of ambar-
gris, one of Ciuet, & one of musk. beate
all those to a perfect past with gum-
dragon steept in Rose-water, beate
in the white of an Egge; make this
up into little Loaues the Fashion of
a manchett some 3 inches about,
bake them in an Ouen as hott as for
thin tarts taffaty Tarts, & when they
rise up high take them out of e
Ouen that they may be as white as
snow, & when they be thorough

147
315

dry, & very light, box them up
for all the yeare.

+ To make Gentill egges.

A ffan 18  Take a pound of fine sugar beaten &
searced, 2 ounces of blancht almonds
beaten in a mortar uery fine with Rose-
water of which yoo must put in all
a quarter of a pin, 3 grains of
musk; grind them all together till
they growe white, then streyne it into
an earthen dish, lay as much gum-dra-
gon to steepe in the white water as you
think will make it a payst. when it is
steept enough beate the gum dragon &
juice with the white of an egge, ^& 3 grayns
of ambar gris. when you have beate all
this to a perfect payst, make it up
in knotts, & bake them. They will
be white as snow, & as light as a
puffe.

A ffan + 19 To make Curran Cakes

Take a pound of flower, a quarter of
a pound of sugar, the yolkes ^to of 2 Eggs,
3 quarters of a pint of Creame made
scalding hott, a little saffron squeezd
into the Creame. make it an indifferent
stiffe payst, wrap it up in a cloth, &
let it lye halfe a quarter of an hower
by the fire: then rub your currans very
cleane rowle your payst out uery






316
thin, spread your currans, & upon them
put citron or lemman peele thin sliced;
a little ambar-girs, & jelly of pippins
if you please: couer them with uery
thin payst & cut them round with e
top of a beer glasse. prick & bake
them, & keep them for your use.

To make an exellent Water gruell
for the cleansing of a childbed
Woman or one in the like
Condition.

A ffan +
Take a quart of spring-Water, halfe
a pint of white Rhrenich wine, 3 spoonfull of
My Lady whole groots, 2 ounces of ^candied erringo roots,
Lewenthorp 2 handfull of mayden hayre; boyle this
close stopt in a pipkin: you must
take this at 3 times, Viz: in the
morning early fasting, at 4 of the
clock in the after noon, & when you
are in your bed at night.

To stew a Lambs head.

Take a Lambs head halfe boyld with
the lights & heart, slice them in thin
slices of an inch long put them in a
stew pan wth the grauy that runns
from them, put in with them a blade


148
317
of mace, a whole onyon, 2 anchouies,
6 spoonfull of the liquour they were
boyld in, salt, halfe a nutmeg sliced;
then couer it with claret wine, &
let it stew with the Couer on till it be
uery tender. So serue it up with Sli-
ced lemmon & barbaries, ^& with what o-
ther pickeled things you please ^about on the
dish side.





318

149
319
To make french broth
A ffan
+
Boyle two capons with two pounde of beefe
mutton, and bacon boyle them in about two gallons
of water with one ^halfe a spoonfull of salte, when the
capons are tender enough to eate, take off the
pott, & after you haue taken out 3 quarts of the
liquor, couer it, put that liquor into a pipkin or
Scellet, vpon a handfull of purslin, a handfull
of succurre, 2 handfull of sorrell, 4 cucumers
cutt in peeces foure Inches bigg, & the seeds
taken out; when the hearbs are very tender
take them vp, & poure them into the same dish
as e capons must be in, vpon thin slices of -
french bread, then sett e dish upon a chauing-
dish of Coales, & let it boyle, then poure vpon
it 2 eggs beatten uery well, with e ieyce of two
lemmons, & halfe a nutmegg grated , put your
two capons in e middle of the dish, & soe serue
it up:

You must let your beefe mutton & bacon
boyle halfe an houre before you put your
capons in, if you please you may boyle
pecces of marrow, & mushrums with your
hearbs,







320
My Lady Levinthorp's receipt to make
Cream Cheese
+
A ffan 20 o
Take 2 quarts of Stroakings and 2 quarts of creame,
boyle the creame of a cleare fire, then putt it into the stroakings
and coole it a little with a skiminge dish. putt in a spoonfull
of rennett the elder the better soe it be Sweet. Take a large
Strainer and lay it in a great cheese fatt, then with a
skimming dish take up the curde gently & lay it in the Strainer
which lapp up and lay upon it a cheese board of the same size
of the fatt, putt 2 pound weight upon that letting it draine
3 houres, then turn it into a cheese cloth and a fatt 2 fingers
deep fitt for t quantitie of curde. Lay 6 pound weight upon
it, turne it into cleane Fresh cloaths 3 or 4 times before night
and very early e next morninge Salt it wth fine white salt
beat small, according to yr likinge. Turne it out of into drie cloaths
twice in four houres, then take it out and the next morninge
early, lay thick over it & under it the leaues of the largest
nettles, shifting them and putting fresh euery morninge. If
the cheese be moyst at first drie it with a soft ragg; At 15
dayes it will be fitt to be eaten.
A Ffanshawe

A ffan Mrs Fanshaw of Jenkins her receipt to
o + 21 make a Sack posset. the besst that is

Take 12 eggs, leaue out 2 or 3 of the whites. take out the
threds and beat them very well, putt them into the basin you
make the posset in, halfe a pound of sugar a pint of Sack, a
nuttmegg sliced, mingle them well togeather sett the basin upon
a chafeing dish of coales till the liquour is more than bloud warme
Take a quart of Creame and when it boyles up skim it and
poure it into your basin covering it with a warme plate, setting
it upon embers till it be that thicknesse you like. if you would
haue your posset biger double the quantety,
A: ffanshawe

150
323

A ffan     To Pickle a sallet of Reddish.
+
Let your reddish seeds bee stewed in a weake pickle of
water salte and vinegar 12 houres. Then take them out of that
liquour and wash them in 2 or 3 severall vinegars, untill you haue
washed away an ill tast & savour in them. then putt them up in a
great pickle made of the Vergis Vinegar and sugar gently boylinge
a while togeather, soe they will last all winter. You may stew
capers in the same manner to bee tender.
A ffanshawe






324
 To make endouillettes

+ Take a peece of a hind legg of veale without skin and halfe rost
it and bast it wth butter. When tis half rosted hash it very small
with bacon and a little parsly and some sithes, when tis well hashed
togeather take the yolks of 4 eggs and the white of one egg, putt in
some peper and some salt and kneed it alltogeather, then putt some
butter in an earthen pipkin upon a chaffing dish of coales that it
may boyle softly; Cover the dish, & when you uncover it lett the
steame drop into the meate, and stirr it often least it should
burne. You must putt noe water in it, the steame of it is enough to
stew it in. When they are stewed enough you must take the
yolk of an egg and a little Verges & some of the Sauce & beate
A ffan them well togeather & putt them upon the meate.

To stew beef a la mode

A ffan You must take a thick peece of beefe without skin or bone or
fatt, it must be very good beefe. Beate it very well till it is
ready to breake. Larde it very thick with bacon. The bacon must
be season'd before with Vinegar pepar and Salt. Then putt the
meat in an earthen dish upon a little fire. Putt noe water in
lett the steame drop into the meat, which is enough to stew it in.
It must bee very well covered with a dish and a napkin over it.
Season it very well with peper, Salt and some cloves. When it is
stewed enough take it out of the Sauce while tis hott. Tis to be
eaten cold.

A ffan +  To make potage of cherries
Take Cherries and pull of the stalkes of them ........ them
with very good fresh butter. When they a little frie in the butter,
putt in some water: a little sugar and make it boyle togeather,
then cutt some bred in little bitts & frie it in buter alone, and
when tis well fryed putt it to the cherries boyling them all
togeather till there is not much juice left, shakinge them well
together in the boylinge: soe serve it up with fine sugar scraped
upon it.


151
325

To make French porrage of a Duck
A ffan
Take a fatt Duck Larded, putt into the belly pepper and
salt, then allmost half rost it. You must haue then a pott of
hott water upon the fire, draw the Duck of the spitt and putt
it into it with all the gravie in the pan that came from the
Duck, putt in a little salt a little cloves & nuttmegg, then
take turneps pare them and cutt them in round slices, you
must have a good many of them, then fry them in a pan with
some Lard, and when they are well fryed putt them alltogeather
into the pott with the Duck. When the turneps are well boyled
in the broth then make some tosts of white bread, breake
them in little bitts, and putt them into the pott to the broth.
When the bred is well boi a little boyled take out the bred and
turneps & strain them through a sieve pressinge them with a
spoon to make the thick goe through. You must mingle a
little crums of bread with it & poure in some broth to make
it pass through, to thicken the broth. Then putt this broth into
the pott again and lett it boyle a little, then take it up in a
dish with slices of bread under it, and the Duck with slices of
the boyled turneps about it. Lett the bred bee well soaked
in the broth.






326
A Receipt how to Make Pao de lo
A ffan + o
First they take twenty eggs and of them they break then
in a basin neither very great nor little, of the which they putt
their whites of the other ten, only their yolks, and with a great
spoon they beate them, then putt in a pound of sugar well
weighed, and beate it by little and little for the space of an
houre or 5 quarters and when they are well beaten, they putt
in a spoonfull of water, and beat it a little more, then a pound
of flower dispersed and well mixed. This beinge done putt it
in a basin which is called de fartes that is not very large yett
somwhat deep, and puttinge under it a little paper carrie it to
the oven, putt it in presently and when it is baked take
away the paper before it be cold.

A ffan Receita de como se fas o paõ de lo
+
Premeiramte.  se tomaõ Vinte ouos e des delles se vaõ que=
brando dentro vna panella, nem mto grande, nem pequena
os quais ouos se huã de botar com claras os outros des so
as gemas, se huaõ de botar e com huã Culber grande os huaõ
de ir batendo a qual bade andar entre as palmas das maõs,
botase Ibe hũ aratel de asugre bem pesado, vayse botando
pouco e pouco, dentro na panella, e se vai batendo com os
ouos por tempo de huã ora, ou cinco quartos, e como estaõ
mui bem batidos, se Ibe bota huã culher de agoa e se tornaõ
a bater qutro pouco, e teraõ pezado hũ aratel de farinha
e se bida totando dentro espalbada, e sebir a mexendo en
estando isto feito se botaõ na vma bacia das q' chamaõ
de fartes, q' naõ seja mto grande, e q' seja fundazinba; e se
lhe ha de por lã papel de baixo, e logo ^se ba de leuaro forni
e meterse logo dentro, e como esta cozido, se Ibe tira a papel
antes q' se arefeca

152
327





328

To Adubado Porke

A ffan + Take Porke new kill'd what joynt you please flee
of e skin, & put it into an Earthen pan shred
a handfull of sage very small, & put it into a
stone Morter, put thereto two cloues of garlicke
rub them very well with e sage ^with e Pestle put
thereto a pint of sharp claret wine, then poure
all this vpon e porke put in likewise vnderneath
e pork a pint of vinegar & a pint of water
mingled together, & straw some bay salt finely
beat ouer it all, when the Meat hath layn in it
2 dayes & a night it must be rested, & you
may eat it hott or cold as you please with
mustard or else with oyle & vinegar which is the most
proper sawce.


53
329

A ffan A Receipt to make an Italian
+ dish of hogs heads

Take 2 Hogs heads & Tongues 2 whole nutmegs
bay Leaues & sault, whole pepper, lett them be boyled
till e bones come off very cleane, then take them
out, the Eares & e great End of the tongue must
be cutt in pretty bigg slices & thin, the rest chopt
small, then putt in Cloues Synnamon, Mace,
Nutmeggs, pepper, all beat to a powder, &
some Lemmon pill cut small, & salt as you
much as you thinke will season it very well.
& then you mvst haue a wooden presse of what
fashion you please, in e bottome & sides you must
putt Bay Leaues very thick, t e Meat may
not touch e wood, then in e Bottome you must
strew some spice & salt & then put in some of
e chopt meat, & vpon t some of e Eares and
Tongues, t are cut in sleeces ^& soe lay chopt
meat againe, Eares & Tongues till itbe all in
& between euery Row of Minst meat & tongues
strew some salt & spice, when you haue done
lay Bay Leaues a top & soe couer it with the
Couer of e Presse, & lay very good weight
vpon it & lett it stand 48 houres all this
must be done whilst it is hott, when you
take it out of the Presse you must serue it
whole & carue it at the Table in thin slices, &
eat it with oyle & Vinegar./






330

154
331
Madrid e 10 of August 1665 I. N.
A ffan
+ o
To make Lemonado

Take 4  quarts of e best fountaine water & 2
quarts of e best white wine, cut into it 3 Large
Lemons, rine & all, in square bitts of an Inch
bigg, squize e juyce of one whole Lemon into this
Likewise, & put in a pound and a halfe of e best
white sugar, stop all these close in an Earthen
pitcher, setting it in a coole place for 2 houres
during which time you must stirr it very well,
with a wooden Ladle, or spatula 3 or 4 times,
then passe it thorough a course Canvas strainer
& put to it a dragme of Ambar-Greece ground
very small, then bottle it vp, & keepe it very
coole, after 4 hours you may drinke it, it will
keep good 2 days & 2 nights & noe Longer, this
drink is only for e sumer time.

Madrid 10
Augt 1665 + To make Synamon water

A ffan Take 6 qts of e best fountaine water put it in a
new Earthen pipkin, & sett it vpon e fire, when
it just ready to boyle take it off, put into it two
ounces of Sinamon bruis'd, stop e jugg very close,
& let it boyle till 3 pints be consumed, then take
it off, & put to it, 2li of e best white sugar, & a
dragme of Ambar Greece, wch must not be put in
till e Liquor be strain'd, & e sugar consumed in it.





332
To make Alman Milk called
Garapiña de Leche de Amendas
Madrid 10
Augt  1665
A ffan o + 22

Boyle 5 quarts of the best fountaine water with a quarter
of an ounce of whole Sinamon in it, a quarter
of an houre then poure it into an Earthen
pan in which there is 3 pounds of Almonds
beat small after hauing them been blanched
& beat with Orange flowre water stirr them
well together & lett them stand 2 houres, ...
put into it a pound of e best white sugar:
well beat then straine it thorough a thick
Canvas strainer, & put in a dragme of
Ambar Greece. if you like it, put it into a
great glasse bottle & sett it in a  Coole sellar
you may drinke it after 4 houres standing
there, it will keep good 2 days, & 2 nights
but noe longer.

drawing of pot for making hot chocolate? with a stirrer and the words
this is the same chocelaty pottes that are made in the ....
Indes
 To dresse Chocolatte 23

A ffan

 .........of Good Ale & halfe a pound
.........te sugar cut the Chocolate in
peeces neer an Inch bigg, mingle it with the sugar,
haue ready on e fire your Chocolatte pott
& a large quart of e best fountane water
wch as soone as you perceiue it be just ready
to boyle, take it off, & put in the Chocolatte
& sugar, stirring it very well wth a  chocolatte
stick made for e purpose a quarter of  an
houre, setting e pot all e while vpon hot
Embers or hot dishes, you must serue it vp in
little Cupps of China t hold neer a quarter of a pint
stirring it very well at e putting of it in to euery Cup
t it may lye froth'd at e top, taking always care that


155
333
be seru'd  vp as hot as it is possible to be done
you must serve vp as many Cupps as there are people
or rather ... more

The best Chocolatte (but t of the Indias) is
made in Siuill in Spaine

Madrid e 10th August 1665
A ffan X To make an Olla podrida

Take 2 pound of the best flanck beefe, wi/thout skin
or much fatt, 2 pound of the Leaner part of a spanish
Gammon of bacon, let these boyle in a great pipkin
or silluer skellet, with 4 quarts of water a houre on
the fire then put to it 2 pound of Mutton, of the
shoulder or rump end of the Loyne with the rump on
that is not too fatt 2li of a breast of veale, skim e
pott & lett those boyle together halfe an houre
then put in a young hen t is not too fatt, two
partrige & lett these boyle halfe an houre longer
to these add 4 young pigions, &, & 2 sweet breds of
veale, & after these haue bin in a qer of an houre
put in 4 spoonfull of green pease, 4 spoonfull of
french beans cut in peeces in their skins, e white of
2 great cowcumbs cut in great pecces, e ....
of 2 Gravy cheeks cut in peeces 2 spoonfull of
green grapes, 2 spoonfull of parsly Leaues, 3 spoon-
full of balme Leaues, as much salt as will season
it, as much pepper & Cloues beaten to fine powder
as will lye vpon a shilling lett these boyle alltogether
till the Meat will part without cutting, then mingle
as much safron made into fine powder as well lye.







332

To make Alman Milk called
Garapiña de Leche de Amendas

Madrid 10
Augt 1 1665

A ffan o + 22
Boyle 5 quarts of e best fountaine water with a quarter
of an ounce of whole Sinamon in it, a quarter
of an houre then poure it into an Earthen
pan in which there is 3 pounds of Almonds
beat small after hauing them been blanched
& beat with Orange flowre water stirr them
well together & lett them stand 2 houres, at
put into it a pound of the best white sugar:
well beat then straine it thorough a thick
Canvas strainer, & put in a dragme of
Ambar Greece. if you like it put it into a
great glasse bottle & sett it in a  Coole sellar
you may drinke it after 4 houres standing
there, it will keep good 2 days, & 2 nights
but noe Longer.

+ To dresse Chocolatte  23

Madrid 10
Augt. 1665.

A ffan

Take a pound of Chocolatte & a pound
of e best white sugar cut e chocolatte in
peeces neer an Inch bigg mingle it wth e suger
haue ready on e fire your chocolate pott
& a large quart of e best fountaine water
which soone as you perceiue to be be just ready
to boyle, take it of, & put in e Chocolate
& sugar, stirring it very well wth a  Chocolatte
stick made for t purpose a quarter of  an
houre, setting e pot all e while vpon hot
Embers or hot Ashes, you must serue it vp in
Little Cups of Chinea t hold neer a qr of a pint
Stirring it very well at e putting of it in to euery Cup
that it may lye frothd at e  top, taking always care that it

155
333

be seru'd vp as hot as it is possible to be done
you must serve vp as many Cupps as there are people
or rather ........

The best Chocolatte (but t of e Indies) is
made in Siuill in Spaine
Madrid e 10th of August 1665
Affan + To make an Olla podrida

Take 2 pound of the best flanck beefe, wthout skin,
or muck fatt, 2 pound of Leaner part of a spanish
Gammon of bacon, let these boyle in a great pipkin
or silluer skellet, wth 4 quarts of water a houre on
e fire then put to it 2 pound of Mutton, of the
shoulder or rump end of e Loyne wth e rump on
that is not too fatt 2li of a breast of veale, skim e
pott & lett these boyle together halfe an houre
then put in a young hen t is not too fatt, two
partridge, & lett these boyle halfe an houre longer,
to these add 4 young pigions, & 2 sweet breds of
Veale, & after these haue bin in a qr of an houre
put in 4 spoonfull of green pease, 4 spoonfull of
french beans cut in peeces in their skinsm e white of
2 great cowcumbs cut in great peeces, e bottomes
of 2 Hartychooks cut in peeces 2 spoonfull of
green grapes, 2 spoonfull of parsley Leaues, 3 spoon-
full of balme Leaues, as much salt as will season
it, as much pepper & Cloues beaten to fine powder
as will lye vpon a shilling lett these boyle alltogether
till e Meat will part wthout cutting then mingle
as much safron made into fine powder as will lye





334
vpon a 2 pence; rub e dish wherin you mean to
serue it up, very well wth garlick puting e meat
therein e smallest on e top, e ... broth at e
bottom, & herbs upon e Meat if it be at a time
of yeare when all these things are not to be had
you may either doe it wthout them, or suply those
things wth others of e like Nature

You may likewise, if you will, put in Lambs
stones, cocks stones & combs, a pot pound weight of all,

The sause vsually in Spaine eaten with
this meat is Parsely stampd very small
made thin wth vinegar wherof wth two cloues of
Garlike bruis'd into it & strein'd out, & soe
mingled well wth e parsley & serv'dd in sawcers

to pickell Oysters

X o take a full gallon of Oysters and cut the finns
and and pull them clean ofe with aney rags of
the outter, wash them one by one in ther licker
then strane the Licker and put them into a
Skillet, and boul them saft softly for halfe
an hower then take them ofe the fire and
wash them again in the same licker  one by one and lay them
in to an earthen pan sett the licker on in a
Cleane pipkin and put to it hafe a pinnt of
uineger, 1 2  ounces of peper a quarter of an
ounse of cloues ^a littell salt  and a quarter of an ounce of
mace, lett thes boyle halfe an and as soun as you
perseue it boyl up take it ofe and pore it
softly upn the oysters you must stope them
up Closs in a littell barell or pott, the licker
is a uery Good Cordall.

156
335





336

To make Cheesecakes
A ffan o + 14
Take one pott of new milke, and turn it to a tender
curd, and whey it very well; then worke it in
halfe a pound of new butter and beat six yealkes
of egges, with six spoonefulls of rose water, two nutmeggs
grated, one quarter of a pound of sugar, and halfe a pound
of Currants. Stirr all these togeather, and make your
Coffine, as followeth. Two handfull of fine fflower,
One handfull of suger finely beaten, Two yealkes of
egges and one white, beaten, with one spoonefull of rose
water, and make it into a Past, with a peece of new
butter, roule it then and cutt it round, & raise it with
an edge, & pinn papers about the edges, to keepe them
from Running over. And when they begin to colour,
take them out of the Oven and putt vpon every one
of them, two or three spoonefull of this as followeth.
Take one quarter of a pound of suger beaten, a peece
of new butter as bigg as a Turkeyes egge, seven or eigth
spoonfeulls of Rose water, melt it altogeather and
poure it on your Cheese cakes, and searse some loafe
suger over them and let them stand one quarter of
hower longer in the oven.


157
337
+ o 25 To make Lemmon creame
the best way
A ffan

Take the Iuice of four faire Lemmons and a half
pare the pilles of two of them, very thinn and squeeze
the Iuice of the Lemmons to the pill, then take the
whites of eight egges, and but the yealke of one beate
them very well then put them to the Iuyce of the
Lemmone with a Pint of faire water, and two or three
spoonefulles of Orange flower water, and sweeten it with
water sugar  to your taste. Then straine it through a haire
siue, & after set it vpon a soft fire, stirring it continually
but let it not boyle; And when you see it thicke
enough, putt it out, and let it stand three or foure howers
before it bee eaten. Putt in a little ambergreece.

A ffan + To make Puffs

Take the Curds of 3 pint quarts of m milke put to
Them neere A whole Nutmeg Grated the yolks of 4 Eges &
The white of 2, put into this about 2 Spoonfulls of Sugar,
And a uery little Salt and mingle it with so much flower
As will make it pretty stiff not hard When all this is
Mixt together it must b put upon a Slice and then Cut off
from it in litle rouls into a fring pan with 2 pound of
Clarified butter which must boile or bee uery hot before
you put in the puffs, the fier must bee a quick wood fier
They must bee fryed broune & turned and when they
Are soe you must tosse them in the pan & when you
Dish them up you must a litle buter beaten thick with
A litle Water & Nutmeg and Sugar on them & strew
some sugar ouer them;







338

To Stew Pippins

A fff X 26
A ffan

Rub your pippins Cleane Cutt them in halfes put to
euery pound of pippings a quarter of a pound of sugar
and halfe an Ounce of leaman and Orrange pill shred small
Couer them with water, and lett them boile fast in a deepe
dish dnever turning the Skines dounward, but keepe them
Cloase Covered, when they are uery tender take them of
& Sqweze in as much of the juice of orrane & leaman as
you like, Serve them in an intermes dish with the Cleere
of the liquor when they are Could, with double refined Sugar
Scrapt upon the dish

A ffan X
To Dry porke like Spanish bacon

Cutt A leg of poarke round in the Shape of a Spanish
gammon of bacon lay it upon a board high in the
middle that the brine may run of, rub it well with
half bay salt and halfe Salt peeter, So let it ly ten days
then hang it up in a Chimne where wood is burnt and
the heat is not to great, when it is through dry for
your use keepe in a dry roome for your use,


158
339

X 27  To make Icy Cream

Take three pints of the best cream, boyle it with
a blade of Mace, or else perfume it with orang flower water
or Amber-Greece sweeten the Cream with sugar let it stand
till it is quite cold, then put it into Boxes, ether of Siluer
or tinn then take Ice chopped into small peeces and
putt it into a tub and set the Boxes in the Ice Couering
them all ouer, and let them stand in the Ice two
howrs, and the Cream Will come to be Ice in the Boxes,
then turne them out into a saluar with some of the same
Seasoned Cream, so sarue it up to the Table.

X To dress Salmon, Carps, Tench
Trouts, Pikes or Perch

Take any 2 of the aboue named fishes boyle
them in half vineger or varges & water with
a handfull of salt & a good quantety of lemon
peel; put boyle them with no more Liquor then
will well couer them When they are enoughf
take them up & sett the fish plate you boyled em
them upon over a woden platter near the fire
then make your sauce with half a pint of
white wine a quarter of a pint of oyster liquor
2 Anchoues, half a spoonfull of whole pepper
a Little Hors-Redish scraped uery small a few
mushroms shred small, a quart of oysters, a pint
of prawns when al when your oysters ar througly
Stewed with this Liquor then put in 2 pound
of butter & Beat it very thick Lay sippetts
of white Bread around the dish & fry leaues
of clary, with fryed parsly & Horse redish scraped to garnish the dish
Lay your salmon on the sippetts in the middle of the
dish & your other fish on each side & pour th
Sauce all ouer them so let it stand on a Chafing





340
with a soft fire a little before you send it in

L. Marshall. The best way to Vse Muchrons to aney sort of sauce
is to spread them upon plates and set them in an
ouen, turne and drye, and beat them to powder, lay
them tyed Clear in a Galle pot, and put in as Much
at a time as you find thicken and giue tast to Your sace

to make Powder of musherooms

Take half a bushell of musherooms, wash them & wipe them dry, then take
18 large Onions peel & cutt them into a quarters, put them & the Musherooms
into a pott and let them stew in their own liquor over a Gentle fire a quarter
of an hour, then put to them a pint of viniger, half an ounce of cloues, & half
an ounce of mace, a quarter of an ounce of black pepper, beat your spice small,
& put it in to the musherooms and let all boyle together till the liquor is
allmost consumed, then put in a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, keeping
it constantly stirring all the while it is over the fire, let it simmer till all
the liquor be consumedl then take it of the fire and lay it thin all over
a tin driping pan, (or something of that kind of tin), then put it into an
Oven as soon as the bread is drawn out, let it stand all night and the
next morning turn it, so doe 4 or 5 times after bread till you find them
dry enough to powder, you must take care the oven is not so hott as to burn
them, when they are that dryed beat them to powder in a mortar, and
sivet it thro a hair cieve, and put it in Gally potts tyed closs doun to
keep for use, it will keep severall years.

To Pickle Ripe Cowcumbers in slices

Take Cowcumbers before they are full grown, & slice them thin into a pewter
dish, to 1w Cowcumbers take 3 or 4 large Onions slice two onions very thin
and a handfull of salt and put to them, & let them stand cover'd 24
hours, then take out the onion & pour a way the liquor from them thro'
a Cullender, and put them into  Glased potts.

to make the Pickle
still the best white wine viniger in a Cold Still, with some mace Cloves &
salt. make this pickle scalding hott and pour it over your Cowcumbers
after 4 or 5 days, pour your liquor from them & make it hott again, &
put it to them as before, and Cover your potts with bladers to keep them Close.

To five quarts of viniger putt half a pound of Salt, when you still it.

159
341

To make Jelly and manjor blanco
+ 28 together,

Cut a knuckcle of Veale in peeses bones & all
& a well fleshed hen, wash them both in warme
water, pricking out as much of the fat as you
Can, then wash it in Could water, boile it in a
new pipkin with as much Spring water as will
Couer the flesh a handful ouer, when your
broth is neer halfe boiled away, put in a pint
of whit wine, & let it boile halfe an hour,
Straine it wel, & when it is Could take ofe all the
fat Cleere, then put it into a Cleane pipkin with
three quarters of a pound of fine Suger, three
Spoonfuls of pure Cinamon water, a very litle
Salt, a leaman with the peel Cut Cloase ofe and
the Seeds taken out, Ceauen whits of Eggs wel
beaten with the Shells & all, as soon as these boile
up to the top of the pipkin Straine it into a
boson, take three pints of this Jelle & put
into it a quarter of a pound of blanched allmonds
heat uery fine with a little orrang flower water,
Shred the brawne of a Capon that hath been roast
or boiled uery Smale beate it uery fine & after-
wards the allmonds with it, mingle them well
in the three pints of Jelly & Set it in a Scilet
on the fier Stiring it til it bee ready to boile,
then Straine it into the dish you intend to Serue
it in, it is best within Six hours after it is
Could, if the remaining jelley bee not Sharpe






342
enough you may Squeeze in another Leaman &
Straine it ouer againe,

160
343

To Pickle Cucumbers as Mangoes

Take of the Largest & Green Cucumbers, Scrape of e upper Rind & black Spotts,
Rub them with a Course Cloth & lay them in Salt & Water for 24 hours,
then Slitt them long ways & take out all the Seeds, & fill them up with whole Cloves
of Garlick (2 or 3 in a Cumcumber) & mustard & Ginger cut in Small peices mixt
together, then tye them up with a thread, & lay them in an Earthen pott.
To a Gallon of white wine Viniger put 4 or 5 handfulls of Salt, boyle e Pickle
and then add Some whole Cloves & Mace, & pour it Scalding hott to the Cumbum-
bers, then put Dill upon them, & cover them Close, & once in a day, for the
first week SCald the Pickle & pout it over the Cucumbers, & after do the Same
once in a month as long as they last.

To Pickle Mellons like Mangoes.

Take Ginger Sliced thin, & Steeped in Viniger 48 hours. Take the Smallest
Cloves of Garlick one pound & Scald them, then take horse Radish Sliced
thin, & make a composition with mustard Seed & viniger, & fill the bodys
of the Mellons (the Seeds being first taken out) with these ingridients & tye
them together with tape and Packthred.
For your Pickle take one half white wine viniger, & the other VerJuice,
Boyle thm half an hour, then put in your Mellons and boyle them a quarter
of an hour, then take them out, and let the Pickle boyle a quarter of an hour
longer, then put your Mellons in a well Glased earthen pott, and put your
liquor to them Scalding hott, & Cover it Close to keep in the Steam as much
as you can.

To Pickle Wallnutts white

Choose your walnutts tender & young & Clear from Spotts, pare them till they
come to the white, & put them in Cold water as you do them, & let them lye
in it, till you have reade Some boyling water with a little Salt in it, put
your Nutts into it, and let them boyle about a quarter of an hour or less
if tender, - lay them one by one upon a Cloth till they be Cold, & have
ready the Pickle which must be made of white wine vineger & one third
white wine, with Cloves mace, whole peper & Salt, & a Small Clove of Garlick
& a bay leafe or two. boyle the Pickle near an hour, & let it be Cold before
you put it to your nutts, If the viniger haue been Stilled it need not boyle
So long.






344

345
+ To Colver A Salmon

Cutt your salmon in as may peeces as you
please, wash it very Cleane then Lay it into a
Kettle with all the grain of the skin one way as near
as you can then have ready boyled half an hour together
as much water & salt whole pepper & a few bay Leaues
as you think will cover the fish poure this Liquor
into your Liquor ^Kettle upon your Salmon & let it boyle slow
at first but a quarter of an houre boyle it fast, to every
gallon of Liquor you must put in a quart of white
wine & a quart of vineger thus take the bottle where
they are mingled together & dash it upon the Salmon
Long ways against the grain of the Salmon about a
quarter of a pint at a time then when you have
put in your wine & vineger & se that your Salmon is
through boyled take up your Salmon & Lay it on Fresh
plates or any other thing through which it may drain
boyle your Liquor apace a quarter of an hour
after you have taken your Salmon outt, besure
your Liquor be very salt, & when it is cold poure
putt your salmon into it
thus ordered & putt up Close in a kitt or Close other
Vessell that no Eire Can Enter and no more licker then
will well Couer the Salmon it may be sent a hundred
mile good.





346

162
347
To Boyle & Sowce Brawne
+

Cut your Brawne in as many Collers as you please
wattering it so many days as will make the flesh white
shifting the water once a day, then take it out & scrape
it & wipe it very Cleane & dry then roul it up very hard
with broad  incle set all your Collars into a great Kettle
or Copar filled with water & make it boyle softly at first
for 3 hours then let it boyle faster 12 hours more untill
it be so tender that a straw will pass through it every
way when it is 3 quarters boyled you must put in 6:
gallons of flet milk have a great care how you
take it up for fear of breaking & set up euery Collar
on one end upon a dresser or board Covered 2 inshes
thick with salt & put a great handfull of salt up
on e top of Euery one as it Comes hot out of the
Kettle so Let them stand till the Next day
the day before you boyle your Brawne you must make
your sowce drink as follows take so much ale not to
Strong nor small & boyle it with so much salt as will
make it uery salt & lett your Liquor boyle 3 hours
& so sett it to cool in the Tub you intend to sowce
your Brawne & when e Brawn has been 12 hours cold
put it into this Liquor, it will keep good till may or
Iune & never Frise in winter;






348

163
349
Mr. Mace

Directions for the fineing the Raison wine

One ounce of Ising-glass to ten gallons of wine.
Then Boyle it in one quart of the wine untill its desolved, and let it
stand a night or two.
Then Draw a quart more of the wine and heat it hott enough to dis-
olve the jelly into a Liquor.
Then whisk it well with a whisk into a froth, and Tun it into the Cask
thro a fine sive, and sturr it about in the Cask; with a broomstick
Slitt a cross at the end, and lett the Bung lye open two or three or 4
nights before you Close it.
When it is bright bottle it which will be in about a fortnights time.

To Make the Raison wine

Pick the fruit from the large stalks, or any that are perish'd, & put
them into a Mashing Tub, and to every hundred weight of Raisons
pour on eighteen Gallons of Soft Spring watter, Cold. Cover yr tub
and once a day stirr the Raisons very well with the Mashing staffe
or a Strong Stick, when it has Stood for a fortnight, press it thro a
hair bag, in a press made for this purpose, or for want of Such
in a Cheese press. Then tun it into your vessell, and let the bung
be open, till it has done working, then stop it down Close, and let
it stand about Six months, after which fine it.

half Vellvidore raisons, & half malaga makes very good wine
as also half Smyrna Raisons & half malaga, or each sort alone,
but for Elder wine the latter ^mixture is best, and we draw the Iuice of
the Ellder berrys by setting them in a pott in an oven, & then
press the juice from them, and Damsins slitt & a little water
put to them & Sett also in the oven & press't out, & we take two
parts of the Elder Juice & on of the Damsin & to every Gallon of
wine put a pint of the Iuices when mix't,





374

173
375
The Composition of the Sirrup
of Sanacle uery good against
a Consumption.
A ffan +

Take of these things following, Sanacle, Bugle,
Scabius, Red bramble topps, Agremony, Ribwort
Auens, Speedwell, Coltsfoot, dasey Rootes, Comfrey
Rootes, of each of these 4 handfulls. of wood
Bittany two handfulls.
Pick & wash these hearbes uery cleane &
dry them with a cleane Cloth, then stampe them
& strayne them, & to every pint of Iuice put
to one pound of sugar double refined in powder,
ffirst boyle yr juice on a Charcole fire a little,
& scumme it. Then put in your sugar & so boyle
it to a Syrrop, & be Sure to scume it uery cleane,
& when it is boyled to a syrrup put it up for
your use. Take of this syrrup a spoonefull in the
morning fasting, at night when you goe to bed,
At midnight or at any time of the day upon
an empty stomache.

This syrrup must be made in Iune
or Iuly at farthest, mid may best.






376

174
377
How to make Sirrups.

A ffan + o

You must take your Flowers or Hearbes and picke them cleane &
steepe them in running Water ouer warme Embers but not too hott in any
Case, and strayne out the Flowers or the Hearbes and putt in fresh eve-
ry 24 houres this doe till your Syrrup be strong enough, 3 or 4 tymes
or more, then, straine it out and to every pinte of liquour putt a pound
of Sugar, so boyle it up leisurely.

+ 29 To preserue Oranges
A ffan o

Take a dosen of the fayrest Oranges and the best couloured, & if you
can gett them with smooth Skinn's they are the better, and with a gra-
ter grate of the outward pill, if you will haue them whole then with a
Coreing Iron take out some of the meat, or if You will haue them cutt
in halfes you must leaue some of the meate in them, then lay them in
steepe in  Conduit water 2 dayes & 2 nights, they must be shifted mor-
ning and Euening, then take them out of the water and rubb them
with white Salt, then with a cleane Cloth rubb them very drie, then
boile them in 2 seuerall waters, then when you thinke they are verry
tender take them out of the water, then with a knife take out all the
blacks, then weigh them & take to a pound of Oranges a pound & halfe
of Sugar, when this is done putt your Sugar into a Skillett, & to every
pound of Sugar putt a quart of water, then take the whites of 2 Eggs,
beaten well and putt into the Skillett on the Fire, & let it boyle as fast
as it can, when you perceiue your Syrrope to rise up, putt in 2 or 3
Spoonfulls of faire water, then take it of the Fire, lay your Oranges in
a preseruing panne, when you haue scummed your Syrrup very cleane
powre it through a cleane Napkin on your Oranges in a preseruing
panne, leave out Some of your Syrrup & as it boyleth away, putt it into
Your Oranges, then sett your Chaffendish on a very quicke Fire & lett
them





378
them boile as quicke as you can; you must keepe them couered
all the while. You must haue ready halfe a pound of Suger bro-
ken into pieces as bigg as wall nutts, & as it boyles now and then
putt in 2 or 3 of them when they haue boiled 2 houres, putt in a
pinte of the best white wine, and let them boile till they be very
cleare and the syrrup thicke, then take out your Oranges &
lay them in a Siluer Dish or Bason. If your Syrrope be not
thicke enough You may boile it a little more, then take it of
the Fire and putt it on your Oranges, & putt to them the juice
of 4 Limonds, Let them stand till they be cold, then putt them
up. Take to euery 3 pound of Sugar a pint of Apple water.

A ffan o + 30 To preserue Cittrons

Take your Cittrons ^rub them wth a cheese course cloth till they be uery cleane ^then and cutt them into Quarters & lay them in
Water one day then boyle them still till they be tender, then take
to euery pound of Cittron, a pound & a halfe of ^refined Loafe Sugar, & to euery
pound of Sugar a pinte of the purest fountaine water you can get,
and boile your Syrrope a Quarter of an howre, scumming it till it
be cleare, then take it of the Fire & putt it into a Broad ear-
then panne letting it stand till it be so cold as that you may putt
in your Finger, putt in your Cittron againe couering it, Thus
doe euery morning till your Cittron be cleare and your Sirrope
thicke.

If your desire to haue Muske and Amber putt in, tye what
Quantity you think fitt in a piece of Cobwebb Lawne & hang it in

A ffan To make Orange Marmalade the best way

+ Pare your Oranges & lay them in water 3 daies shifting them morning and Euening, boile them two howres, then take them owt
of the water and wipe them very dry with a cleane Cloth; cutt them
asunder

175
379

asunder and picke out all the Seeds, then stampe & Straine them and
sett them a while to dry on a Chaffendish of Coales, take to euery
pound of Pulpe a pound & halfe of Sugar, & putt it in by degrees and
let it stand a good while on the Fire.

A ffan + To make Ielly of Pippins

Take & slice your Pippins from the Core into Conduit water, boile them
till you thinke all the heart is gone into the Water, then straine them
but not so hard as to take away any pult, sett e Liquour on the Fire &
let it boile halfe an houre or somewhat more, then take a Lumpe of dou-
ble refined Sugar, and let it boyle still putting in Lumpes of Sugar till you
thinke there is enough; When it is neare jellying putt in e juice of
Lemmon, the rind of Orange sliced very thinne, no bigger then a thred
and when it is perfect Ielly, which you may perceiue by cooling a little
in a Spoone - putt it up in shallow Glasses for your Vse.

A ffan + 31 A Receipt for Cherries in Ielly

Take a pound of Greene Apples & a pound of Cherries & 2 Ounces of
Sugar, and 2 pintes of water, boile these together till they be very
tender, then take them of the fire and strane them putt in some of the Sugar, &
of a pound set it on the Fire, then take 3 quarters of a pound of Cherries &
putt into the Syrrope then take the rest of your pound of Sugar and put in to boyl them up one a quick fire till the be enough

+ 32 To make a Conserue of Roses the best way.

Take Red Rose buds and cutt the yellow bottomes and the topps of them
then take a pound of Leaues and a Quart and halfe a pinte of water,
and boile them together till e water be allmost consumed, then take
3 pound of Sugar beaten, & putt it in at 3 seuerall times into your
Roses and let it boile untill your Syrrope will rope, then putt it up:
The best way is to beate the Roses a little, and if there be a lesse Quanti-
ty it will be the sooner boiled.

A ffan + 33 To preserue Apricocks wett or dry.

Take your Apricocks and paire & stone them, then weigh them, boile
them till they be very tender, then wipe them dry with a very cleane Cloth





380
take to euery pound of Apricocks a pound & 2 Ounces of Su-
gar, putt to your Sugar so much water as to wett it, boile it
up to a Candy, then lay your Apricocks in a Bason & putt your
Candy upon them, & heate them upon a Chaffendish & fire three
dayes morning and Euening, then putt them up. Leaue out those
You intend to keepe dry, & putt them upon Glasses & dry them in
a Stoue.

To make Mackeroones.

A Fan  +
Take a pound of the best Almonds, lay them in Cold water
all night, then dry them very well in a cleane Cloth, take as
much Sugar as Almonds and beate them, dippe e Pestle in Rose=
water, then mingle them well together, then dry your paste
ouer a Chaffendish of Coales, You must beate 6 whites of Egs,
& when the paste is cold, putt in the Froth of the Egs, with a grain
of Muske and Amber Greece, then lay them upon Marchpane
Bottomes, and searce fine Sugar upon them, & when they are
hardned take them out of the Ouen and fashion them, then
sett them in againe & let them stand untill you thinke they
are bakt.

A ffan + 34 To make Sugar ^March-pane Cakes

Take a pound of Iordan Almonds, wash them very cleane,
blanch them out of hott water into Cold, then dry them in a Cloth,
p beat them in a Stone Morter with a wooden Pestle till they
be pretty small, then putt in a Spoonfull of Rosewater, or Orange
Flower water, so beat them till they be pretty dry, continue bea-
ting, and putting in of water till they be beat very fine: then
take a pound of double refined Sugar, Let the better halfe be fine-
ly beat and searsed, and putt into the Almo, stirr them well
about, take them out & make them into little Cakes what fashion
You please, dust a Sheet of Paper with fine Sugar, & lay them
upon it, haue e Couer of a Baking panne with Charcoale kin-
dled very cleare, & sett your Paper of Cakes upon a Table, & couer them
with e Couer of the baking panne, untill you see them white and
hard

176
381.
hard on the lower side, then lett them coole a little, Take the rest
of your Sugar and make a ^whight Candy with Orange Flower water &
faire Water; Then with a Feather wipe your Cakes ouer with this
Candy; then putt them under the baking panne till that Side be dry;
then turne the other Side and Candy it; then sett the baking pann
& them till they be thorough dry, & Boxe them for your use.

A ffan + 35  To make Cleare Cakes of Currans, Plums,
Rasberries or Gooseberries.

Take your Fruite, put them into a Stone pott, having pickt them
very cleane, sett them in a Skillett with boyling Water, & let them
boile, still powring out the juice as it comes, measure your Liquour,
& take to euery pinte of Liqu a pound of refined Loafe Sugar, wett
Your Sugar in Lumpes as you putt it into your panne, sett it on the
Fire and let it boile to a candy, warme Your Liquour somewhat
more then Bloodwarme, & powre your Candy into it; Let it stand
upon a few soft Embers, stirring it continually till the candy is dissol-
ued, putt it in Glasses, & set it in the Stoue; keepe a constant heate
but not too hott. All white fruits are to be infused boyld
in 3 quarters of a pint of Water to 1li of fruit.

A fffan + 36  Cleare Cakes of Quinces the best way

Haue 2 Skilletts of boyling water on the Fire at once, then take
of your best Quinces, wipe them and cutt them in halfes or Quarters
if they be great; then boyl but one in a Skillett at once, & let them
boyl only till they be but soft; for if they be too soft the juice will be
too thicke; then take them up in a Skimmer that the water may
runne from them; then straine or wring one of them at a time tho-
rough a Tiffany as hott as you can indure to touch them, & let it be
wrung so long as any juice will come without pappe; then put out t
& take another & doe the like till you haue as much as you would;
then powre it againe thorough a Tiffany that it may be cleare, &
set it on a few Embers to keepe warme, then take to a pound of refined
Sugar a pinte of juice, boyl the Candy as for other cleare Cakes, mingle
them





382
them together and let it stand upon the Embers till the
Candy is dissolued, putt them in Glasses and stove them.

A ffan + 37 To make Marmalade of Oranges.

Take sixe or eight Oranges & pare them very thinn, cutt them
in halfes and take out the meat and the juice, then boyle them
in 6 seuerall waters till they be very tender; You must boyl them
in Fountaine water, with a dry canuas Cloth try them, peele
of the outside and cutt them in square bits, putt to euery pound of
Orange a pound & halfe of Sugar, only wett the Sugar in water,
then let it melt, & cleare it ouer the Fire, then have Apple wa-
ter ready strained, putt to every pound of Sugar halfe a pinte of
that water, let them boyle a little, & scumm them, and then putt
in your Orange; when it is halfe boyled putt in as much Amber
Greece as you please, picke out the Kernells, & skinn of e meate
of e Orange, and when it is boyled very thicke putt in e meat
and the juice, then warme the juice of a Lemmon, & putt into it
as it comes of the fire, rubb the Oranges with Salt, & wash them
before you boyle them

A ffan + 38 To dry Cherries.

Take to euery pound of Sugar 4 pound of Cherries, & take
almost a Quart of Water to one pound of Sugar, & so make a
Syrrope first and scumme it, then putt in your Cherries & let them
stand very hott, but not boyl some 2 houres, stirring them sometimes
then powre them out, & let them stand in e Syrrope 2 daies, then
warme them againe, & let them stand 2 dayes more, then lay them
upon Glasse Plates and dry them in the Stoue.

 A ffan + 39 To preserue white Quinces Mrs. Holycrofts way.

Take such of your Quinces as are well couloured, not of the greatest
but of a reasonable Bignes, weigh them, & to euery pound of Quinces
take halfe a pound of refined Sugar, then cleare your Quinces &
in the

177
383

in the clearing, let your knife goe cleane thorough, so as they may
haue a whole in the Stalke end as in the other End, & core them with
a small knife or coreing Iron, then putt them into warme Water & so
scald them untill they be very tender; You may not preserue aboue 2li
of Quinces at a time, putt to your 2li of Sugar the white of an Egge & a
Wine pinte & 1/2 of water, and when your Syrrope is boild cleare straine
it into a deepe preseruing Bason, then let it boile till the Syrrope be of
a greight height, then pare your Quinces as fast as you can, & putt them
into the boyling Syrrope, & with them putt in 1/2 a pinte of Liquor of
Quinces, and there let them boyle as fast as you possibly can make them,
continually scumme the Syrrope, & turne e Quinces, & so let them
boyl untill they be tender & beginn to breake; then take them up
with a Siluer Scummer, but take up no Syrrope with them, & lay
every Quince seuerall by it selfe in a siluer or Stone dish, when you haue
taken them all up take some of the clearest of e Syrrope, & keepe it in
a Dish by it Selfe to lay the next day upon the Quinces, when they are
throughly cold putt your Quinces into preseruing Glasses, which must not
hold aboue one or 2 Quinces at the most, then putt the rest of e Syrrope
to them whilest it is hott, & so sett them in an open window to coole
apace.

A ffan + 40  How to dry Apricocks.

Take of your fairest Apricocks, stone them & pare them, putt them into
faire water to keepe them from looking blacke, then weigh them & take
e weight in fine Sugar, beate it not, but breake it into reasonable
bigg pieces, & dipp it into faire water to wett it, & then putt it into a
Siluer Bason, & let it melt upon the Fire, & when it is melted, let it
boile apace till it will haire, & is neere candying, then take it of the
Fire & let it stand a little while, then putt in your Apricocks & turne
them in the Syrrope, & let them stand in the Syrrope 2 houres, & turne
them now & then, then take them out, & putt every Apricocke in a
piece of Tiffany by its Selfe, and tye it up, & while you are tying them
up sett your Syrrope on the Fire to heat, but it must not boile, then putt
in Your Apricocks into your Syrrope, & let them boile as fast as they can
untill





384
untill You See them looke cleare, & the Syrrope is thicke, then
take them of the Fire, and let them stand till they be cold, then
take them out of the Syrrope, & lay them on a Dish side, to drayne
in the Tiffany, & when they haue drayned a little while, take
them out, and lay them upon Sheetes of Glasse, & set them in a
Stoue to dry, & turne them upon dry Glasses every day.

A ffan + 41 How to preserve Quinces red.

Take Quinces & pare them, & core them, then take to euery
2li of Sugar, 2li of Quinces, & 3 pintes of water, clarefie your
Syrrope, then putt in your Quinces, couer them very close, then
let them boile very softly till they be tender, & looke verry red, then
take them up, and boile the Syrrope a pretty while longer, then putt
them up with some of the Syrrope, & putt the rest of the Syrrope
to them when they be cold.

A ffan X 42 An Excellent way to make Conserve of
any Flowers.

Take your Flowers, and picke them very cleane, & to euery halfe
pound of Flowers, a pinte and halfe of water, & let your water seeth,
then putt in your Flowers, so let them boile till they be verry tender
then putt in your Sugar at seuerall tymes, till the Syrrope be thicke
enough, then pott it, and keepe it for your use,: You must take
twice the weight of Your Flowers in Sugar. Roses three times
their weight.

A ffan X 43 To make any Kind of Lozenges withSpiritts.

Take the purest refined Sugar what Quantitie you thinke good,
breake it in pieces as bigg as wall nuts, then take 3 parts of the
Quantitie of Sugar you meane to use, putt therto no more water then
will just melt the Sugar after 'tis upon the Fire. put the remainder
of your Quantitie of Sugar in by degrees a lump or two at a time.
then

178
385

then boyl it till it become almost Sugar, then putt in your Spiritts in
a Spoone, stirring them together, then haue ready a siluer or Pewter
Pye-plate. drop your Sugar upon the Plate as fast as you can, the bignes
of a three pence or a groate. If You find your Sugar grow Cold suddainly
or too thicke you may putt in a little water according to your discretion, &
set it on the Fire againe till it be come to the same height t it is fitt too
droppe. If it be for any Lozenges that are medicinall, You must putt in
the Quantitie of your Spiritts, according to the Partie diseased. If not
5 dropps of any Spiritt to halfe a pound of Sugar is sufficient.

A ffan + 44 To dry Cherries

Take two pound of Cherries, stone them, and lay them in a siluer
Dish, then take some Sixe spoonfulls of the juice of Cherries, & putt to
them, and a Quarter of a pound of Sugar finely beaten, strewed on them
when it is melted, let it boile apace till it looke cleare, then take them
out and lay them one by one in a dry Dish, & keepe them safe in an
Ouen, still turning them, till they be dry, in the Same Syrrope you may
boile more Cherries.

A ffan + 45 To make red Marmalade of Quinces with Jelly
betwixt.

Take the juyce of Quinces as for cleare Cakes, & some juice of boiled
Pippins, but not much, take scarce the weight of Sugar, so boile it with
faire water mingled; then take 2 or 3 Quinces parboiled, & when they
are pared boile them in bigg pieces a while in your Sugar: and when they
are tender & well couloured take them out & slice them in very little
thinn & small pieces, & put them in your Stuffe being ready to jelly, stirr
them in and sett them into your potts, & sett them three or foure dayes in
to a Stoue.

A ffan + 46 To make Jelley of Apple Johns to lay upon Oranges.

Take Apple Johns & pare them and cutt them in pieces somewhat lesser
then quarters, then picke out the Kernells but leaue the Cores in them,
& as you pare them putt them into fayre water for feare of being black
then






386
then putt to euery pound of Apples 3 Quarters of a pint of faire
running water, & let it boile apace till it be halfe consumed,
then let it runne through a little Cotton Ielley bagg, then take
the full weight of it in double refined Sugar, wett your Sugar
pretty thinne with faire water, & let it boile till it be almost a
Candy, then putt your Apple liquour & 2 or 3 Slices of Orange
peeles, & one slice of Lemmon peele, and a little Ambar Gris &
Muske tyed up in a little piece of Tiffany, so let it boile not
too softly for boiling the cooler, then warme a little juice of Orange
& Lemmon together, & when it is halfe boyld, put it to it. You
must not putt to much juice for then it will not jelley. then set
some to coole in a Spoone, & when it is jelley take it up &
haue ready in Glasses some pieces of preserued Oranges, & powre
the jelly hott upon them.

A ffan X My Lady Greyes white Quinces.

Take 1li of Quinces & core them, & weigh them, & to euery
pound take a great pound of fine Sugar, finely beaten, then
take an Earthen pott very well glased, & strew some of e Sugar
in the bottome, then pare your Quinces, & as you pare them fill
the Cores with Sugar, and set them into the pott, & strew Sugar
on them so doe till one rowe be filled, then spread a good rowe
of Sugar, put another rowe of Quinces, & then Sugar as many
as You please, & let Sugar be on the top. Couer them with
a Board, & a bladder and yellow waxe that no Ayre may
enter in, and set them in the Cellar. after you open them
sett them in a warme place: You need not open them till Lent.

A ffan X 47 How to dry Plums the Lady Mande-
vills way.

After the Plumms be stoned take halfe the weight of them
in Sugar, & to a pound of Sugar put a quarter of a pint of water,
then

179
387
then melt the Sugar, and lay the Plumms one by one into it:
so boile them very softly for feare the Skinn should breake: boile
them but halfe enough at first, and so let them stand till the next day;
then boile them out right and when they are cold then lay them upon
a Sive, and let them not touch one another, & so set them into an Ouen
when it is warme, till they be halfe dry, and if they feel clammy, then
dipp a Cloth in scalding hott water and wipe them: then sett them
into the Ouen againe and dry them up for your use; Lay them with
Papers betweene let it not be white Paper, but a thinne browne Pa-
per, for that will Sucke in the Syrrope, & will keepe your Plums dry.

A ffan + 48 To dry more Plums in the same Syrrope

Putt as many Plums as you can into the Syrrope & sett them
on the Fire, & if you find your Syrrope sharpe sprinkle a little
Sugar upon them, let them boile till they be tender, then take them
of, and the next day set them on againe, & so 3 dayes together, then
when they are cold, take them out, & lay them upon Glasses, when
they are half dry with a fine Ragg dipt in scalding hott water
wash them, & rubbe them dry with another Cloth, sett them in the
Stoue againe till they be thorough dry, then boxe them up for yor
use. In this manner you may doe any kind of Plumms or Cherries

 Affan + 49 To make past of Oranges or Lemmons

Your Oranges or Lemmons being thinn pared, boile them in sixe
or Seuen seuerall waters, untill the bitternes be out, & they be very
tender, cutt them in two, & take out the Kernells, then beat them
in a Morter with the pap of 2 pippins, then straine it all, & set it
on e Embers, then take to euery pound 2 pound of Sugar, bo^iile it to
a Candy, then take your Stuffe, and halfe a pint of e clearer juice
of Orange, boile it to what height you please or paste or Marmalade
when it is ready to take up squeese in a little Lemmon.





388
A ffan + 50 To perfume Sugar

Beat double refined Sugar verry fine, putt it into a galley pot,
fill it halfe full, if your pott hold 2 pound then putt in 4 graines
of Amber Gris, tied in a little piece of TIffany, then put in the
rest of your Sugar, thrust it downe, tied it downe with a Paper
& a Leather, sett it into the Ouen after you haue drawne your great
Bread, let it stand till it is cold and then breake it out for your use.

This is the best way that is to perfume Sugar; You may putt in
more or lesse Amber as you like.

A ffan + 51 To make White Marmalade.

Take a pound of Quince, being pared, cored, and quarter'd, and
to that, halfe a pound of double refined Sugar, and putt them
together into a Skillet drye, let not the fire at first be too
violent, but assoon as the Sugar begins to melt, boile them as
fast as possibly you can, stirring them very carefully from the
first putting in, (for they will burne to presently) if you be not
very carefull) twill breake enough in stirring, & when e Quince
is tender glass it up.

As fast as you pare it, couer it with Sugar, t it may not
grow blacke,

180
389

+   How to preserue green Wallnuts
A ffan 52 my Sister Elizabeth Ffanshawes way

Take your green Wallnutts before they be
hard when you may run a needle tho-
rough them, boyle them in fayre wa-
ter shifting them in the boyling
from one water to another 4 times,
let them boyle but a little in the 2
first waters for fear they turn
black when you find them tender
enough, take them up in a cullender,
& peele them, & put them into syrrup
which must be made ready while they
are seething; To euery pound of nutts
a pound and a quarter of sugar; you
must weigh your nutts before you boyle
them, yo must boyle your syrrup to a
good heigth, & put your Nutts into ^e hott
syrrup as fast as you peele them, stick
into the top of euery nutt a Cloue, let
them boyle leisurely in the syrrup till
the syrrup be thick enough, then take
them out, & when e syrrup is cold
put them in a pot & keepe them for
yr use. You must run a great Needle
through euery one of them, & prick
them before you boyle them. The best
time to doe them is the morn after mid-
Somer about the 10th of Iuly in the
increase of the Moon. If yu will use
them physically ^to purge you must make e
syrrup of powderd Sugar.





390

181
391

My Lady Beadles receipt for Billy
of Pipins
A ffan + 53

Take a pound of pipins and a pint of water; pare your apples
and putt them into the water and boyle it untill it will gellie
then straine it out and sett it by; then take one pound of sugar
and one pint of water and make a syrupe of it: then take it
off the fire, after it hath boyled a quarter of an houre, and when
it is somewhat coole, putt in a pound of apples after they
are pared and coared, and boyle them soe fast as you can, untill
they are halfe done. then putt in your gellie and halfe a pound
of sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rhenish wine, the juyce of three
lemons and some lemons pills boyled, then them up as
fast as you can.





392

182
393

Sr Kenelmer Digby's receipt
to make Meade

Boyle what quantitie of rain ^or spring water you please, till a fourth 3d
part be wasted consumed  and then lett it settle 24
houres, and poure the cleare from the settlings, take 60 gallons
of the cleare and boyle in it 10 handfulls of Eglantine leaves
5 of liverwort 5 of Scabios 4 of balme, 4 of rosemarie, 2 of
bayleaves, one of thyme, one of sweet marjorane, halfe a handfull
of Eringo rootes, scrape them & splitt onl m when these haue boyled
halfe an houre in the water, run it through a Sieve, after it is
settled, poure the cleare from the dreggs to euery 4 gallons of
this liquor, take one gallon of the purest white hony you can
gett, lade the honey & liquour with a skiming dish till it is
well mingled. soe you must doe thrice that day: the next day
boyle it verie gently skiming it all the while poureing
in now and then a ladelfull of the cold liquour which you must
reserve to make the skum rise. when it is vere cleare from
Skum you may boyle it more strongely till it beare an egge.
very high, then lett it coole till it bee luke warme. Putt in
Ale yest to make it worke the Same quantitie you doe into Ale.
tunn it up in a cask that has had sack or white wine in it.
Keepe the bunge open till it hath done working, fillinge it up
as it wastes with the same liquour, which you must reserve for
that purpose. When it hath allmost done working? hang a
bagg in it of thin canvase, ^in it a quarter of an ounce of ginger
sliced, a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon, cloves, & nuttmeggs a quarter
of an togeather. Putt a Stone into the bagg to make it
Sinke, stopp it up close for 6 months before you drink it, and
then you may draw it into bottles if you please.





394 My Lady Barklay's receipt to
make Meade.

Take 6 gallons of spring water, a handful of tops of
rosemarie, a handfull of thyme, a handfull of bay leaves, 2
handfulls of Eglantine leaves, wash them clean and putt
them into the water, boyle it skimming it all the while for
an houre, then run it through a sieve, stirr it once in halfe
an houre for that day, at night putt in a Gallon of the purest
white honey well stirred into the liquour, the next day boyle it
againe and skim it verie cleane. putt in 2 eggs well beate
cleare it by skiming very well, and lett it boyle for half
an houre after, take it of and run it through a sieve, poure
it into broad earthen Vessell or Vessells to coole. Be Sure to
pure the cleare from the bottome when it is well Settled.
Beat the whites of 3 eggs very well. putt to it 2 spoonfulls
of wheaten meale, 2 spoonfulls of yest, beat this very well
together, putt it into the liquour when it is cold, ladeing
of it euery half houre with a skiming dish for one day, next
morning: take the whites of 2 eggs, one spoonfull of wheat-
=meale, & one of yest and beate all these well togeather
putting them into the liquour and mingling them well
togeather. Then tun up the liquor in your Vessell hanginge
a bagg therein, of a pennieworth of cloaues, of ginger, of
Cinnamon, of nuttmeggs, bruise them well before you putt them
in. At 3 months you may drink it, at 6 months it is best.

183
395

Take of Sarsaparilla cutt small
6 ounces, flinty china 2 ounces
Guaium halfe ^an ounce, infuse these
in 5 quarts of water 6 hours
then boil halfe away, with a
gentle fire : adde at the later End of boiling, liquerish Sliced
2 drams, halfe a dram of
Coriander Seeds, & pour it off
while hott & lett him drinke
it for his ordinary drinke
cheifely

If he find it too hott, adde
2 ounces of raiisins washt
(but whole) to the next boiling.
Dr. Lower.





e nerves of e eares are affected
& obstructed, & you must goe
to the Bath & bee pump'd
about 3 weekes
& you must purge e day
before you begin to pumpe
& purge once in a weeke while
you stay there
& stop yr eares with wool
moistened wth good Compound
Spirit of lauender
yr deafenesse is a paralyticall
weakenesse of e eares
you should drinke a drying dyet
drinke of sarsa & china
for yr constant drinke while
you vse e bath & a while
after





396
+ 54 To make Cakes of all fruits.

A ffan Take the best quinces you can gett and boyle them
tender, take them from the skins and the cores, and doe
them through a fine cushion-canvasse. And to a pound of
the pulp take a pound of double refined sugar beaten very
fine & mix your pulp & Sugar togeather in a Skillet with
some musk & ambergreece & set it upon a quick fire: the
faster it boyles the better it preserves the colour, but you
must take heed is does not burne. You must stirr it allways
with a wooden stick and when it begins to be enough, it
will come cleane from the bottom of the Skillet, which you
may know by dropping a drop upon a board & lett it coole
and if it come cleane off it is enough. Then take it
off the fire, and haue a board on purpose very Smooth,
and drop your past upon it what fashion you please. If
you like it in knotts you must poure out and shake the board
that it may not bee thicker in one place than in another.
And when it is cold cutt it off the board & strew searched
sugar upon it & make it in knotts. For your cakes you must
Sugar them & print the sydes next the board: then putt them
upon papers with the printed syde upwards, for the other syde is
apt to stick. Then stoue them or drie them in the Sun, and
if they bee right they will drie in 2 days. The less sugar you
make it up in the better. If the pulp be too thick, you must
putt two or three spoonfulls of the water in the Quince in it
before you straine it. Thus you make Pippins, Apricocks,
Orenges or Lemons, Gooseberries or Respberries, plums. But you
must boyle them as you doe for clear Cakes in a Tankard
in a skillet of water. Then doe it all through a canvass if
you do: the Quinces. If you will doe the green apple past,
you must greene your apples, and putt noe applewater into them,
nor to the four Last fruits. If it be once boyled it will neuer
drie: if it be under it will drie, but not soe soone. You must
shift it on clean papers.


184
397

+ To make Lemmon Creame
A ffan
55 Beate the whites of eight egges and one yealke
very well. putt to them the Iuyce of four Lemmons
and a halfe, one spoonefull of Orange flower=water &
as much suger as makes it sweet, stir these all
well together, and drayne them through a hayre
Siue, sett it on a soft fire, in a silver or earthen
basin stirring it all one way, till it is as thicke as a
ffoole, Then it must stand three howers before you
serve it up. If you please you may Putt in a graine
of Amber greece, wel in Powder, when you take it offe
the fire.

+ To make a fine Creame
L. Good: 56
o Set three quart of new milke Let it on
the fier, and when it boiles up, pour into it
an other quart of new milke, at Seueral times
leting it boile up betwixt euery time, then
take it off the fier & Stir it til it bee quite
Could, then pour it into 5 Seuerall pans or bouls
& let it stand 2 days & 2 nights, then take ofe
the top thik with a tin Slice with holes in it
put to it 1 Spoonfuls of Orrange flower water
& Sweeten it to your tast, so Stir it with a
Spoon all one way til it bee as thik as a Soft
butter, lay it in little heapes upon a fruit dish
& So Serue it up. if you would doo it at a
nights warning, raise it with a quart of Creame.






398

+ 51 To make Leaman or Sugar waters.

L. Goodricke o Mingle your Sugar (after it is finly beaten
and Searced)in a Siluer Spoon with as much
Leaman or Orrangflower water as wil wet it,
then hould it ouer A Chafendish til it lookes
Candied ouer as you Stir it with a little knife
you must have a great Care that it does
not I boile, when it is enough Spread it
upon a little Square peese of paper uery
thin & pin it up the 2 Sides of it together
& set them in a Stoue or Sum other warme
place 24 hours, & when they are drie wet
the outsides of the papers & so take
them ofe, it must bee fine paper or they
wil not Come ofe whole.

To make Angelot Cheese

L. Good: o  take to 4 quarts of milke one quart of Cream
let your milke bee just warme from the Cow
& Put your Cream to it Could, Set it together
& when it is Come, with a little China Cup
take it whole up & fil your Chees fat
& when it is Sunke fil it up again so doe
til it is all in, then let it stand til next morning
& with a trencher laid ouer turne it in the
fat so euery morning & night for 4 dayes then
take it out, Salt it a little & lay it to dry
turning it Constantly; it wil not bee good under
three months but best oulder.

185
399

To make a baked oatmeal puding

L. Mordaunt    In 3 pints of new milke Steep a quart of
great Oatmeal until it bee tender, then break
into it ten Eggs, Put in a pound of suet shred
smale a pound of rasons of the Sunn picked and
washed & a quarter of a pound of Sugar, mix
& beat them all well together, & pour it into
a pan wel butered, & so bake it & serue it up.

To dress cocles the best way

La: Mordaunt

Put your cocles into a pail of clean water, and
with a birch broom, rub them round the pail
very wel with seueral waters til you thinke
they bee not Gritty, then fil a broad earthen
pan wil Coals lighted & so strew a little ashes on
the top I so spread your Cocles all ouer them thin
& lay a Cloth four or fiue times double ouer them
Cloase that the steam & heat doo not get out
let them stand til they bee enough which wil
bee in halfe an hour or little more, then let
your pan into a dish & serue them up that
they may bee very hot with Sum butter melted
upon a plait

to pot fruit for tarts to keep all winter.

La: Turnor o

Take your fruit Clean picked & dry gathered put
them one by one into Glas bottles, Stopt & tie them
very Cloos downe that neither air nor water Can
get in, then let your bottles into kettle of water on
the fier & let it stand til the water just begins
to boil then take out your bottles & let them by thes
wil keep all winter







400

To Keepe Walnuts moist all winter

La: Mordaunt: Gather your walnuts uery dry & Carefully for
fear of bruises, then put them Green shels
& all into new dry high earthen pot lay
on a sheet of paper & ouer that a Gloue
& ouer that a wet skin, lie it all hard
downe & let your pot in a room that is
neither moist nor hot, when you open your
pot it wil not keepe long after, when you
Serue them up peil off the Green shells
they wil keep thus til Sumer

To keepe raw fruit.

Put raw fruit in an earthen pot, lute it
uery hard & Cloas up, & hang it into a
well, & it wil keep til that sort of fruit
Comes again.

To make french bread.
La: turnor.
to halfe a peck of fine flower take a pint & halfe
of uery good new ale yest, then beat the whits of
2 eggs til they be a light froth, & beat them wel
into your yest; heat a quart of milke prety
hot & put sum of it to your yest & aggs so run
it through a hair seiue into your flower and
with you hand mingle it well together if it
bee to thick you may put more hot milke to it,
Couer it with a dish couer & let it rise before
the the fier halfe an hour whil your ouen heats
thein make it up as fast as you Can into
little loafs & bake it in a quick Ouen.


176
401
To make Smale Couslip wine.

La: Turnor: o Pick your Couslip flowers from the botums
& put them into a high earthen pot & pour
upon them boiling water as much as you please
for the strengh of it let it stand all night and
the next day run it through a Canuas strainer
& press all the juice wel out of the flowers then
make a thik Clear Syrup with juice of Leaman
or Citron or both, & mingle your liquor & Syrup
well together, then run it all through a double
flanel Iealy bag, & bottle it up.

To make Spanish eggs

La: Turnor Take the yolkes of 6 eggs, beat them uery well,
then take the weight of Sugar as you gues rather
too little then too much; boile it to a high
Candy almoast to a Sugar again with water
then pour in your Eggs, stir it on the fier as
long as you Can for fear of simering, then take
it off the fier & with a ladle pour it into a smal
funell & let it run into a spoon underneath, as
the spoon fils lay it into your dish & so fil it
again til it is all run through, when it is quit
Could serue it up it is proper to beee eaten among
Jealys & could salets after hot meal & before
the Desart.

A past for the hands;
La Issabela
Turnor 3 quarters of a pound of biter almans,halfe a pound
of reasons stoned, halfe an Ounce of Camphir the
pulpe & juice of 2 leaman, 2 spoonfuls of brandy
& 2 of Sack, all made up, with 3 Spoonful of poset
Curd.







402
To make Clear Leaman Cream;

Mrs Harington:
* about halfe a
pound of fine
sugar beat,
Squees the juice of 4 large leamans .......
........ of e finest loaf sugar, & * 8 or 9 spoonfuls
of fair water; .... in a litle pann of e s.... then
Set it ouer a Clear Charcoal fier til the Sugar bee
all melted; then haue ready the white of 4 eggs
beaten & put them in; stir all together and
run it gently through a Iealy bag, then set
it ouer the fier again stirring it Continualy
one way, & So soon as you perseaue it Grow
thik take it off imediatly, if you like it
put in one Spoonfull of Orang flowr or
amber water Stirring it round one way til it
bee Cool then put it in the dish with leaman
peil boild & Cut Smale betwixt.

To make an Orange puding.

Mrs Harington: O

Take the rihnd of an Orrang or too Cut uery
thik boil them til they bee uery tender, and
Sum of the biternes out, then dry them in a Cloth
& beat them in a ston morter, with the yolkes
of 8 eggs, a quarter of a pound of loaf Sugar,
& a quarter of a pound of butter, beat all
these about an hour til it bee like puding stuf
then bake it in a quick ouen, with a leafe of
Suet Past under & ouer it, as it lies in e dish;
if you Cut the peil uery smale as it saw before
you beat it & so put it in, it wil bee much
the better;

187
403

To make Cherry wine Currant, Apricok
or plumb wine.
La Turnor
take your Cherrys as many as you please, slice
off the stalks & put them into a high earthen pot,
with your hand mash them all, then pour on
them boiled water as much as you guess is one
part of three let it stand til the next morning
uncouered, then pour it into a thik Canvas strainer
& put it betwix a Iely press or a Clean Chees press,
til you have pressed out all the liquor, then sweeten
it to your tast & to 6 Galons of liquor put in a
pint of fresh rasberry juice, then run it through
a double Iely bag (you must beat the yolk of an
Egg with three or Spoonfuls of milke, pour it into
your Iealy bag & run it round with your hand to
thicken it,) run it through til it bee uery Clear
& so put it up in bottles, Currant wine whit or
red is made the Same way, Omiting the juice of
rasberys, & so is Apricock or plumb, if you would
haue your Cherry wine to keepe youmust break too
handful of the stones & squees them in

To make goosberry Wine.

La: Turnor: o

Take 5 quarts of whit Cristal Goosberrys ripe, put
them into your pot one by one, & Crack euery one as you
put them in, then pour upon them a Galon of boiling
water, let it stand uncouered all that day & all
night, then pour them into a Canvas Strainer and
hang them up to run pressing the bag gently with
your hand for fear of the thik Coming through, sweeten
it to your tast, & run it through a Iealy bag uery
Clear & so bottle it up, this is for the pale, but
for the broune you must put the water Could to the
Goosberrys, Couer it & Let it in the ouen after broun
bread let it stand whil the ouen is warme then ^doe as before







404

To Brew Heath Beer.

Mrs Hicks.
Take a kilderkin & 2 or 3 Galons of water
because of wasting in the boiling; diuide it
into 3 parts, first boil one part with heath
& Ginger, then put it into your mashing tub
& let it Stand halfe a quarter of an hour
then put to it a bushel of molt & let it
Stand one hour til you haue made the next
part boile, then let the first run & put in
the Seacond to doo 3 times stil boiling the
Liquor with Ginger & heath, & if it ever
Clear from the Molt boil your liquor wort uery
litle, & when it is Could put it all together
& Let it to worke with a quart of yest
& the next day Run it into your Kilderkin
3 ounces of Ginger beaten uery Smale, &
2 good handfuls of Heath is enough;

the Smale Beer at Jenkens has too bushel of Molt
to a Hogshead which the brewer there Says is stronger
then the 8 Shiling Beer at London.

An Electuary for the Cough of the Lungs.

Mrs Grantham;
Take 6 Ounces of rasons of the Sun Stoned, beat
them in a Stone Morter uery Smale, then
take 4 ounces of broun Sugar Candy, beaten
uery fine; then take halfe a pound of Conserue
of red roses; mix all these well together, then
take 12 drops of the Oyle of Sulpher, & 2-4 drops
of the Oile of Viterell & one ounce of Syrup
of Diorodium mix them all wel together
& take of this Morning & euening, the quantety
of a nutmeg, if the party haue a loosnes they
must leaue out the Syrups, add 1 ounce of Syrup
of Colts foot;

188
405

To make Pipin Cakes;

La: Turnor. o take a dozen of fair pipins, pair them & Cut them
as fast as you pare them, into a quart of Spring
water boiling upon the fier, let it boile til it Comes
to a thik pulpe then take to euery pound of pulpe
a pound of double refined Sugar, boil your sugar
in a Clean skillet to a uery high Candy, then pour
your pulpe into it, Stir it upon the fier as long as
you can for fear of Simering, take it off & put in
juice of Leaman And Leaman peil raw boiled & sliced
acording to your tast, Glas them up in Clear Cake Glases
& Stoue them & when they are dry atop turne them
out upon Sheets of Glass & so dry them up as Clear Cakes

To make Cherry Brandy.

La. Mordant o
Fil a 2 quart Glas with a wide mouth, ful of
Morello or Kentish Cherrys within 2 inches of the
top & as you put in your Cherrys strew amongst them
a quarter of a pound of whit Sugar Candy, finly beaten
then fil your glas to the top with the best brandy you
Can get Stop & tie it up Cloase, & let it stand about
2 or 3 months & then draw off the brandy into quart
bottles Stop them & keep them for your use.

To picle all manner of Salads;

Mrs Adamson. o    Make a picle of 2 parts Vineger & 1 part water
boil it & put sum salt into it, put it in an earthen
pot to keepe, & when your purslaim or lettic is fit
Cut them in lenghs to your liking & put them
into this picle, & at your leasure a Month or too
after take you Salads out of this picle, & put
them into a stew pan of fair water, Couer them
up on the fire & when they begin to boile take
them off, & set it by to Cool, then set it on







406
again & take it off when it begins to boile, this
doo til they bee Green to your mind; then make
a fresh ppicle as before only boil in it Mace,
Cloues, Ginger, & whole peper, & when it is
Could put in your Salads, & lay a round
broune paler double Cloase upon them and
Couer your pot with a trencher; thus you
may doo any picled salads; For Cewcumbers put dill,

To preserue rasberys wet

Lay Lytton. o
Take the largest & best rasberys you Can
get then take their weight in loaf sugar and boil it to a syrope, & then put in your
rasberys & boil them as fast as you Can make them boil til they bee Clear which wil quikly
bee; So. Skim them & Glass them up.

To make Orrang or lymon Curds;

Mrs Adamson; Take a quart of Cream, let it boil, then take
8 Eggs leauing out 4 of the Whits, beat them
uery well & squeese into them the jeuse of a
whole leman, or the jeuce of More then one
Orrange, & pour it all into the Creame as it is
upon the fier, & So let it boile 2 or 3 walmes
upon the fier stirring it all the while uery
well; then put it into a strainer & hang it
up; & when the whey is run out, beat the
Curds in a stone Morter, that they may bee
tender, season them with rose water & sugar
to yr liking & 5 spoonful of Orrang flower
water if you like it; put in yr sugar & water
as you beat them they may be as thin mixt
as leamen Cream.


189
407

To Make the Spanish Biskets;

La: Is: Turnore o Break the whits of 4 eggs into a long bason
and whisk it up it up til it bee all froth with a
peese of a whisk then put in the 4 yolkes, and
beat it uery well a Good while with a Spoon;
then put to it halfe a pound of fine Sugar
beaten and Searced, and beat your Eggs and
Sugar together all moast an hour, then put
in halfe a pound of fine flower well dred, and
when you haue beaten it about a quarter
of an hour More, with a spoon Lay your
biskets long ways upon Clean whit papers, and
when they are Layd Strew a Great deal of
fine Searced Sugar thik ouer them and Shake
it off again, then bake them, in a baking
pann if you haue one, if not, in a Gentle
ouen, and take them off with a knife while
they are warm.

To Stanch Bleeding;

Mr Ford. Take Veruain & bruise it wel in a Morter or wooden
platter &. put it up the nostrils & it wil immediatly
Stanch the bleeding.

 To make balls

Mrs Wells o
take the flesh of Vieal, rabet, or Chiken & double
the quantety of beef Suet; Shred it Smale & then
beat it in a Morter, then Shred sum Sweet herbs
Smale & Mingle with it, and a little Salt, and
...g then beat the yolk of an agg or More acording
to your quantety of Meat & Mingle with it, and so
boil, or frie them in a pan.






408

To picle Cowcumbers or any salet

Mrs Peck Steep them a night in water & Salt them wipe
them dry with a Soft Cloth & put them in a high
pot or Glass; then Make the picle as follows;
to a Golon of beer vineger put Salt So much
as until an Egg wil Swim in it, a Smale
hand ful of fenel 2 Smale handful of dill
3 nutmegs quartered, a quarter of an ounce of
whole pepper, sl  little Mace & Cloues & a prety
deal of Ginger Cut in peeses, boil the picl a
quarter of an hour and then pour it hot upon your
cowcumbers, Couer & tie them doun for ten days
& bee Sure not to open them at all, then pour
off your Liquor Clear, & boil it again & pour
it on again boiling hot, & tie them doun
for ten days more in which time they wil be ready

To make marmalad of Cherreys

La: Denbigh. o
Pick your Cherreys from the Stonns & Stalkes, and
weigh them, & Set them on the fier without any
thing at all in them so let them boil in their own juice, til .... the juice bee halfe Consumed,
then put into them halfe their weight in Liqer
& so boil them till they are Clear & wil Iealey;

To Make Marmalad of Quinces

La: Denbigh. oSet your Quinces (in a Skillet of fair water) on
about a good Large  the fier & Let them bee scalded but not Soft,
quince make 1: pound & while they are dooing take as Maney pound
of fine Suger as you intend to haue of Quinces
& to euery pound of Suger put three quarters
of a pint of Water Set it on the fier and
Clear it with a good Maney whites of Eggs,
about 16 small  & So boil it to thinn Syrrop, then Let it bee
ones Make a qua while you pear & Core your Quinces in quarters,
of Iuce & weigh them as Maney pound of Quinces as
you haue of Suger in your Syrop, put them into


190
409

your Syrop & Set them on the fier and
let them boil uery Gentley keeping them
Couered til you perseaue they begin to turne
towards red then haue readey, to 3 pound of
Quinces a large pince of raw juice of quince
& put it in & boil it up as fast as you Can
stirring it often & keeping it Couered. then
put it up in pots or Glases for your vse.

To Make past Cakes of Apricoks

La: Denbigh o  Cut your Apricoks in quarters after they are
paired & put them into a high Stoun pot &
tie them Close up & Set your put into a Scillet
of water ouer the fier to infuse, let them
Stand til they bee uery tender but not too
much Mashed, then put them out into a
be & weigh them, & take to euery pound of
of Apricock a pound of double refined Sugaer
then put your pulpe in a bason &l let it boil
upon e fier til it is prettey drie, then in
another bason boil yr Suger to a high Candey
& then put in your pulpe & only let it
Stand upon then fier til the Suger is well
melted, So put it in Clear Cake Glases &
Store them & when they are Candeyd ouer
turne them out & drie them.

Luenbellas Balsam

La: Leuenthorp;
o Take one pound and halfe of Sallet oyle, and beat it
with one pint of Sack, half a pound of Venis turpentin,
beat in Damacke Rose water, Stil pouring it out til the
turpintine looke white. then melt four ounces of wax in
a great Earthen pann or pipkin, and add unto it the
former ingredients, Stiring them all together until they
boyle, then put into it halfe an ounce of red Sanders
& let them boyle alltogether an hour, take it from the
fier & keepe it in a Galley pott, Leaue ^Close stoped.







410
To Make Makeroons;

Mrs Harrison o Take a quarter of a pound of almans blanchd
and 3 ounces of Sugar, Searced beat m together
with a little of e white of an Egg, ^& rose
water til it be a little thicker n butter
for friters, so drop it upon wafer & bake m

To dry goosberries
Exceeding Cleere
Mrs Harrison o
Take your large Duch gooseberries, and take out all e
Stones, & Cut of all the topes;  & fling them into Cold
water, as you Stone them, then haue ready a Siluer bason
full of water. Lett itt boyle, then take itt of a lett it
stand one Minnett; & then put in your Berries; and
Couer them, Close, ffor allmost a quarter of an hower;
or till you see they will peele, & as you peele them, fling
m into Cold water to harden m, & to Keepe theire
Cullor, then to a pound of theise berries, take halfe a
pound of the Best dubble refined Suger, finely Beat
& 8 spounfulls of water. Lett e Suger & water boyle;
then put in your Berries; & lett them boyle about a
quarter of an hour; or till the bee Cleere; lett m
boyle very fast; take them of & let them stand a
a little while & take them out to draine, on a
siue, them Make a uery thine Candy & lay your
Berries in a Siluer bason; and pour your Candy hot
ouer them & Sett them in a Stoue, but a little warme
& ffor 2 days warme them euery day a just blod warme
and Noe More; & then lay them on glasses to dry on
in the Sune, or in a Stoue a little warme;

191
411

Harrison The fleech of quince Apricoks

This must be a Mistake in the writing
there for doo as the white Quince page 414

Take the Best dubble Refined Suger, and Beat itt very fine,
then to a pound of t Suger take a pint of e juce
of white Currance; & halfe a pound of aprecokes
after they Bee stoned, pared & Cutt into thine Chips
then put m into your juce & Suger; and sett m
ouer a fire, & when the Suger is Melted, Boyle m
up as fast as you Can; Scuming them Cleane; &
when you see t itt will Gelly, take it up into
Your Glasses; haue Care that you breake not e
aprecoke in e boyleing

To Make a hastey puding

La: Denbigh
o have readey white bread Grated, with a little
flower mixed with it, then Set your Cream
on the fier in a Scillet, & when it boiles up
Strewe in yr bread Crumbs. Stiring it all the
while with a Stik, & Season it with Salt &
suger to your past when you find it, uerey
thik haue readey beaten the yolkes of four
Eggs to 3 pints of Cream, & peel them in stir
it til you see it runn to oyle & then take
it up, you must put in a few plumbed
Currants before your Eggs just.

To Make raw Cream Thick

L. Denbigh Take your pans as maney as you would use, and
Make water scalding hot & put into them till the
panns bee verey hot, then haue your Milke as
warme as you Can from the Cow, pour away the
water & pour in your Milk as high as y Can
let it Stand all night and Skim it thik next
day






412
The Black Plaister

La: Leuenthorp.

Take of pitch frankinsence and rossin of Each
too pound of Sheeps Suet one pound, of Saffron
Cloues & Mace Each too Ounces, of labdanum three
Ounces, of Anniseeds halfe a pound dryed, beat all the
Gummes Spices and Seeds uery Smale, and Shred e
Suet; first melt e pitch in a vessel much biger
than wil hould it, else it wil bee uerey hard
to keep it from boyling ouer after he pitch bee
throughly melted, pour in the frankinsence, Rossin
and Sheeps Suet, with the Seeds amd Spices one
after another, Stir it Continually and put in
the Ingredients leasurly, let it boyle an hour, and
y wil Sknow when it is enough by droping sum
of it upon a board wch wil Come of Clean when
it is Could, then anoint your hands with oyle or
butter the Salue beeing set from the fier to Cool,
& when it is of a temper to handle make it up
in roules; it is to bee Spread upon leather &
layd to the Soles of the feet.

This plaister draweth down the Gout, or aney ill
or Superfluous mois humor from the head or bodey
it breaks imposthums, helpes the Sight & hearing,
it hath been found Good in Case of dropsies in
the bodey, it hath drawn humors from aney
Soar Ould or new, that e Selue applied to aney
Such wound or Soar may haue its power to work
with More facilleley.

White Plumb Past

L: Middleton. o
Coddle yr plumbs in water til the bee soft, then
pour off the hot water, & pour on Could, and one
by one Scinn & Stone them, then put their weight
of double refined Suger to them, & Set them on
the fier while they are well Melted like Clear
Cakes to Skim them & put them in Glases in a
Store.

For Black plumb y must infuse them in a pot
in a Skillet of Water, first & then doo them
like the white.

192
413

Harrison To pickle wallnuts after e Indian way

o Gather your wallnuts when the bee soe young, that you
Rune a pin throwe them; & lett them be gathered in a dry
day; put them into a large pot of water; Shifting of itt
euery other day; for a weeke; & then for a forthnight euery
day twise; put freech water to them; then put them into
a haire siue to drain; and then put them ouer the fire,
with a good quantity of water to boyle; till they bee a little
Soft; then draine them out and with a Course Cloth; Rube of
all e outmost Skine, then of white wyne veniger, & of water
boyled; & Could an Equall quantity; as Much as will Couer
them; when they are put up; Before you pot them.
Lay in the bottome of your pot; or glass; a handfull
of fennel & dill; a Small handfull of e Cloues of garlick,
and one small handfull of Shallot; & a handfull of Salt;
.......... & some Cloues and Mace; then
lay in a lay of wallnuts; & then the Same quantity
Harrison of things; as before; & then a lay of wallnuts; & So conti-
new; till all e wallnuts bee in; then pour in as Much
of your pickle as will Couer them; & tye them up with
a leather;

To bake a rumpe of beef.

L. Munmouth. o
Take a rumpe of beef & take the bone Clear out,
Season it as y would do Vinison then take a pound
of beef suet shred very smale, put yr suet into
the bottom of an Earthen pot & lay yr beef upon it,
then take Winter Savoury & thime, of each a handful.
Strip it & Strew it on the beef, then Strew a handful
of Sugar over the herbs, & halfe a handful of Capers
shred; then lay the bones that were taken out of the
beef upon it again, & pour into it a pint of Claret
wine and Six or eight Spoonfuls of White wine uineger
all this must bee dun ouer night & the pot made up
with Coarse Crust, readey for the ouen, & in the
Morning bake it Seaven hours; & then put it in a
dish for the table.   an onion





414

The fleech of white quince

Harrison

Take your fine Aple quince; wipe them &
with a Cleane Cloth; Core them with a Coreing
Iron; & Coddle them in a Kettle of  Al water; t
houlds 3 or 4 gallons of water; Codle them not
tow tender; Constantly turning them that
all Sides May Coddle alick; then take them
vp into a Cleane Cloth Couer them vp, & when
& when they are a little Cold pare them hould-
ing them in a Cleane Cloth; for your hot
hand will Make them look ill; & when they
are pared, Slice them very thin: lick oringe
Chipes; dusting some Suger ouer them to
preserue e Culler; take none but what lookes
white, & None that is hard; or spotty, then
have Reddy a pinte of the Gelly of John ap-
ples; & a pound of the best duble Refined Suger
well beat; & Set it ouer e fire & lett it boyle
vp to e tope of the pan, & then forthwith
Sling in a pound of yr quince Chipes,
& one pound More of Suger uery finely
Beat; & lett all boyle as fast as possible you
Can; till you See itt Gelly, & the quince looks
Cleere; which itt will the Souner don, if you
Cut your quinces very thine; Scume them
very Cleane; & ^put them up with your gelly
& when they Bee Could, you will find that
they will Cut out licke Cleere Ice, betweene
the Slices of quince;


193
415

Allmon Butter

Lady Halifax

o Take a pound of the Best Gurden allmonds Blanchd
in Could water; then Make Sume very Cleere barly
water; & with some of some of that water Beat the
allmons in a Stone Morter very fine; ffor the finer you
Beat m the Better your Butter will bee; then put
in a quart of e Barly water & pres out your water
from e allmons very hard; & Seet itt ouer a Cleere fire,
being very hott; & put in as Much Salt as wil ly upon
a 6 pence; & e juce of one leamon; & Stire itt Softly
about till you See it Breake; then put it gentlely
by Spounfulls. into a dubble boulter bag; and tye
itt up Close & let itt hang all Night ffor the
whay to Rune out; & in the Morning Beat it up
with a uery little Rose water; & fine Serchd Suger
and pinke the tope as you dowe other butter
with the tip of a Knife;

Mr Fraklin. o  To Make a Lobster pye.

Boil e Lobsters & take them out of their Shells, and
Cut the Meat in bits, & put to them Oysters parboild
& the finns taken off; Season it with Nutmeg mace
& Salt to your tast, then make your pye & lay in e meat,
put fresh butter on the top, & Couer it up, and
just when yu put it into the ouen pour into it
a little Oyster Liquor, & let it Bake halfe an hour
when yu draw it Cut up the lid, & take away the
fatt, & put in a leere of thick butter 5 or 6 anchovas
dissolued, the juce of an orrange, 2 or 3 yolks of raw
eggs, a little Sack, & a leamon pared and Cut Gros
So pour it into your pye & Shake it together &
Cut yr lid & put round it.






416

Mrs Phipps way of Ieley

L: Denbigh; o Take a knukel of Veal & a pair of Calues feet
lay them in water all night to Soak out the bloud
wash them Clean & Set them on the fier in a great
pipkin with 4 quarts of water, & when tis halfe boyld
put in a pint of white wine, & let it boil Scuming
it Clean til tis a tender Iealey, then pour it through
a Cullendar & let it Cool, take all the fat Clear off
the top and bottum, & Let it on the fier & when tis
melted put to it a little Salt, a pint of Sack, and
Suger to your tast, So giue it one boyl, then take it
off and Cool it a little, & then put in the whits
of 6 Eggs beaten, to froth, Stiring it fast e while,
last of all put in the juce of Leaman as much
as wil make it Sharp, then let it on a hot fier and
boyl it a pace til you See it Curdle, then run it
quick through the bag, then run it through again
puting in but a porenger ful at a time, So let it
run gentley into the Glasses, hanging the bag near the
fier to keep it warme; Whilst the Iealey is
Making you Must dres the bag thus; put put in a
Sprig of rosemarey at the bottum to keepe it hollow
then add Spice, Rasped Leaman peel, & amber, the
Spice when dryed & beaten Mix thus, first take a
little Cloues, put twice as Much mace, to it, then
double that quantetey of Nutmeg, & then as much
Cinnamon as all the rest; when the Spice is thus mixt
use it according to your discretion, make you Stok just of
e Same thiknes you would have your Iealey whenn finish'd.

To Make a plumb Cake.

La: Denbigh. o
Take 5 pound of flower wel dryed in an Ouen, put to
it 6 pound of Currants picked & dryed; 4 nutmegs, as
Much Cinnamon and Mace; halfe a pound of Sugar
and a little Salt; Mingle all these wel together, then
put in 18 eggs, beaten, but 7 of the whites, a pint
& halfe of ale yest, a quart of boyled Cream, with
too pound of butter Melted in the Cream; mingle
it all together well with a ladle, Stiring it all
one way, then Couer it with a Cloth & Set it before
the fier to rise, then Stir it wel together, & put it
in a Case of paper, & bake it about an hour when
you draw it let it Stand til tis Could before you  remooue it.


194
417

To make a Cream.    Sack Cream

 L. Denbigh o  Take a quart of Cream, & put into it a nutmeg
Cut in quarters, & boil it, when it is almost Could
put into it 4 ounces of fine Suger, the yolks of
7 eggs, uerey well beaten; haue readey a quarter
of a pint of Sack, & too bare Spoonfuls of Orrang
flower water, with 2 ounces more of Suger dissolued
in it; then Cut a new french Manchet & lay it in
your dish, & pour the Sack & orrange flowr water
upon them, when they have soaked up all e liquor,
then make e Cream & Eggs, boiling hott, but
with Great Care stiring it all the while for
fear of Curdleing, then run it through a seiue
upon the Sippets & let it stand til tis could.

Syrop of Cloue Gilliflowers

 Mrs Harrisson. Clip your Gilliflowers, and take their weight and
halfe of fine Suger beaten verey smale, stamp
the flowers and put them into a uerey Clean earthen
pot laying your Suger in betwixt the flowers, tie
it uerey Cloas and Set it in a Skillet of boiling
water, let it boil apace till the Strength of the
flowers are, out, and then strain it into a silver
bason and Set it over the fier to thiken but not
boil

To drie Plumbs

Ly Lucey Bright. Slit your plumbs and take out the Stone, and
fill up the hollows with Sugar, and so lay m
one by one into a Galley pot, but first strew
sum Sugar in the bottom, and betwix every
row of plumbs a little; then tie a paper loos
ouer them and set e pot into an ouen. but not
too hot let them stand in til they bee well
soaked, and when they are Could lay them out
upon Glasses and so dry them.






418

To Make mead,

My Sister Grantham

Take 12 Gallons of riuer or pond water, or rain,
(Wine Measure) let it Stand a day or too to
Clear, then pouer it off and boil it, put
into it of mint, Balm, rosemarey, & bays,
each a little Sprig; then run 10 Gallons
of it into a Clean siev or Cool, then put
into it 18 pound of the best honey halfe a
nutmeg & as Much Cloues mace Cinamon
Ginger & leamon peel bruised, all, let it
boil halfe an hour Scuming it well befor
y put in the Spice, when it is fit to
Set a working; put into it a wheaton toast
well spread with yest, & let it worke it
as other drink it will just fill an anchor,
bottle it at 3 weeks end and it may bee
drank in a fortnight More.

To dry Plumbs;

L: Lucy Bright.
Ston your Plumbs and fill euery one with
Sugar, & lay them into a Galley pot and
betwixt euerey row of Plumbs put a lay
of Sugar, So doo til your pot is full then
tie a leather or paper ouer it and Set it
into an Ouen with whit bread, and ^when they are
baked til they bee Clear Set them by
to bee Could, and theyn lay them out upon
Glasses in a Stoue til they bee dry.

195
419

To make Leaman Brandey

L: Laurance

Take 12 large leamans and pare them uery
thin, and put them into 3 pints of Brandey
and let them Steep 48 hours, then take 3 pints
of fair water and a pound of Double refined
Sugar, Set it on the fier and when it boyles up
take it off and let it Stand til tis allmoast
Could, then pour your Brandey off your peels
through a Iealey bag into your Syrop, then
runn it all through your Ielley bagg too
or 3 times til tis Verey Clear, and So bottle
it.

To Make Syrop of Ground Iuey.

Dr Medford.

In May Take the Iuce of Ground Iuey,
put it into an Earthen pot, Couer it & Set
it Into a pot of hot water ouer the fier,
Keep the water hot with a Constant fier
but doo not let ^it boil, it must stand thus
24 hours, and there will bee a uerey Great
Scim upon it when you Open it; take off
that Scum, and Strain yr Liquor, and to
a pint pound of Liquor put too pound of Sugar
so boyle it up to a Syrop, put in a verey
litle Saffron & Sinamon in a bag.

The Queen of Hungareys Water.

La: Crauen

Take the flowers only of Rosmarey put them
into an Earthen pot & put to them as Much
of the Best Brandey as will just Couer them,
then tie down the pot Cloase & Set it 24 hours
in the Chimney Corner where it may just keep
warme, then Still it off in a warm or Limbeck
put the Same water to more flowers as before
& Sill it off again, & so Keep it.






420

To Make a Carrot Puding.

L: Lytton. Grate a too peney Loaf & a Great Carrot and
mix them together well, then beat 6 Eggs
leauing out 3 whites, a pint of Cream and
a Smale Glass of Sack, one Nutmeg & as
Much Sugar as will Sweeten it to your tast,
Stir all these Verey well together, and Melt
halfe a pound of butter & Stir into it, then
Set it into a Moderat Ouen for 3 quarters
of an hour, Strew Sum fine Sugar upon
it before y Set it in,

To Make Apricok Wine.

L: Lucey Bright To 3 quarts of Water put 3 pound of Sugar
let it boyle, & Scim it Well, then put into it
6 pound of Apricoks pared and Stoned, & let let them
boyl til they bee tender, then take them up
& when the Liquor is Could bottle it.
if y please y May let the Liquor have
one Walme with a Sprig of flowered Clarey
when the Apricoks are taken Out.

To Make a Great Cheese

L: Goodrick.

Take 12 Gallons of New Milk, Set it together
as it Comes from the Cow, when it is Come
break it as Smale as possibley y Can, put
it in a Chees fat and press it well for halfe
an hour, then take it out and with your hands
break it as Smale as is possible, & take Care
y leaue no slip Curds, then rub well into it
3 pound of fresh butter out of the Churn
with a Candfull of Salt, when they are uerey
well rubd in put your Chees into the press again
turning it twice aday til it bee well pressed
it must not bee eaten til tis 2 years ould.

196
421

 To boyl plate white,

La: Denbigh Put your plate into a Charcoal fier til it is
red hot then take Argall and Salt and a little
Allum and boyl it in a Good time, & if it is not
white enough the first time heat it hot & boyl
it again;
you Must haue a Care of Melting the Sawder
and bee Sure to boyl it in water enough to couer it.

To Pickel Leaman Peel.

L: Denbigh

Cut 6 fair Leamans in halfes & take out the
Meat, Soak them an houer, then Cut them
round uerey thin, & boil them in 4 Seuerall
waters, til they bee tender. put them in a
Coarce Cloth & set them by til they bee Could;
in the Mean time prepare a thin Syrop
with halfe a pint of Whitwine Vinegar, &
halfe a pound of loaf Sugar boyld together
a quarter of an hour, & when tis Could, put
in your Leaman peels; they wil bee readey
in 4 dayes; e thikest rhinds are best.

Sinamon Water.
Mrs Hoult

Take 3 quarts of whit wine and one of brandey,
a pint of Damask rose water, a handful of Salt
and if you . please Sum rosemarey & Couslip flowers,
put all these into your still bottum, Then put to them
a quarter of a pound of Sinnamon grosley beaten
then Set on the Still head & lite it, let it Stand
within the ayr of the fier 24 hour, then diuide
it & distil it at twice with a uerey Slow fier, you
Must take aboue 3 quarts of water, then Mix
the water all together, & put into it a quarter







422

of a pound more of Cinnamon beaten as before,
infuse it 24 hours, & distil it again at twice
as before, if it bee distiled with Care there wil
bee 3 quarts of Good water.

Sweet Water

Mrs Harrisson;

Take 3 peckes of Damask Roses picked; of pintos
one peck; Cloue Gilliflowers ^halfe a peck; Sweet
Baszil, & Sweet Marjoram, of each a handful;
lauender too handfulls; Wallnut leaues, Coastmary,
Southernwood, Leaman thime, of each 1 handful;
Balm 2 handfulls; Bay leaues & tops of rosemary
of each halfe a handfull; of Leaman peel &
Orange peel a quarter of a pound; of Cloues
3 ounces; Cinamon 3 ounces; Benjamin 2 Ounces;
Storax 1 Ounce; pick your herbs and flowers;
& put them into an earthen pot, bruis your
Spices and Gums & put them in, themn put to
them all too quarts of Whit Wine and halfe
a pint of Wine Vineger; tie them down Close
for ten days, & Stir the pot well twice a day,
then Still it off as you doo roses, and put it
all together, with 20 Grains of Amber Greec
and 20 Grains of Musk, and 10 Grains of Ciner,
tied up in 20 Severall parcells; Seal up your
Bottle & open it not till too years or More;
the longer you keep it the better, for it feeds
it Selfe up the Sweets

197
423
My Ladey Allens Water.

Mrs Harrison

Take of Sage, Sallandin, Rosemarey, Rew,
Wormwood, Rosasolis, Mugwort, Pimpernell,
dragons Scabius, Egrimoney, Balm, Scordium,
Cardus Beniditus, Bettoney, Centerey, Marigold
flowers and leaues; of each of these a Good
handfull; of Burrage, Buglos, Burnet, Angelica,
flewellen and Wood Sorrell, of ^each Likewise a
Good handfull, then take the roots of tormentil
Elecompane, Teduary, Gentian, of each of
these roots halfe an ounce; Wash all your
herbs, & Shake them in a Cloth till they bee
dry, then Shred all your herbs, & Scrape
& Slice your roots, Mix all together with
these flowers and Seeds folowing, Marigold
flowers, Cowslip flowers, parsey flowers, buglos,
and burrage flowers, Clarey flowers, Cloue Gille
flowers, & red rose buds of each halfe a
pound or as Maney as you Can get if not
the Whol Quantetey, Caraway Seeds, Sweet
fennell Seeds, Coriauder, & Cardimums, of each
halfe an Ounce; bruise your Seeds and put
all these things into an Earthen pott with
2 Gallons of the best Scak, Couer it Cloase
& let it Steep 2 days, & 2 nights; Stir them
with your hand once a day uerey well from
the bottum, then draw it off in an Ordinarey
Still with a soft fier, Steep e Stronger and
Smaler apart as you please.







424
A Seed Cake:

Mrs PalmerTake 2 quarts of fine flower, and a pound
of the best butter, Rub them well together,
then, take 6 yolks of Eggs, & 2 white,
6 Spoonfulls of yest, 6 spoonfulls of Cream,
and   Spoonfulls of Rose or Orrange
flower water, worke it all well together &
Set it before the fier to rise halfe an
houre, then worke halfe a pound of
Caraway Comfits amongst it, butter your
pann or paper verey Well, and So Set
it into the Ouen, & let it Stand an
hour, you May Ice it or not as y will

To Make Orrange Cream.

Mrs Hopkins;

Take the juce of Six large Orranges the
yolks of 10 Eggs well beaten, and Mixt
with the juice, Sweeten it well with fine
Sugar, and put ^in too or 3 Spoonfulls of
Orrange flower water, Run it through a
Seive, & Set it on a Soft fier till it
bee thik, then put in a bit of Sweet
butter as big as a Wallnut, when tis well
Melted in, Stir it till it bee Could, & then
haue readey Sum Cream boiled & Sweetend
& Could again, and put in as Much of
it as you please;

198
427
To make a baked oatmeal
puding.

L.E:ffanshawe

Set a pint of Cream on the fier & when
it boiles Stir in as Much oatmeal beat
to powder flower as will Make it as thick as
an ^hashey oatmeal puding, let it boil a little,
then take it off the fier, & Stir into it
halfe a pound of butter, and Season ^it as you
thinke fit with Salt Sugar Cloues Mace and
Cinnamon; & when tis Could put the yolkes
of 8 eggs and the whites of to well beaten
into it, then butter yr dish & bake it in a
prettey quk ouen; halfe an hour will bake it

To Collar beef.

Mrs Chipp:

Take a flanke of Beef and Make a brine
for it of bay Salt and pump water Strong enough
to bear an egg, then put in your beef and
four pound of Beef Suet, let them ly in 5 or 6
dayes; then take it out and put off the Skinn
and Split the beef in the Middle & twill bee of
a Good Thiknes, take too handfulls of Sage washt
and Chopt Smale, and 1 ounce of pepper, 2 ounces
of Cloues, 2 of Mace, & 6: or 8: Nutmegs beat
the Spices uerey Smale and Mix them with your
Sage & too handfulls of White Salt, then Strew
your Spice all ouer the beef and rail in up in
Collars, tie them up had with pakthred, and put







428

it in a pot & lay the suet upon them &
pour in a quart of Rhenish wine and a
quart of Water or better, tie up the
pot Verey Cloas, &; Set it into e ouen
with houshould bread, when you draw your
bread take out the pott and turne your
Collars in it and tie up the pot again
and Set it into the ouen and let it stand
all night, next Morning take it out of
the pot and let it hag up to drop
till it bee dry then let it hang or stand
on a Shelfe, if you like it you May put
in all Sorts of Sweet herbs or bay leaues,
it will keep too Monthes.

An Ounce of Chocolet to a quarter
of a pint of Water

A Drinke Good to bee taken
to Make Good Labour.

L: Northamton. Take halfe a pound of figgs Sliced, a
quarter of a pound of Reasons of e sunn
Stoned, four Ounces of Liquorish Scraped,
and Sliced, a Spoonfull of Annireeds bruised,
boil al these in too quarts of Spring water
till one pint is wasted, then Strain it out
and drinke a quarter of a pint in e morning
and as Much when y goe to bed for Six weeks
before you are brought to bed.

199
429

To Dry Hamms

La: Goodrik. Let your leggs of Poark bee Cut like gammons
and when they are readey to Salt haue bay Salt
Made Very hott before the fier or in an Ouen
lay your Gammons upon a Sheluing dresser
and So Couer them thik all Ouer and Under
with the hot Salt take Care they doo not
touch one another, euerey day they Must bee
remoou'd into a dry Place, and what Salt you
put to them to Supply that which is Melted
Must bee Made hot, about ten days will bee
enough to let them ly and then they Must
bee hanged up in a Chimney where there is a
Constant Moderat Wood fier.

To Make baccondecooks.

Mrs Windsor. Make a uery thick batter with a pound of flower, 4
eggs whits and all, a Spoonfull of Ale yest, a little
Salt, mix it with Warme milk, and So beat it up &
batter, Set ^it before e fier to rise too hours before you fry
them.

To Make the fruit whipt Cream.

Take halfe a pint of Iuice of aney fruit, drawn with
water, or alone Such as will bee Clear, put to it halfe
a pound of fine Sugar beaten & Searced, the Whits of
too Eggs whipt up, beat it with a Spoon till it will
ly upon a plate.







430

To Make little Seed Cakes.

Mrs Montague. One quart of fine flower, halfe a pound of butter,
halfe a pound of Caraway Comfits, aboue halfe a
pint of Yest, as Much Milk as will wett it.
Mix your butter and flower well first, then put
in the Yest, then the Milke, then lay it befor
the fier in a pees of Woolen to Rise and when you
Make them up put in the Comfits.

To Make a Winter Cream Cheeses

Mrs Hopkins. Take four Gallons of New Milk and one Gallon of
Cream, Scald your Cream with too Quarts of Water
amongst it, then put it to the new Milk, put to
it a quart or three pint of Rhenet, when the
Chees is Come lay it into the fatt in a Cloth, press
it a little with your hand as you lay it in, but
break the Curd as little as you Can, you Must
Lay a Smale weight upon it at first, then
adding more weight til it Comes to the press, let
it Stand an hour, with the weight, turning it
3: or 4: times in a Cloth halfe wett, when it
Comes out of the press it must bee kept turn'd
betwixt too fatts, Salting it as you ^doo Other Cheeses, you
Must take Great Care of breaking it in e turning.

To Make your Rhenet take a gallon of Water, & one
handfull of Nettles, & 3 good handfull of Salt, boyl
all these together for an hour, then let it Stand, and
Settle, put it in a pott, & put a bagg to it, let the
bagg ly in it 8: or 9: dayes, it Must bee a Stale bagg
after the bagg is taken out let the rhenet Stand a
week to Settle, & then bottle it up, e Rhenet Must
bee made at Michelmas, & May is the best month
to Make the Cheese.


200
431

A pectorall drinke for a Could.

Dr Needham. Take 5 pints of Spring water put into it, 6: ounces
of reasones of the Sun Stoned, 3 ounces of figgs, 2 ounces
of Dates, Sliced, a handfull of Maiden hair, a handfull
of Colts foot, halfe a handfull of Vnsett Isup, a ounce
of Liquorish Scrapt, & Slict, a few Anniseeds & Caraway
Seeds, 12 Sebertians, 12 Iudebes, boil all this to 3
pints, Strain it, & put to it 2 ounces of broun Sugar
Candey, Clear it with too whits of Eggs.

The drying dyet drinke,

Dr Lower.Take of Sarsaparilla Cutt Smale 6: ounces, flinty
China 2: ounces, Guaicum halfe an ounce, infuse
these in 5 quarts of Spring water 6: hours, then
boyl halfe away with a Gentle fier. add at the
latter end of the boyling Lycorish 2 drams, halfe
a dram of Coriander Seeds, Let it Settle & pour
it off while tis hott.
if you find it too hott, add 2 ounces of Rasins washt
but whol.

For a hot rhume in the eyes.

L. frichnil. Distill Roten Apples in a Could Still and wash
the Eyes with the water often times in the day.







201
A Gargle for a Cancer
in the mouth. by Mr Dixson
surgion

Take french barley well wash'd one
ounce, boile it in a quart of water
till e barly is soft. Strain the Liquor
& boile in it the Leaves of fl...ellen
fluellin, perriwincle, bramble tops
Hunnisuckles, of Each one handfull.
Ivory, & heartshorn Calcind' or burnt
white, of each half an ounce. These
being sufficiently boild' upon a soft fire
strain them from the Liquor, & to every
pint, or pound. put hunny of roses
rosses. & sirup of Mulberies. of each
one ounce. Spirit of Sulpher. a few
drops. if you Can get any of the Flowers
of blew botles, to boile in the decoction
they will add more Strength to it.
the patient is to gargle with this
often. Especially Morning, & Evening.





Virtues of the Lady hewytts Cordiall water

Where a Cordiall is requesit none Can exteede this, singularly good
for women in travell to uphold ther spirits and further there
Labour for vomiting and a Laske and griping of the gutts nothing
can be better: it driues all infestion from the hart speedily
Causeth rest procures sweat in feavors when nothing else will
doe it: for surfits nothing Can be better excelently good for
palsyes Lethergeys or any swounding fitts brings out the small poxe
When given over by Doctors the quantity to be taken is three spoone
fulls for a grone person and so in proportion for younger persons
nothing ought to be taken in two hours before nor in two hours
after the takeing of it





432

The lady Hewits Cordiall water

Cousin Coke Take of Red sage betteny spermint unsett hysope settwell balme
penyrial sanacles salendine watercresses Lavender Angelica germander
Calamint tamaris coltsfoot Aringoes valerien sapsafrax pimpernell
vervin parsley rosemary sauory scabies Egrimony mothere of time wild
margerome Roman wormwood Cardus Benedictus pellitory of the wall
feild daysey with the leaves roots & flowers dryed togethere of each of
these severall herbs take the quantity of a great handfull after they
are picked clean

Take of Rue yarow Comfrey plantine Camomile maiden haire sweet
Margerome of each of them a handfull before they are picked
of red rose leaves Couslope flowers rosemarie flower burrage flower
buglace flower maregold flowers of each of these halfe a peck
of aniseeds sweet fennell seeds parsley seeds Caraway seeds of each
halfe an ounce: of spicknard of Elecompany roots dryed mellett
flower Calamus Aromaticus Cardimum Lignum Aloes Rubarbe
sliced thins gallingale veronica of each of
them halfe an ounce of Juniper bery 2 drames of Aromatica
rosa solis 4 drams of china roots one ounce of sasafras sliced
thin one ounce of virginia snakeweed 2 ounces
wash all the forenamed herbs and dry them in a cloth shakeing
them till they be dry then cut them & put them equaly into tow
great earthen pots & in the midst of the herbs put in the flowers
& drugs ading allso these spices nutmeg Ginger sinamon white peper
Cloves & mace of each halfe an ounce the seeds spices & drugs
being first bruised then put thereto such a quantity of the best
shery sacke as will cover & steep very well & let them stand 24
hours or more very Close stopt then put it in a limbeck & draw
of the pots one after the othere draw from each pot 3 pints of
the best the rest will be smaller to every quart of strongest
put in these Cordial 20 grains of bezar 15 grains of amber
grees 15 grains of musk of flower of perl 1 dram of flower of
red corall & white & of amber each a dram and ounce of
harts horn finely pared half a pound of the purest white suger
candey beaten & sersed you must put in about tow penny
worth of saffron in a bag & let it hang in the Glase when
all the Cordials are in it must be stopt very Close with a
blader & leather tyed on it: it must every day be shaked
for the space of 15 days to make the Cordialls encorperate
& then the longer it is kept the better

203
433

A medcin to stop a flux

L. Denbigh Take halfe a pint of plantain water and half
a pint of Red rose water, mix them together;
Set a pint of New milk on the fier and as
often as it Rises quench it, for nine hines and
then drink of it,

Sace for boyld Rabets

L. Denbigh. Parboyle the hiers, then take out the strings
and shred them Very smale with spinage,
parsley, and sorell, and a little peper, rail
all these up in butter and skewer it up in
the Rabets belleys, when they are boyld, take
it out, and in a sace pann Mix it with
the Yolke of a hard Egg, sum Leaman shred,
and a little of the Iuice, a little salt and
as Much butter as Makes it pretty thick.

To make white Quince past

L. Denbigh Scald your Quinces a very little, and cut them
in peeses, then Couer them with the juice of
grated quinces, and so boyl it together till it bee
a thick pulpe, then put weight for weigh of
sugar wanting 2 ounces to a pound, so Glass and
store them

A sheet or too of white paper
boyld in aboue a pint of Millk
boyl it Well & drinke it for a
loosness Mrs A Halden

To stop a flux

L. ThanetTake a quarter of a pint of Treacle Water, and put
into it one ounce of Diascardium, shake the bottle and
Take one spoonfull when you goe to bed, or too if very ...





434

To Make Elder Berrey Wine.

Dr Lower.
Take 20 pound of the best Malliga reason, pick
out only aney stones or dirt more then ordinarey,
neither wash, nor rub nor pick them; shred
them very Smale, then take 5 Gallons of Water,
boyld halfe an hour and Measur'd after, put that
and your reasons together, in a tubb, & when tis
near Could Couer it up Very warme and set it
in a warme place to worke 10 days at least, Stiring
them 2 or 3 times a day, then Strain it Well out
and put to it 6: pints of the Juice of Elder
berreys, taken when they are Very ripe, and
baked in an Ouen and se the Juice Straind out
then Tunn it up, and when it has dun working
in the Vessell Stop it, and Set it in a warme
room & if the weather proov very Could, Couer
it up, let it Stand 2 Months or 10 weeks and
then bottle it, as  ^near .. as you Can before the Great
frosts Come; put the juice Could into the Liquor.

100ti of Raisons; 100: quarts of boying water, Measur'd when straind out is
9ti quarts. Elder Iuce, 11: quarts. in all 107: quarts
1 bushel of Elder berrey backed yeilds 14 quarts.
all must be Measur'd by Wine Measure

Mr Cranmer puts 60li of Malliga Reasons to 12i Gallons of Water
boyld, works it a Week, this is for whit.

 The ordinarey backed plum Puding

Aunt Harrison.  Take 3 quarters of a pound of flower, as Much
whit bread Soaked in Milke, a pound & quarter
4 Eggs of Suet Shred as fine as is possible, a pound
of Rasons Ston'd, a little Ginger and salt.

For a burne

Cousin Coke Take an Enex Ston, and beat with the white of an egg
till it Turne to Curd, and lay the Curd upon the
burne, Changing it once in an hour till the fier
is out, take out the Ston & lay it to dry.
an Enix ston is a lumpe of Roch allum only.

204
435

To Roast or bake a Pike.

Mrs Sloan Scald your Pike, and then Take out the Guts under
the guills; then take, Oysters, anchouer Sweet herbs,
Grated bread, Capers, and a little pepper, and Salt,
Shred all these together and Make it up with the
Yolkes of 2 or 3 eggs, and put it into your pike through
the Guills, then Strew it all ouer with, Sweet
herbs, Grated bread, onion Shred, what Spice you like,
& a little Salt, and wet it well first with yolke
of Egg, and Melted butter, then lay it in a
pann with a quart of Claret wine, a pound of
fresh butter and allmoast a quart of Grauey.
then set it in an ouen for an hour or More
if it bee large,

For your .ace, Take Sum of the Liquor twas
baked in, Sum Leaman Cutt in bits, a few Capers
shred smale, Sum Mushroms, and Murelles,
Shrimps and oysters, beat all up with butter &
So pauer it over you pike in the dish

You May Shred Sum Sum  Eile, or Salman,
into the puding.

To Make a Leaman Toort.

Mrs Burwood Take to large Leamons, Cut out all the Meat, and
boyl them till they will beat in a Morter to a very
fine pulpe, then beat into them 3 quarters of a pound
of uery Good buter, and when tis Very well Mixt Squees
the Iuice that you took out, and of one or too Leamons
More, and put in, & as Much Sugar as you please,
then put it in a Shallow dish with a little Crust
as you doo aney other toort & bake it.







436
For a Scald head.

Cousin H:Fanshaw. Take 7 or 8 large Onions, beat them in a
Morter till they are all past, then beat into it a
quarter of a pound of boars Greace, till it Comes
to a Salue, Make a Case of buckaram to put over
it, Cut or pull away all the hair, then noint
it twice a day; as Much as you Make at twice
will Generally doo, but allways thrice.

The bitter Tincture.

Mrs. H:ffananshaw. Take Candies, henbarey lefis, Cammomil flowers, Sage,
Rew, of Each a handfull, on ounce of Gentian root,
Slice the Root, and Shred the herbs, Grosly, put them
all into a Ston pitcher with a quart of the best
Nants brandey, or a quart of Whit wine, or as
Much Spring water, according as you would haue
it hoter or Coulder, tye down you pitcher, & set it
in the Oven when the bread is drawn, when you
take it out dont uncouer it till tis Could;

If tis infusd in brandy or Wine, take too 3 or 4
Spoonfulls, if in water a wine Glass full in the
Morning fasting;
If you would have it to purge put into it it 4
drams of Cenna, & one of Rubarbe,

When it comes out of the Ouen you Must after
tis Settled, power off the Clear, & keep it for your
use, you May put in a little Saffron if you will.


205
437

The Erringo Cream.

Mrs Sloan. Take a quarter of a pound of the best preserv'd Erringos,
Cut them in thin Slices and powr upon them a pint of
Scaulding hot Milke, let them Stand an hour or too at
least if not all night till the Sweetnes is Soaked out,
then powr away the Milke, and boyl them in Cream
to what thiknes you like.

Ginger bread.

Mrs Woodcock.Take 4li of flower, 2li: of Sugar, and haue readey beaten
and Searct halfe an ounce of Caraway Seeds, halfe an ounce
of Coriander Seeds halfe an ounce of Ginger, and 2 Nutmegs.
Cinnamon, Cloues, Mace, Cardamum Seeds, of each a peneworth;
Mix these with your flower and Sugar, then Make it into
a Stif past with a pound of Melted buter, halfe a pint
of Milke, and the Whits and Yolks of 4 eggs, set it by
the fier to Rise a quarter of an hour, then Make them
up into little Cakes, and wash them over with e yolk
of an egg, buter your papers, and bake them in a Slow
Ouen, if you like it you May put in 6: ounces of Cittron,
orrang, or Leaman peel.

 Iealley of Red Currants.

take to each pound of Stript Currants, 3 quarters of a pound
of double Refin'd Sugar, and boyl these to Sugar to a Candey, hight,
then put in your Currants, and Stir them together as
they boyl ouer the fier, let it boyl as fast as you Can
for a quarter of an hour, then power it through a
fine Ielley bag, and Glase it.
Ladey Longuill.





438

Syrope of Wood Sorrell

Mrs Peck
Stamp and strain your Wood Sorrell, then
then filter it through a Cap paper and
to every pint of juice take a pound and
halfe of loaf Sugar break yr sugar in
lumps and powr your juice upon it, and
let it Stand in the Sunn till you See
it quite dissolv'd and Clear, Stiring it
uery often.

For the Scorbut

Mrs Peck
Put into an earthen pot a handfull of
Sea Scurvey Grass and a handfull of
Garden Scuruey grass, and Cut into it one
whol orrange peel and all, then have
readey too quarts of Whit Wine poset drinke
and powr it Scalding hot upon it, Couer it
and let it Stand upon the herbs and drinke
a qr of pint or More it this Morning &
euening.

To Make a barley puden.

Mrs Verney Take 4: ounces of pearl barley, 3 quarts of
Milk. Sum nutmeg, a little Salt; and a
Smal handfull of Rasins, Sugar to your Tast,
bake it in a dish twil take 3 hours bakeing.


206
439
White Collops.

L: Denbigh. Cut your Collops very thin off of a leg of Veal, hack
them on both Sides beat the Yolkes of Six Eggs uery
well with a Spoonfull of Cream, then With a bunch
of feathers Wash your Collops uery well all ouer with
the Eggs, then take of Persley, Sweet Margorum,
a little time, Sum Leamun peel Cut Small, peper &
Salt, then put them in a frying pan one by one with
a little bit of buter and let them bee just warme,
through, have Readey a little Strong broth Made
of Sum of the Veal, put into it halfe an anchoue
Shred Smale, and a  pees of buter, So toss them all
up together, and put to them balls of the Same.

To Picle Pork Red.

Mrs Verney  Sprincle your pork with a little bay Salt, and
let it lye too or three days that the bloud may
drain from it before you put it up for good,
take 4 ounces of Salt Peeter, and halfe ....
Bay Salt a peck of bay Salt, and one quart
of Whit Salt, Mix all the Salts together, the
Salt Peeter beeing first beat very fine, then
rub it in Very Well, and lay it in your tub
or pot Very Cloas, so that no ayr may get
into it.

this quantetey will put up too Smal porkets.







how long the .....
when asses Milk
when the powders
if Tea is Good.
sick stomak
1 scotch pill.

Sage Tea, & leaf

207

To Cure a Cancer or any
Sore, proceeding from a Sharp humour
in the Blood.

Take the hard Pith which grows in the
Midle of a Walnut & which devides the Kernell
in two. Drye it in an Ouen, then beat it to
powder, & take as much Morning & Night as will
lye on a ppears which looks like a 6d in Milk Water, or any Liquor
you have a Mind to.

This Receipt was given me by a Lady who
had receiv'd great bennefit by it her self. She
had a Swelling in one Breast which was so painfull
that when ever she went in a Coach her Breast
felt as if it were a pulling off ^& by taking this powder she is perfectly well. She was advis'd
to this by a Lady who had Cured a poor Woman
of a Cancer in her Breast. It Cured a Boy
who had a very bad Scald Head, which shews t
it is good against Sharp humours





The Lady who gave me this Receipt
told me that the good effects of the Powder
was confirm'd to her by a French Minister here
the boy told who told me her that he had seen
a very remarkable Cure perform'd in France
with this powder on a Gentleman who had
so Violent and Malignant a Humour fall'n on
on one Arm, that after he had been ill
some time of it, the Surgeons pronounc'd
it must be cutt off, for they cou'd not
save it from the Gangrene. The Gentle-
man wou'd not undergoe the operation, but
resolv'd to dye. Upon which a Lady who was
in the House with him undertook him.
Gave him this Powder every 3 Houres, till
the danger was over, & then Morning &
Night. And with this alone she perfectly
Cured him

208





440
To pickle fresh herrings

Mrs Windham
Take threescore herrings and was them uery clean and dry
them in a clean cloth, and then lay them up on a table, and
the take halfe a pound of bay salt and one ounce of black
peper, 2 ounces of guinnee peper, and beat it in a mor-
ter and a small handfull of white salt and mix itt all
together, and strow all a bout the herrings and then
putt them into a pot with a few bay leaues and
put to them three pints of white wine uinegar &
so bake them after the first batch of bread; lay
them in your pot one by one

To make fresh chees

Take a pottle of the best milk from the cow hott, put
to it a pint of creme, soe much warmed as that is, and
to this put a spoonfull of runett, couer it close, when
it is come Whey it well, and break it uery well with
four or 5 spoonfuls of rose water where in hath been
steeped all night a little mace, cinamon, and nutmeg
all bruised. tow spoonfuls of fin sugar, you must put
to it. all this must bee bruised and wrought together,
with a silluer ladle, then put it in to your fatt it
(for itt will make tow) lettt it sand in the sellar
all night, to pour on it you must boyle a quart of
creme, with a little rose water, and lett it stand a day
and a night, then put the best of it on the fresh
chees when you serue it up

209
441

To make ducth biskett

Lady Dalkeith
Take 2 pound of fine flower, put in a quarter
of a pound of powder sugar, than take a quarter
of a pound sweet butter, rub it well in the flower
putt in an ounce of caraway seeds and half a
pint of yest (it must bee ale yest) then wett it with
milk, then lett itt lye and rise a little while, then
make it into little cakes the thickness of a wigg,
Sett it in the ouen and lett it stand half an hour,
then take them out and cutt them thin then
Sett them in the ouen to broun again.

To make tarts the best way

Take a quart of the finest flower and half a pound off
butter rubbed dry into the flower the white of one
egg make it up with cold watter uery qick role it out
uery thin and handle the past as little as posible, lay
in one row of friut and one good spoonful of double
refined sugar, when the tarts are made wash them
ouer with melted butter and sears some fine sugar ouer
them, bake them in a uery quick ouen and doo not
putt up the stoue, as soone as they begin to colour they
are enough, the cheef is to make them up exceeding
thin and to shine att the top






442
To make Aprycock cakes o orrange or leamen

Draw your Ielly and pare your aprycocks and cut
them in slices and sett them on the fier withou any thing
in them, lett them boil til they bee all soft, then take
to a pound and half of apricoks, oune pound of
Ielly, stirr them well together, and sett them ouer e
till they bee Scalding hott ready to boil, then take
your Sugar and heat it upon the fier in a pan
or basin, and take the weight of your stuff in
sugar and put it in stiring it ouer the fier till e
sug bee well mellted, and the glass your cakes

For a Cough

L:Denbigh.
Make a Lambatiue of Linseed Oyle, and
Syrop of Madenhair, and White Suger Candy,
and take a Tea Spoon full when y Cough,
it must bee Made fresh euery day.

The biber Tincture

Ms Neuil
Gentian Root one dram; of the lefes of Centrey
the Less, and Camomil flowers, halfe a handfull
each, of Roman Wormwood a quarter of a
handfull; put to it about a quardt of boyling
Spring Water, & when tis Could powr it of
into a bottle; Cover it only with a paper.


210
443

To make orrange wine

Take 20 gallons of watter and 40 pound of sugar
boile itt ouer the fier and claryfy it & haue ready
200 orringes (they must bee the best cevil oranges)
pared very thin without any whitte: as soon as
soon as you take of the sirrup putt in the pills,
couer it very close & ring out the Iuce of the
oranges and when the sirrop is allmost cold put
in all the Iuce but no seeds & put tow or three
spoonfuls of yest sett it to work 2 days then
barrell it and putt to it 2 gallans of renish or
white wine: stop it clos for a month: then draw
it of into a nother vesell an in 2 or 3 days after
bottle itt

To make stichwort Watter

Take of stone hors dung a good quantity and of
Stichwort, and couer the bottom of the still with
the dung and then lay a Layr of Stichwort &
so doo till the still is full, then pour 2 quarts of
white wine and 2 quarts of small ale and stop
the still close and the next day still it off,you
may draw of 3 ose of thes quantity and hang
in the bottle a little of Saffron a bout a rpenny
worth & lett itt bee in the bottle the watter is drid
it is no matter how often, lett e party drink
nine spoonfuls att any time, when they are in
pain it is allso uery good for the stone sweetned
with sirrup of marsmalos






444
Orrange Cakes.

Mrs Eells. Take 12 larg Siuil Orranges, Chip off the
outward peel as thin as you Can, then lay them in
Water 2: or 3: days, Shifing it twice a day, then
Cut them in halues, and take all ^the meat out
Clean, boyl the peels, and Set your Meat
in a pot into a Scillet of Water, as for Clear
Cakes, & let it boyl about an hour, then when
the peels ar boyld tender, beat them prettey
fine in a Morter, then Weigh your meat
and to a pound of Meat take halfe a pound
of the peel, Mix them Well together & Set
them upon the fier whilst you boyl your Sugar,
you Must take the full weight in uery fine
Sugar, and boyl it to a high Candy, then put
it to your Orrange, and Set it ouer a Slow
fier for an hour, keep it Stiring all e while,
but dont let it boyle; then put it into a
pot to keep, and dry them out as you Mean
to Use them, and then Lay it out in Spoonfuls
upon Glasses, Stoue them till one Side is dry,
then burne them and Clap too together, Cloase
them neatly with a knife, and dry them up

add juice of Leaman when they are all mixt
together and Set upon the fier

211
445

The biter drinke for one that
is Paralettick.

Mrs Slocker.

Take the tops of Roman Wormwood, and e leser
Centrey of each too drams, of Gentian root Sliced
and the roots of Virginian Snake Weed, (a little
brused) of each a dram & a halfe, the outer rind
of Siuel Orranges, Calamus arromaticus, the
lesser Cardamum Seeds, of each a dram, pour
upon these ingredients 3 pints of boiling
Spring Water, when tis Could power it off, and
put to it Compound Wormwood Water, & Steel
Wine of each 8 ounces.

Almand Cheescakes.

Mrs Butler. Take 6 ounces of Almands, or penockeys, beat them
Smal with Rose Water: then take 1 pint of Cream,
4 biskets Grated, 1 nutmeg, 8: eggs, but halfe the
whits, and halfe a pound of buter, put all together
in a Sace pan, and Set it on the fier till it Grows
thik, then put it into your Ciuet, & bake them
in a Great one, or Small one as you like.

Sack Whay

Take 3 pints of Milke, 3 pints of Water, Set it upon
the fier and when it boyls up pour in halfe a pint
of Sack, take off the Curd, and so drinke it.

The Harts Horn drinke.

Take 1 ounce of burnt Hartshorne, a Crust of Whit
bread, & a little Sinamon boyl them in 3 pints of
Water till halfe bee wasted, then Sweeten it with loaf
Suger.







446
Rice puden

H. Harrison. Take halfe a pound of Rice flower and a quart
of Milk, boyl it to a hastey puden with a bit of
buter to keep it from burning, then Stirr in the
remainder of a pound of buter, and when tis Cool
Stirr in 8 eggs, a little Suger and Salt, bake it.

The drying lime Water

H. Harrison.One pound of quik Lime to a Gallon of Water,
let it Stand 3 days, then powr off as Much
as is Clear for your Vse.

For Iamm of Plums

L: Denbigh. Mussel Plums, and Pear Plums, Must haue
halfe the Weight of Suger, Damsons must
haue 3 pound of Plums to one pound of Suger,
Make a thin Syrop With halfe a pint of
Water to each pound of Suger, So boil it
till tis enough.

Bisket.

Mrs Verney Break 6 Eggs whites & all into a Large Earthen pot
beat them a quarter: of an hour with a whiske, then put
in 5 Spoonfull of Orrang flower Water, beat it an
other quarter: then put in by degrees a pound of fine loaf
Suger, Searced, & keep beating an hour, then put in
14 ounces of fine flower beeing Readey dryed by the
fier, beat it in as fast as you Can, & when there is
no dry flower to bee Sean, dope them upon papers
buterd as fast as May bee, & bake them in ^a quik Oven
put in Sum leaman peel Grated.

212
449

Syrop of Steel

Dr Lower. Take 1: ounce of Steel fileings, put it into a pint of the
Strongest Whit Wine, with halfe a dram of mace bruse'd,
Let it Stand a month or 6 weeks, till the Wine bee of a
darksih Colour then Philter it off through a Cap paper
in a Glass funell, then put into it as Much fine loaf Suger
broaken ^in lumps as Will Make it into a thin Syrop without
boyling.
Of this Syrop take euery morning one larg Spoonfull
with 12: granes of Cream of Tartar, with it, you may mix
it with fair Water, or aney Simple distil'd Water you like.
If Syrop bee too heauey for your Stomak, leaue out
the Suger, & use the deoction as above.

An Opening drinke.

Take green Elecompaney roots, Sliced, on pound, uncut
Hysop 4 handfulls, Horehoand 4 handfulls, Water Cresses
and Scuruegrass Shred fine, of each 8 handfulls, Rasins
of the Sunn Stoned a pound, put these into a bagg & hang
them in a Vessell of Small ale or Beer Wort, put the
Bagg into the Vesel as Soon as it hath dun Working,
and after 3 or 4 days you May drinke, if you keepe to
this drinke only you will find the More benfit, the Bag
will Serue twice. only the Cast will not bee to strong.

A Wash for the teeth.

Mrs Clarke. Take the botums of too Glas bottles, put them in the
fier till they bee Red hot, then put them into a quart
of white Wine Vinegar, let them stand till tis Could
throw out the Glass and Let the Liquor Settle, Strain
off the Clear, and put into it an ounce and halfe
of bold almorick, fine beaten, & a quarter of a pint
of the juice of Sage, Wash your mouth with it once
a Week, Shake it when you Vse it.  X






450
Orrang Marmalad.

Mrs ffanshaw
of Lenten Pareloe
pare your Orranges thin and Rub them well with
Salt, then put them into a large quantetey of Spring
Water, let them ly a little while in the Water and
then tie them up in a Cloth, and then boyl them
in a great deal of Water, as the Water Grows biter
Change it, it usually require Changing 3 4 or 4 5 times,
when they are Very tender take them out of the
Water, Cut them open and take out all the Skins &
Seeds, Reserue the meat to Mix with the Rinde, which
Must bee broak very Smale, to euery 3 orranges
boyld, take the Meat and juice of on Siuil Orrange
and one Leaman, which must bee just boyld
before it is Mixt with the broaken Orrange,
when tis thus Mixt alltogether, take to euery
pint of Orrange a pint of Ielley Made with
John apples, & to every pint of it So Mixt 3 quarter
of a pound of Sugar, Stirr it Well together, and
Sett it ouer a quick fier, and boyl it till you
find it will Ielley.

To Stop a Gangreen.

L: Longuill. Take Cow dung and put to it as much Spirit
of Wine as will boyl it to a pultis, lay it to the
part as hot as you Can bear it, shift it as oft
as it Cools till you find the part Sensible.

To dry up aney Feberish humor

Take 2 ounces of white lead Sifted fine, 2 ounces
of Chalk, Scraped and Sifted, and 2 ounces of barror
greace, Mix them well together on the fier
till it just Simmer, and then keep it in a pot
for youe Vse.

213
451

To preserve orranges Whol.
L: Lansborough:

Pare your Orranges very thin and lay them all
night in Water, then boyl them halfe an hour and
put them into Could Water. then make holes in the
Stalk ends and take out the Seeds as Clean as you
Cand with the whit pulp only that is in the Middle,
let them ly in that water til the next day, then
boyl them again allmoast halfe an hour then
take them out and put them in a double Napkin
Couerd till they bee allmoast Could, then weigh
them and put to every pound of Orranges
a pound and halfe of Sugar, to the Sugar put
a Wine pint and halfe of water boy your Syrop
and Strain it, and when it is allmoast Could put
in your orranges and boyl them with a Soft
fier till they look Clear and the Syrop bee of
a good heith, about a fortnight or three weeks
after take your orranges out and boyl your
Syrop and when tis Could put ^it in to your orranges
again.
about halfe an hour or little More will boyl
your orranges in the Syrop.







452

To make a Baked Pudding

Take some good Milk or Cream, according to the bigness of
L: Lansborough. your Pan (mine is but a pinte and Half) and a stale Role
of Bread sliced thin and the Boileing milk or Cream
poured hott upon it and when tis Cold add 4 Eggs -
leaveing out two Whites well beaten and Mix them and a
good handfull of Currans and Raisons well Cleaned
and ston'd, and when you put into the Oven, put half
a grated Nuttmegg, some sugar, and Melted Butter
with a spoonefull of sack or Brandy all mixt well
together. as you put it into the Oven, Plump the fruit
before you Mixt itt, a Little Bakeing will Serve. You may
make the Same Pudding boiled onely adding a little
flower to Bind it. Some times I put Marrow Instead
of Butter, but think butter better.

At the Unicorn, over against the New Church, near the May-pole
in the Strand, London, liveth I. Inglish from Edinburgh,
who alone is Authorized by his MAJESTY to Make and
Publish

Dr. Anderson's, or, The Famous Scots PILLS:

So universally known and approv'd by the most eminent Physicians and others of
all Ranks for their rare and singular Virtues; and particularly as a very Sove-
reign Remedy against Diseases or Pains in the Head, Stomach or Bellies of Men, Wo-
men and Children, but especially against Giddiness and Megrims, Palsy, Deafness, Weak
or Blear'd Eyes, Want of Appetite, Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm, Gross and Thick Humours,
Worms, Paleness, Green-Sickness, Barrenness, Defluctions on the Lungs or Joints, Rheumatism,
Gout, Gravel, Stone, Scurvey, Dropsy, Cholick or Gripes, and all Obstructions; and the most
effectual Remedy yet known for those that are Costive, and therefore convenient for
all Travellers by Sea and Land. They are known also to be of excellent Use (Two
or Three taken at Night) before drinking of Epsom, Tunbridge, or any other Medicinal
Waters. They are so accomodated to all Ages, Seasons and Hours, that they are safe-
ly us'd by Women with Child, Infants, and decrepid old Persons, Summer or Winter, at any
Time of the Day, without regard to Diet, or hindance of Business. Their Operation
is so gentle, pleasant and effectual, that by Experience they are found to exceed
any Medicine hitherto publish'd. The Dose is from 3 to 11 after Dinner, Supper, or
hard Drinking, as may be seen more at large in my Papers of Directions given with
the said Pills.

manicule Their Excellency is sufficiently demonstrated by the multitude of Counter-
feits that endanger Peoples Lives; in order to prevent which, I have frequently gi-
ven notice in the Gazette: But notwithstanding that, and my having the only
true Receipt, and the King's Authority for publishing these excellent Pills; yet
there are some covetous Persons of late, who, tho they have been manifestly proven
and publish'd Cheats and Impostors, have not only counterfeited them, but stollen ...
Title and Directions verbatim, and give them out with their Trash. Wherefore to
prevent such Abuses in the Country, the only true Pills are sold by Mr. Hodges Book
feller in Derby; Mrs. Cockes in Shrewsbury; Mr. James Buchanan in Rochford; Mr. ....
liam Ward Bookseller in Nottingham; Mr. Edmund Assheton at Preston in Lancashire; ....
Wyat in Worcester; Mr. Richard Lowry Haberdasher of Small-Wares in Kendal, We....
land; Mr. John Addleton in St. Martins in Stamford, Lincolnshire; Mr. Smith in Ne.....
near Richmond in Yorkshire; Mrs. May Bookseller in Exeter; Mrs. Banks's Coffee-....
in the M..er-yard in York; Mrs. Keblewhite in Newport in the Isle of Wight; Mr. ....
Harris in Sarum; Mrs. Staples at Boston, New-England.

manicule To distinguish my Pills from those of Impostors, you are desir'd to take  ....
That my Boxes are seal'd on the Top (with black Wax) with a Lion Rampant
Three Mullets Argent; Dr. Anderson's Head betwixt I.I. with his Name round ....
Isabella Inglish underneath the Shield in a Scroll.


214
455

It is good against the paines in the Breast, Coughes and Colds.
It conforts the Heart, preventing the burning, and trembling there of
It cures all indispositions of the Stomach, As extreame hunger, or Loaths-
omeness, and strengthens the Vitall Parts.
It Kills All sorts of Vermin, or worms, expells them out if the Body, and
hinders their ingendring.
It cures the Leprosie vsed often by the Patient,
It provokes womens Termes, and the Stopped Flux of Piles, or Emo-
roides, and what is wonderful! stops the too! mach running of the
same, Comforting Naturem weakned by both indispositions.
It provokes the after Birth, and it helps to bring forth Dead Children Haue-
ing many other vertues, that for brevity don't mention, being a Reall
and rare Medicine, well known to all agreeing with all Persons from, 7.
years and vpwards, at any time taken.

THE DOSE.

To the young, and those of strong Complexionsm 2 or 3 Scruples,
Alone, in wine, Aqua Mulsa, or other liquor.
To Aged People One dram, and the same Quantity for Poisons, or the
Ague.
But as a Preseruatiue onely, but one scruple, Haveing allways a Reguard
to the Constitution of the Patient.

....... having been Counterfei....
is the Occasion of this our neW Sta....
for the Truth of vvich vvee annex o.....
Seal in Margent.

THIS TREACLE amongst all the other prerogatiues hath Virtue
of preserueing from the Plague, and from all other Contagions,
Keeping the Body Chearful and in Health.
It is good against the beatings of the heart, or Ear Akeing, remo-
ving thenee Melancholy, Consumeing the putrified humors of the Body,
expelling Euery vnwhole some superfluity of the Same, Keeping it whol-
some, and strengthens admirably.
It cures the Very PLAGVE, and other PESTILENTIAL DISEASES.
It is good against all Biteings of VENEMOVS CREATVRES Especielly
of Scorpions and Madd Doggs, and other sorts of Beasts of both Land or
water, Taken at the Mouth and apply'd to the wound on the out side.
It preserues from Poisons, Taken before or when thereis suspition, and Es-
pecially after the Poison is discovered, In Which Case the Person must
not omitt the takeing said Treacle inwardly often.
It helps very much those that from, an Inward, and vnKnowne Desease,
Consumes away as if they were poisoned.
It is a singular Remedy against all Agues preventing, the Rigour of the
Fitt, Takeing this Treakle 3 or 4 times before the .... begins.
It cures the Quartane Ague, but not in the beginning, the matter, and,
Cause being Raw.
It preserues from Pestilent and Malignent Agues, and cures them.
It expells the wind from the Stomack, it is good against the Paine in the En-
trailes griping of the Gutts, Paine in the sides, occasioned from Vlcers
and thestone, it cures the Dropsie, and the Pthisich, in the beginning
the Fitts taken.
It strengthens the Eye sight, is excellent good for All Internal Diseases
of the head, Falling sickness, Apoplexy, Palsey, stops the Flux, and
Rheumes prouokeing Sleep.







214
It is good against the paines in the Breast, Coughes and Colds.
It conforts the Heart, preventing the burning, and trembling there of.
It cures all indispositions of the Stomach, As extreame hunger, or Loaths-
omeness, and strengthens the Vitall Parts.
It Kills All sorts of Vermin, or worms, expells them out of the Body, and
hinders their ingendring.
It cures the Leprosie vsed often by the Patient.
It provokes womens Termes, and the Stopped Flux of the Piles, or Emo-
roides, and what is wonderful! Stops the too! mach running of the
same, Comforting Nature, weakned by both indispositions.
It provokes the after Birth, and it helps to bring forth Dead Children haue-
ing many other vertues, that for brevity dont mention, being a Reall
and rare Medicine, well known to all agreeing with all Persons from, 7.
years and vpwards, at any time taken.

THE DOSE.

To the young, and those of strong Complexions, 2 or 3 Scruples,
Alone, in wine, Aqua Mulsa, or other liquor.
To Aged People One dram, and the same Quantity for Poisons, or the
Ague.
But as a Preseruatiue onely, but one scruple, Haveing allways a Reguard
to the Constitution of the Patient.

THERIACA
ANDROMACHI
SENIORIS
Divinum Inventum.

LA THERIACA adunque trà l'altre sue prerogatiue hà virtùdi pre-
seruare gl'huomini dalla Peste, e da ogn'altro male Contagioso con-
seruandosi sani, & alegri.
Gioua alle passioni dell'animo  ,  rimouendo la Malinconia , consu-
maudo gl'humori putridi del corpo , discacciando ogni inutile super-
fluità, con mantenerlo sano, fortifica mirabilmente.
Cura l'istessa Peste, e gl'altri mali contagiosi, però è ottimo preseruatiue , e
curatiuodi quella, e di simili
Vale alle morsicature di tutti gli animali velenosi, & in particolare degil
Scorpioni, e del Can rabbioso, e degl'altri animali, tanto di Terra, che di
Mare, pigliate per becca, & applicata di suora sopra dette morsicature.
Preserua da i Veleni, presa auanti quando si hà sospetto, e si cura quando sos-
sero stati diuorati, nel qual caso deue cercare l'infermodi vomitare, reite-
rando, più volte il pigliar per bocca della sopradetta Theriaca.
Gioua sommamente à quelli, cheda causa interna, & occulta si vanno con-
sumando, come se fossero auuellenati.
E remedio singolare à tutte le febri leuandone il tremore, rigore, ò freddo;
che durano longamente, pigliandone treò quatro volte auanti l'accesso.
Sana ancola Quartana data nello stato vniuersale del male, e non nel prin-
cipio, essendo la materia cruda.
Preserua dalle febri, Pestilenti, e maligne, e la cura.
Risolue la ventosita dello stomaco Gioua alli dolori delle viscere, e delle re-
ni cagionati da Vlcere, ò dalla Pietra.
Guarisce l'Idropisia, e la Tisica nel principio del male.
Toglie dal petto la Marcia, e ferma gli sputi del sangue, tolta spesso per boc-
ca da gl'Infermi.

....menta la vist...Si conviene a tutti si mali in....  apo, come a...
al caducho, Appoplesia, paralisia fermando ..... Catarri con ....
....citare il sonno.
...serisce eccellentemente alle passioni del petto, alle tosle, & a i catarri.
conforta mirabilmente il cuore, togliendone la palpitatione.
a tutte l'indispositioni di stomacho, come la troppa same, innapetenza,
nausea cacciandone la collera, e la puttrefazione, aiutando la concozione,
con riscaldare, e fortificare le parti vitali.
Ammazza tutte le sorte de vermi, cacciandoli suora del corpo, e n'impedisce
la generatione.
Cura la Lebra vsata spesso da pazienti.
Prouoca i Mestrui alle Donne, & il sopresso flusso dell'Emoroide. E que lo,
ch'è di Marauiglia, restringe egualmente i souerchi flussi Emoroidali, che
Mestrui, confortando la natura debilitata da ambedue indispositioni, che
rebusta abbraccia il medicamento.
Prouoca le secondine, retenute, e manda fuori del Corpo delle Donne le
Creature morte.
Hà molte altre virtù, che per breuita si tralasciano, eslendo medicamento
reale, Canonico, e notissimo à tutto il Mondo.
Conferisce a tutte l'età da sette anni sopra tutte le complessioni, e si dà secu-
ramente in ogni tempo.

LA DOSE SARA'.

ALli giouani, è quelli di virile eta al peso due o tre scropoli sola, ò con
vino, o con aqua mussa, ò altro liquore.
Alli vecchi 1. dráma, & il medesimo peso si darà ne Veleni, nella Peste, e per
preseruatiuo vno scropolo, hauedo sepre riguardo alla qualita della persona.
UENETIA, M. DCCVII.
Presso Domenico Milocho.
Con Licenza de' Superiori.






Picture of Angels with text in Latin

THERIACA. FIN. ALLA. SPECIARIA DEL. PARADISO. IN RIALTO

THIS antidote is compoSed in VENICE with all
dilligence by ANTHONY RAFFAELLI
Apothecary at the Signe of il PARADISO
at RIV ALTO!  upon the Wine banck in the
prefence of the most Illuftrious MAGISTRA-
TE of the OLD IVSTICE, and the Excellent
COLLEDGE of Doctors, Apothecarys and
other Deputys for the fame, the Virtues of which
videlicet.

Illustration of a lion with wings

This having been Counterfeit
is the Occafion of this our neW Stan
for the Truth of which vvee annex o
Seal in Margent.

This TREACLE amongft all the other prerogatus hat Virtue
of preferueing from the Plague, and from all other Contagions,
Keeping the Body Chearful and in Health.
It is good againft the beatings of the heart, or Ear Akeing remo-
ving thenee Melancholy, Confumeing the putrified humors of the Body,
expelling Every unwholefore fuperfluity of the Same, Keeping it whol-
fome, and ftrengthens admirably.
It cures the Very PLAGVE, and other PESTILENTIAL DISEASES.
It is good againt all Biteings of VENEMOVS CREATVRES Efpecielly
of Scorpions and Madd Doggs, and other forts of Beafts of both Land or
water, Taken at the Mouth and apply'd to the wound on the outfide.
It pererues from Poifons, Taken before or when thereis fulption, end Ef
specially after the Poifon is difcovered, In which Fafe the Perfon muft
not omitt the takeing faid Treacle inwardly often.
It helps very much thofe that from, an Inward, and vnKnowneDefeafe,
Confumes away as if they were poifoned.
It is a fingular Remedy againft all Agues preventing, the Rigour of the
Firt, Takeing this Treakle 3 or 4 times before the fict begins.
It cures the Quartane Ague, but not in the beginning, the matter, and,
caufebeing Raw.
It preferues from Peftilent and Malignent Agues, and cures them.
It expells the wind from the Stomack, it is good againft the Paine in the En-
trailes griping of the Gutts, Paine in the fides, occafioned from Vlcerts
and theftone, it cures the Dropfie, and the Pthifich, in the beginning
the Fitts taken.
It ftrengthens the Eye fight, is excellent good for All Internal Difeafes
of the head, Falling ficknefs, Apoplexy, Palfey, ftops the Flux, and
Rheumes proukeing Sleep.







I hope this will not giue you the
trouble of writing un lesse you shall
bee as well as I wish you, but by the
account you gaue me of your illnesse
yesterday I cant hope for that, & I am
tempted to write this to let you know
docter linerused to giuve Glisters of ?
breath for the distemper you complain
of, if you haue grim with it, I haue
known a glister of butter fresh made
with out any solt doe a great deal
of good & Docter houer I remember gaue
that race to my lord Marlborough
perhaps yo uwill think this very odd in
me to proseril to you that are the flauouring
in these things, but when one is sick one
does ? I think sie well as others & I shall
be glad to send you a remedy book
for body & mind

Inn: the 16th Friday





460
Mrs Cokain
Mrs Cokains Drinke for the Kings Euele

Soke a pottle two quarts of Runing spring water, one handful
of whit Archangell flowers, sweet fennell seeds, &
Annisseeds of each an ounce ^bruised, Sassaparilla and
sassafras, of each a quarter of an ounce, Cut
in smal peeses, of Cloverswort, one Good handfull,
an ounce of Liquorice scraped & sliced thin,
and .......... put all these into a
pipkin and kin and boyle them on a uery soft fier
till a third part bee Consum'd, then strain it
and put to it two ounces of Hony of roses, take
a quarter of a pint at a time, in the morning
fasting, at 5 a Clock in the afternoon, and
when you Goe to bed, for 6: weeks spring &
fall, at least a Chill May take less.

The cloverswort & Arckangel flowrs must be
Gatherd in their season and kept dry.

Mrs Burwood
To Fricasey Red Herrings

Skin & bone 6: Red herrings, steep them in ale
then set them ouer a soft fier to bee sCalding hot
but not boyle, for 2 hours, then fry them in buter
then power the buter from them, & shake them
with fresh buter and Mustard, & serue them with
Balls Made of fresh fish, Crumbs of white bread,
sweet herbs, spice & buter, Rol'd up with flower.
& fry'd, e fresh fish Must be boyld.

217
461
For a speck in the Eye or Rheum.

Mrs Houlder

Take white archangell the tops, Green and
Flower and all, stampe and strain it, and take
too spoonfulls of the juice in a morning all the
while it lasts in flower, spring and fall, you
Must bleed, Vomit, and purge first.

The famous neck plaister for Rhum
in the Eyes

Aunt Harrison
L. Chichester

Take of Gum shiga tragacanth halfe an ounce
Maslik and olibanum, of Each 3 drams, of bole
a dram and halfe, of Mirtle seeds, spilliard, or
flea seed, and pomgranate bud flowers, of
each one dram, burgundy pitch, halfe a pound,
Gum GCaranna strain'd, eight drams & Venice
Turpintine halfe an ounce;

Make it up after this manner.

My Aunt
Harrisson
Let your gum tragacanth, maslick, olibanum,
bole, Mirtle seeds, flea seeds, & pomgranat
flowers, all bee beaten to a fine powder, and first
let your Caranna Gum, and Burgundy pitch
bee Melted together, ouer the fier, then put in
all your powder, being Mixed together , incorporat
them well with your Gumms, and last of all, put
in your Turpintine, Mingle all well, and Make
it up in Roles.

To make fruit puffs

Mrs Scarborough
Take a pound and halfe of pulpe of aney fruit
strain'd Very fine, and a pound of sugar beaten &
searced, beat it with white of Egg till tis stiffe & white
then drop it on Glass, & dry it in a stoue





462
Gratia Dei

Within 14 days after Midsummer day take
Veruain, Pimpernell, and bettany, of each
one handfull, stamp and strain them, then
boil the juice with 3 quarts of whit wine
till a quart bee wasted, strain it through
a linen Cloth, and set it on the fier again,
put into it a pound of Rossin finly beaten,
4 ounces of Virgins Wax, minced smale, and
one ounce of Mastik in fine powder, boyl
these together in the wine till they bee
melted and dissolu'd, stiring it well all
the while, take it of the fier and put in
one pound of Venis Turpentine, stiring
it well til it bee Could, then the salue wil
float aboue the wine, take itt off and
worke it well with your hands and make
it up into Roules.

It is Good for all ould & new soars, it Cleareth
and healeth more in a week then any other
doth in a month, it forceth all deas flesh,
and keepeth a Csoar allways Clean, tis good
for the brawne of the sineus howsoeuer
they bee Cut or hurt, it is good for botches
and boyles, it draweth out a thorne, it is
good for Venamous biteing if Layd on in
time, & for prickings it Ripeneth imposthums
it Cureth the Canker, fistula or fellon,
and draweth out the Core, if it bee first
kiled with the white of and egg & daysey roots

218
463
The Moal Powder for Conuoltions

L. Hatton Take the moles aliue in March, (that beeing
the only time to Make it,) Cutt the throats
of them and let them bleed into a pewter dish
when it has dun bleeding Rip it down the
Belley, and take out the Lungs and Guts,
put them to the blood, and set them all
into an ouen after bread, and take Care the
ouen bee not so hot to parch them, when
they are drye on one side, turne them and
Scrape up the bloud, and turne that likewise,
So keep turning till they are drye enough
to powder, then keep them up Cloase in a
boxe, well paperd, and as you haue occasion
to Vse it beat and searce it.

This powder Must bee giuen too or three
days before and after the new and full of
the Moon, or when you find a fit Comeing,
or betwixt fits if they Come often, as
Much as will lye upon a Mill'd groat to a
Child, or a six pence for a biger person, in
a spoon full or too of Rew or black Cherrey
water.

a Carrot puding

Mrs. Mountney.

Too large Carrots grated, a penney Loaf
Grated, 2eggs beat, sugar and Nutmeg to
your tast, and likewise salt, Mix it well
and stir in a pound of Melted butter,
and so bake it halfe on hour.






464

Orrange Marmalad.

Cousin ffanshaw
Dr Ratlifs biter drinke that hee Gave mee for the Scorbutik pain in My knees, takeing Stira picara one day first.==

Take 12: Orranges, Grate off a little of the
Rhind, then quarter them and take out the
Meat, lay yr peels in Water too or three
days to steep shifting the water twice
a day; pick away all the skins and seeds
from your Meat, and strew a little sugar
ouer them to preserue the tast while yr
peels are steeping, then boyle yr peels
uery tender, and scrape out the soft whit
within them with a knife, drye them well
in a Cloth, and beat them in a Mortar or
slice them Very thin, which yo like best
but leaue out 6: of the quarters or they
will bee too much for the pulpe, then
put the Meat to them and Mix them
well with the Whol Weight in sugar,
boyl them slowly, puting in at the
later end juice of Leaman or orrange
to your tast.

Snayle Watter

Take 2 handfulls of unsett Hyssop, 2 handfulls of Harts
Toung, 50 Snayle washed & wiped dry with a cloth, a qr
of an ounce of yellow Sanders, chop all these together & put
them into a cold Still with 2 qarts of new milk Let
them Steep all night Still them the next morning & Let
it drop upon Sugar Cand: Write by me
M Grantham
April e 29 1909

219
465

Dr Ratclifs biter drinke that hee Haue mee
for the Scorbutic pain in my knees, takeing
three preara one day first

Take tops of Cerbrey, & Roman wormwood halfe an ounce; Gentian
root one ounce and halfe Sliced; Coriander Seed; the lesser
Cardamums, of each one dram beat, infuse there in halfe
a pint of boiling Water, Then strain it out it Must bee
halfe a pint when Strain'd, then add to it Nephretick
Water, 6: ounces; Compound Pioney Water 2: ounces:
take 4: 5: or 6: ounces Spoonfulls euery Morning and
3 Spoonfulls euerey eeuening

Mrs Hardings backed Puden

Slice a penney loaf and power upon it a quart
of Milk if Countrey Measur, 3 pints if London,
Scalding hot; let it stand a little to Swell the bread,
then break it Well with a spoon, and while it is
Warme put into it a pound of beef suet very
fine thred, and 6: eggs Well beat a little salt
Nutmeg, & Sugar, to your tast; backe it either in
puf past or otherways as you please.

Balle Bread

to too pound of flower as much Salt as will ly
vpon a halfe Crown, 2 great spoonfull of
thik yest Wet it fit to Make up with Warm
Milk, throw it upon a dresser, or in the bowl
about 30 times then make it up.







466

A whit fricasey

Mrs Harrison Cut your Meat in peeses and lay it in Water an hour,
then fry it in buter till tis a pale brown, then Couer
it with Cream and put in, onion herbs and spice
to your tast, Stew it till the Cream thickens,
then pick out your spice and herbs and put in a
spoonfull or too of Whit Wine and as Much Graue
a bit of buter, and a Yolk or too of an Egg
according to your quantetey of Meat, shake
it quick ouer a Very hot fier & dish it up.

To Make Liuer Pudens.

Aunt Harrison Take the Guts of a young hogg, wash them uery
Clean and lay them too or three days in Water
take the liuer of the same hogg and boil it
till it will Grate very fine, take to it allmoast
the weight of beef suet shred uery fine season
it with salt, Cloues, Mace, nutmeg & sugar
to your tast all fine beaten, then put in
too pound of Currants, a pint of Good Cream,
a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a penne
loaf grated, and 3 eggs beaten & strained, mix
it well together to such a thickness as Will
fill the Gutts, prick them & put them into
boyling Water for halfe a quarter of an
hour, then take them up and lay them upon
straw to Cool, take Care you dont tie them
too hard nor too slack for fear they burst

220
467

A Whit pot

A Harrison Take 3 pints of Cream, whol Sinamon a little
nutmeg Sliced, and Scald it, haue a penney loaf
Sliced Very thin, and the Marrow of too bones Slice
the Marrow and lay that on the bottum of e dish
upon the Marrow lay the bread, then Raisins of e
Sun ston'd upon the bread, then Marrow again
as before, to the 3 pints of Scalded Cream put
9 yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose Water,
Sweeten the Cream to your tast; with a little Salt,
So fill up your dish With it, backe it and when
it Coms out of the Ouen Searce a Very little
fine Sugar upon it

Harts Horn flumerey

A Harrisson
To one pound of Harts Horn put 7: pints of Water
boyl it fast till it Comes to halfe the quantetey
let it stand till tis Could, then blanch and beat
halfe a pound of sweet Almonds, uery fine with
Orrang flower Water to keep them white, then
Melt your Ielley and and stir it in, Sweeten it to
your tast and put in Leaman peel if you like
it ,Strain it through a thin Cloth or fine Seiue,
and Set it to Ielley eat it with Cream or
leaman Cream.

You may doo the Same with Calfes foot broth.







468

To Make Sasages

Take too pound of beef Suet, and one pound of Veale or
poark, Shred them Very Smal, then take a good
handfull of Sage prettey Smal Shred, Mix it
amongst the Meat with a little peper Salt and
Nutmeg, Make them up with Egg when you
use them, fry them with Good beef Suet.

To Cure a Cancer

Mrs Talbot Take e Corns of e fore Leggs of a Stone horse or
a Gellding, wash m in white wine then dry
m in e Ouen, when finely powdered take
one good thimble full of that & halfe e
quantity of Mace in two spoonfulls of
Sack e first or last thing Morning & Night
purge gently once in io days or a fort-
night & bleed a Small quantity euery six
weeks. The Iuce of Green Elder Leaues 2 spoon-
fulls or that quantity of Syrrope made
of those Leaues is thought a uery proper
purge for that Cancerous humer,

Abstain from Salt & Sower things as
much as possible


221
469

for A Cansorous Humer

Take the corns of a Stone horse Legs, wash
them in warm water; dry them in a cloth
and then wash them in whit wine, when
dry, put them into A pot that couers
uery close, then put them into the ouen
that must be uery little warm, and put
it in ofen and when they are uery dry,
beat and sarch them, then take twenty
Grains att a time, in any drink, in a Spoone,
washing it down, with some of e same that
take it in e morning fasting and fast
an hour after it, if uery ill doe the same
att night goeing to bed

takeing this and being purged once a
week or fortnight, with mercureuos dullcus
cured what was thought, A canser in my
mouth,

Mrs Barron





472
P Betty Hill
Cowslip wine

10 Gallons of watter to 10pd of powder suger boyle it an hour
and scum it, when as cold as new milk put to it a pint
of yeast, sett it to work 12 hours, then put into your Vessell
a strike & half of Cowslip peeps, and pour the liquor
upon them, let the vent stand open three days, then stop
it Close up, & lett it be a month or five weeks before you
bottle it,
if you like lemon in it,you may put the Juice of eight
lemons, & half the peel parcd thin, into the vessell with
the peeps of the flower, & pour your liquor to it,







482

Rx Rad. Zedoar. pulv.
Dram jss Chalyb. Limat pulv.
Dram j. sal. Armon. dejuirat
... Gum. Ammon. solut. &
col..t. Dram j. Pil stomach. Dramss.
Eli... Prop. q. s. M. F. Pil
Med. Sap. iij: vel iiij: mane
& vespei quotidie
Jul. 1. 1708 TW
Dr Werts direction for Nan Gale
to take over 3: or 4: at a time in one
Spoonfull of the Linseed oyle as
for 3 weeks and Repeat it upon
Occasion


227
483

The Recipe belonging to it.

Take Scabious water and Carduos water, of each 1 ounce
and halfe Syrop of dry'd Roses one ounce, Coral and
pearle Prepar'd, of each halfe a Scruple, Beasor Ston
3 grains, Confectio de Hiacintio halfe a draman Mix
all these in Rilif which giue twice a day.

Anoint the Groin and arme Pits frequently
with oyle of Scorpions of Mathiolus.
Thus far Dr Riuercus.

Herb Juices for the Scorbut.

La: Lee. Take brooklime, water Cresses, Dandelions Ground
Ivey, Femeterey, and scurue Grass, of each an
equal quantetey, pound them in a Ston Morter
and Strain out the Juice, put halfe as Much
juice of Orrange as the Juice of the herbs, take
8 or 10 Spoonfull in the Morning fasting and
as Much between diner and Super, it must bee
beat fresh euery time.

A Syrop for a Cough.

Bishop of
Salsberrey .Take 6 handfulls of Gill, and as Much of penne Royall
boyl them Gentley in 2 quarts of Water till it Comes to
one, then Strain it and put to it too pounds of Lisbon
Sugar, or brown Sugar Candey, boyl it to a Syrop &
Scum it well.







482

Taken of
Taken out of Dr Riueroux his book.

To Stop vomiting in a Malignant feaver.

One Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, with a Spoonfull
of Juice of Leamans.

For the Pfisik.

Put one ounce of oximell of Squille to too
ounce of Smal Synamon Water, Shake the
bottle euery time you Vse it, and take one
Spoonfull in the Morning and one in e
Eeuening or at aney time that you are
taken ill if Very ill you May take too.

For a bruise.

Take Honey Comes with the Honey in them
boyl them in Wine to the Consistencey of an
Oyntment, Spred it upon Sheep skin and so
aply it to the bruise.

For a blowdey Flux & Smal pox.
to a Child fiue years ould.

Take Red Rose leaves one pugil, red Sanders
halfe an ounce, Liquoris Serap & whol reasons
of Each one ounce, boyld in the broth of a
Weathers head; then in Nine ounces of the
Strain'd Liquor dissolve 3. ounces of Confectio
de Hiacinto, Conserve of Roses forced through
a Seiue halfe an ounce and one Egg:
Mak all into a Clyster and give frequantly,
while there is ocasion.

227
483
The Recipe belonging to it

Take scabious water and Carduos water of each 1 ounce
and halfe syrop of dry'd Roses one ounce, Coral and
pearle Prepar'd of each halfe a scruple, Beasor ston
3 grains, Confectio de Hiacintio halfe a dramme Mix
all these in Iulif which giue twice a day

Anoint the Groin and arme Pits frequently
with Oyle of scorpions of Mathiolus.

Thus far Dr Riuercus

La: Lee.  Take brook lime, water Cresses, Dandelions, Ground
Ivey, Femeterey and scurue Grass, of each an
equal quantetey, pound them in a ston Morter
and strain out the Iuce, put halfe as much
juice of Orrange as the Iuice of herbs, take
8 or 10 spoonfull in the Morning fasting and
as Much between diner and super, it Must bee
beat fresh euery time.

A Syrop for a Cough

Bishop of  Take 6 handfulls of Gill, and as Much of penne Royall
Salisberrey. boyle them Gentley in 2 quarts of water till it Comes to
one, then Strain it and put to it too pounds of Lisbon
sugar, or brown sugar Candey, boyl it to a syrop &
scum it well.







484

lady Ann Courtnay For the Palsie,

Take of the roots of Gallingal, Angellica, Elicampane, each halfe
a dram. of mace, & saffron each a dram. Gascoins powder with
Bezor one dram and a half. mix all these finely powdered, then
divide them into 20 papers, wherof you may take one in a Glass
of any wine, 2 or 3 times a day if you think fitt.

228
485





486

Mrs Verney For past for tarts, the quantetey is halfe a
pound of buter to a Quart of flower.

L. Lansborough. For Vineger the quantetey is 3: pound of Malliga
reasens to a Gallon of Water,

For a Single tart. a quart of Goosberreys
6: ounces of Suger, a little less then a quarter
of pd of buter, and a little less then a quarter
of a pound of buter flower.

Weight for Weight for Richer puft past
Rould in Cold.

an hour & 3 qrs will Roast a Rump of beef
of about   pound Weight.

Cut off the knucle, & flaps of a Shoulder
of Veal, and an hour and halfe will roast it.

229
487





488

230
489
A Bill of ffare, to direct
a young House = Keeper for setting
forth a Table.

Boyld = meates.
Beefe.
Red = deere.
Ffollow = deere.
Ffawnes.
Rowbuckes.
Kiddes.
Bacon.
Mutton.
Veale.
Porke.
Lamb.
Neates tonges.
Vdders.
Neates ffeete
Bullockes Head.
Trypes.
Calues = ffeete.
Calues = Head.
Appurtenants of
Mutton
Veale &
Lamb.
Sheepes head & ffeet.
Hares.
Rabbetts.
Duckes.
Pigeons.
Geese.
Hennes.
Chickes.
Capons.
Turkes.





490.

Roas't = meates.

Follow = deere.
cutt in joyntes
like mutton.
Row = bucke.
Ffawnes
Chines of Beefe
of Mutton
of veale
of Borke.
of Bacon.
Neates = tongues
A Hogges = head.
A Hoges = Hastlett
Cowes udders.
Pigg.
Kidd.
Rabbetts.
Hares.
Hennes.
Capons.
Turkes.
Chickens.
Geese.
Duckes.
Howles of all sortes.
Pigeons.
Luales.
Partridges.
Phesants.
All small birdes
Swann.


491.
Setew'd = meates

Beefe.
Mutton.
Veale.
Lambe.
Lorbe.
Ox Cheekes.
Neates ffeet.
Tripes.
Calves head.
Calves ffeete.
Sheepes head & ffeete.
Venison.
Rabbitts.
Duckes.
Beefe pallets







492
Fryed = meates.
The hinchpinn of
a Deere and
Humbles.
Beefe = collopps
Scotch collopps
of veale or
of Porke.
Ffricadyes of
Chickens
Pigeons &
Rabbets.
Mutton stakes.
Collops & egges.
Clarey & egges
Bacon ffroyre
Amletts
Calves ffeet
Sheepes ffeet.
Hogges inwards
Appurtenants of veale
Pan = puffes
Pan Cakes
Ffritters.



493.

Soused meates.
Collar'd Beefe.
Pigg
Turkey
Neates ffeet
Brawn.
Souse.
Trypes.
Adobadoed Porke.





494

Baked= meates.

Venison.
Beefe.
Porke.
Veale.
Lamb.
Mutton.
Hare.
Goose.
Minc't Pyes
Humble Pyes
Calues feet. pyes
Neates tongue pyes
Potato Pyes
Artechoake Pyes
A Trotter Pye
Petit pastyes
A Turke Pye
Goose gibbett Pye
Swan pye
Peacocke pye
Ducke pye.


233
495

Fish.

Stew'd Carpes.  Boyled Pikes
Stewed oysters.    Tench
Butterd Cray-ffish.   Mullett
Shrimpes.   Pickled scollopps.
Crabbes.   Pickled Oysters.
Lobsters
Boyld Ling
Boyld Codd
fflownders
Oysters
Whiteing
A loddes head
Salmon.
Cockles
Marrionetted Soales
Seabreames
Boyled Pearch
ffryd oysters.
Smelts
Soales.
Whiteings.
fflownders.
Place.
Stewed Turbat
Thornbacke
ffryd Chine of salmon
Soused Troutes.
Sturgeon
Lobsters
Anchoves
Caviare
Botargo
Souced salmon
Eales.
Broyled Eeles
Eele Pye
Chard Pye
Lampre Pye
Salmon Pye
Oyster pye
Troute pye
Boyled sprattes
Mackarell
Pilchards
Herring Pye
Red herring.







496

Puddings, Cakes, Pulse.
and Bread.

Oatemeale Puding   Rice milke
Dumplings                 Panada
Quakeing Pudding  Egg caudell
A Calues foote}         Oatemeale Caudell
A Peth.}                       Milk pottage.
Biskett.}                      Water grewell.
A Baked.}                    Sugar soppes.
A Bagg.}                       Oatemeale pottage
A plaine}                     Strong broash
Black} Puddings       Chicken broath
White}                         Gelly of veale, or
Marrow}                         Calues ffeet
Cowslip.}                     Butter'd Egges
Liuer}                           Milk=papp
Rice}                             Water papp.
Hasty}                           Sack possetts
Sassages without skins         Gelley of Izeinglasse
Porke sassages with skins               of Hartes horn
fforc'd meate
Greene}
Apple  } Tanseys
fflommery.
Boyled Egges.
Poached Egges
Tartes of all sortes
Plumme Cakes of all sorte
Plaine Cakes of all sortes
Wigges
Bunnes
Shrouesburg Cakes.
Biskates
Macaroons
March=panes
Pan=de=lo
Cheese-cakes.
Houshould bread
Wheate bread
Manchett
Cheate bread
french bread
Rye bread
Mislen bread
ffurmety
Butterd Rice
Wheate
Rice pottage
Pease pottage


234
497

Cold meates & salletts
and Rootes.

Gummons of Bacon. A spanish dish of a
Potted venison.                 Hogges head.
Collard beefe
Sparribb.
Hung beefe.
Neate tonges
Bollogna sassages
Anchoves
Caviare
Botargo
Oliues
Capers
Oyle
Eldervinager.
Oranges,
Lemmons,
Almonds.
Currants.
Hard Egges.
Broome budds.
Sampyre.
All green salle hearbes.
Raddish codds.
Horse Raddish.
Cowcumbers.
Burrage & buglosse fflowers
Couslip flowers.
Clouegilliflowers.
Purslain
Radishes
Butterd Parsnips.
Turnops.
Carretts.
Cabbages
Savvy Cole
Colley fflowers
Artechoakes
Potatoes
Pease
Ffrench beanes
Skerretts
Cardus
The great thistle
Beanes
Sparragus
Colewortes
Spinage







498.

Butter, cheese, Creames.                   Fresh |     Chedder | Plaine | Almond | Wild curdes | All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

                  Salt.
                 Almond |      butter
                 Sugred

              Chefheire
               Parmasan
              Angeletts
           Thick creame
          Thinne creame |      Cheese
              Two meale
              New milke
             Slip coate
                   Sage

                Clouted |      Creame

                Codling |      Creame

                ffruite
                  Whipt
                Cabbage |      Creame
                Junkett

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


                  Chedder |      Plaine | Almond | Wild curdes | All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

              Chefheire
               Parmasan
              Angeletts
           Thick creame
          Thinne creame |      Cheese
              Two meale
              New milke
             Slip coate
                   Sage

                Clouted |      Creame

                Codling |      Creame

                ffruite
                  Whipt
                Cabbage |      Creame
                Junkett

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


                   Plaine |      Almond | Wild curdes | All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

                Clouted |      Creame

                Codling |      Creame

                ffruite
                  Whipt
                Cabbage |      Creame
                Junkett

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


  Sullabubs Custards ffresh cheese                  Almond | Wild curdes | All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

                Codling |      Creame

                ffruite
                  Whipt
                Cabbage |      Creame
                Junkett

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


              Wild curdes | All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |  |

                ffruite
                  Whipt
                Cabbage |      Creame
                Junkett

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


    235 499

Sweete meates ffruites Drinkes.   All preserued ffruites | Canary wine | Jelleyes  of all fruites | Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | ----------- | ----- |  |  |  |  |  |

                  wett. |    Clarrett
       Marmalade of all |       white
                ffrutes |    Rasberry | wine.


  All fruted dryed with |       Meade
                 sugar. |    Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |       Perry
             out sugar. |     Cowship | wine.


                  Small |      nutts.
                  Chest


  Jelleyes  of all fruites |   Cherry | Clearecakes | Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
------------------------ | -------- | ----- |  |  |  |


   All fruted dryed with |    Meade
                  sugar. | Lemonada
 All ffruites dryed with |    Perry
              out sugar. |  Cowship | wine.


                   Small |   nutts.
                   Chest


              Clearecakes |    Syder | Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
----------------------- | -------- | ----- |  |

  All fruted dryed with |    Meade
                 sugar. | Lemonada
All ffruites dryed with |    Perry
             out sugar. |  Cowship | wine.


                  Small |   nutts.
                  Chest


  Raw ffruites. | Curran | Wall
------------- | ------ |


        Small | nutts.
        Chest


  Grapes. Peaches. Peares. Nectarins. Apricockes. Apples. Plumes. Raspryes. Strawberryes. Gooseberryes. Mulberryes. Medlers Sarvices Philberds  Wall
----- | ------

Small | nutts.
Chest


  ffigges. Cherryes. Currans.





500

236
501
A meickstuer of Seuerall dishes
out of which a yong houskiper may make Choys of what is
Sutable to their fortun and Estat:: most of thes things is proper
for littell dishes betuin the great ones unplan on all mons the great ones,

A dish of butter plan or allmons
Chees of all sorts
Biskets of all sorts
Cakes of all sorts
pann pofe
Brues
all sorts of Stud frutte
all ways of dresing Eggs
hasty puding
All sorts of backed pudings
All sorts of boyled
All sorts of hoggs pudings
All sorts of fride pudings
All sorts of Soused metts
risse milke
Barle milke
milke poredge
furmety
peese poredg
all sorts of watter gruell
all sorts of brothes
all sorts of Earbe poredg
all sortes of Cadells
all sorts of Jelles
all sorts of Cremes
all sorts of tannseys
Claney and Eggs
All sorts of possetts
peese poredge
Collope and Egs
All sorts of Custards
All sorts of Siilobbes







502

Otte Cakes
friiing Ottecakes
All All sorts of CheeseCakes
All sorts of pann Cakes
All sorts of fritters
witte potts
buttered weette
A frase
All Inwards of besstes
All tarts
parsnepis
Sauey Colle
Cottey flowers
Cabdeg
Spinedge
Speareygus Espaireigos
Ieanetts
Heartychokes
Colle and backon
beenns and backon
peese
beenns
french beenes
Salletts of all sorts
turnipps
Caretts
All sorts of frutte
All sorts of Sweet mettes
Jelley of flesh
frickeses
An amlett
Chesnuts
wall nuts

237
503

Sweettmett
Stud peares
Waffers of all sorts
all frut both plane and Canded raw
potates
a stud Hogghed in the spaines fashon
presed and Could
Sasedgees
Colered Beefe
Chocalaty
Andothos
Oliues
Capers
Anchoues
Cauearey
pickelled beans
pickelled Coucombrs
pickelled Oysters
pickelled scolops
drid backon
dride beefe
drid tongs
Crabs}
Lobster} both butered on Littell dishes
Crafish}
shrimpes} the Same







504

238
505
Drinkes proper to be mayd
in the Cuntrey

Mead
Coueslipe wine
Cherey wine
Resberry Wine
Curen wine
Gousberys wine
Lemonatha
Sinnomon Wine
teae
Resen wine
perey
Small Ale
all sorts of Wine





512

|A||
|--------|-----|
|An Oyntment for an Ache. |Page. 64.|
|A present Remedy for an old Ache. |p. 65.|
|The Spiritt of Ambar Gris. |p.189.|
|To make the water calld Aqua Mirabilis.|p. 191.|
|To preserue Apricocks wett or dry. |p. 379.|
|How to dry Apricocks.|p. 383.|
|To make Alman Milke. |p 332.|
|To make Almond Milke |p 2156.|

241

A







B.

A Glister for the Bloody Fluxe.   Page. 3.
A Drinke to be taken in the Spring to purge e Blood. p. 4.
A Caudell for the Bloody Fluxe.  p. 6.
A Drinke admirable against a Cold or Consumption. p. 9.
A Posset for an inward Bruise.  p. 11.
An excellent Receipt for any weakenes in e backe. p. 12.
A Strengthening and cooling Broth.  p. 13.
The King of France his Balsome. p. 63.
An oile for a Bruise in the Eye, or any other}
Bruise proued by me of a woman that had lost her}
Eye by a bruise and recouered it againe} p. 64.
A Poults to breake a sore Brest. p. 64
To breake a sore breast. p. 64.
An Excellent oile to comfort the Braine. p. 65.
An excellent oynment for a Breast with which}
I haue done great Cures.} p. 66.
Balsome Christi.p. 67.
An Oyntment for a burning with Gunpowder or a}
Scalding with Water} p. 68.
A rare Medecine for a Sore Brest. p. 70.
A Receipt for Balme Water. p. 191.
To make paste Beades. p. 193.
To make Beane Pottage. p. 273.
A very good way to collar Beefe. p. 273.
To boile a rumpe of Beefe. p. 277.
To bake a Chine of Beefe. p. 280.
To make a Beefe pye. p. 294.
To make Biskett. p. 295.
An Excellent Receipt to make Biskett Cakes. p. 297.


242
B.

To make a Spanish Biske. page 305.
To make french broth page 319







C

Mrs Gatfords cakes - page: 218
For a Consumption Page 2.
To make Lozenges for a Cold.p. 5.
For a Glister for the Collicke or any other}
paine of the Gutts comming of Cold} p. 6.
An approued Medecine for the Conulsion of fits. p. 6.
A Drinke admirable against a Cold or consumption. p. 9.
For a Canker. p. 9.
A Medecine for the Stomach Collicke. p. 10.
Mr Mathias His Cordiall.p. 135.
A Cordiall to be giuen at the beginning of a}
Suknesse} p. 135.
A good Restoratiue after a long sicknes or to}
preuent a Consumption p. 135.
To make Citterne Water. p. 183.
A Water for the Canker. p. 185.
Cinnamon Water. p. 188.
To make Cherrie Water. p. 190.
Spiritt of Clarie. p.190.
An excellent Receipt to make a Cake. p. 274.
To make fresh Cheese and Creame. p. 277.
To make Cheese Curd Creame. p. 278.
To make milke Creame p. 278.
To make codling Creame. p. 278.
To make Spanish Creame. p. 278.
To boile a Carpe p. 281.
To fricasse a Calues Head. p. 281.
To fricasse a Chicken. p. 282.
To make Cheese Cakes. p. 285.
To make Sugar Cakes. p. 286.
To make a Bambury Cake. p. 286.
Wax Candles p. 215.
to make Angelot Cheese. p. 398.


243

C.

To make a Creame Caudle. Page. 287.
To make Creame Tarts. p. 287.
How to make thinne Cheese. p. 289.
To make Barley Cream. p. 289.
To make Broth of Calues feete. p. 290.
A Receit to make a great Cake without fruite. p. 291.
To pickle Cherries. p. 292.
To dresse a Calues head with oysters. p. 292.
To make Creame. p. 296.
To preserue Cittrons. p. 378.
A Receipt for Cherries in Gelly. p. 379.
To make Cleare Cakes of Currans, Plums, Rasberries}
or Gooseberries.} p. 381.
To dry Cherries. p. 382.
To dry Cherries. p. 385.
To make Cherry, or Currence Wine p. 214.
Syrrup of Sanacle against a}
Consumption} p.375
To make a Creame p. 302.
Another Ibid
AnotherIbid
To make a Cake p. 305.
To make Black Cherry wine. p.217
To make the Queens Cake: Ibid.
To make Lemmon Creame. p. 397.
To dry Cherreys & make}
cherry wine} p. 307.
a receipt for a Cough p. 73
To make the blanched Creame. p. 308
To make Chocolatte p. 332.
To make a Cabbage Creame. p. 310.
To make my L: Good: Creame p. 303
To make pasty Crust. p. 371.
To make a Cake my Sisters}
Newces way} p. 313.
To make Curran Cakes p. 315
My Lady Levinthorpe's receipt to make creame cheese p. 320.
To make Cakes of all fruits. p. 396.







D.

A Drinke for a Bruise Page 2.
A Diett Drinke. p. 7.
Mrs. Coply's Drinke. p. 12.
To make white dices.} p. 301.
To candie those dishes.}
To boyle ducks.  p. 312.



244

D.C

To dress Cocles the best way p. 399.







E

For a Stroke or Bruise in the Eye. p. 68.
A Water for sore Eyes. p. 185.
To sowce Eeles. p. 283.
Dr. Fraysers way to dresse an Eele. p. 304.


245
E.






F.

A Glister for the Bloody Fluxe. Page. 3.
A cooling Broth for one that is in a Feauer. p. 12.
A most admirable Receipt for a Fistula. p. 69.
An Excellent way to make Conserue of any}
Flowers.} p. 384.
To dress Fish p. 339
to pot fruit for tarts p. 399
to keep raw fruit  p.400.

246

F.







G.

For the Greene Sicknesse Page. 1.
To make Gascoigne Powder. p. 135.
To make a Gooseberry Foole. p. 287.
To make gentillisses. p. 315.
To make Gellie of Pipins p. 391.
To make Gellie & manjar blanco p. 322.
To make Gooseberry wine p. 214

247

G.






H

A Medecine for the Head Ache. Page. 10.
To bake a Hare. p. 278.
To fry Hartichocks. p. 282.
To make a Cold Hash. p. 283.
To make a hash in Cabbage. p. 290.
The Hippocras. p. 296.
To make a Hedgogg. p. 303.
To make spanish Hypocris p. 197.
The spirit of Hartshorne p. 21.
To make an Italian dish of hogshead p. 329.
To dresse a Hunsia p. 200


248

H







I

A Medecine for the Yellow Jaundies Page. 4.
A Medecine for the Jaundies that by Experience}
I haue found most excellent} p. 5
An approued Medecine for the Itch & to coole the Liuer p. 10.
A very good way to make Ielley. p. 275.
The best way of making Iumballs. p. 291.
To make Ielley of Apple Johns to lay upon Oranges. p. 385.


249

I







K.


250

K.

250r


K.







L.
To make an Excellent opening and purging} Page. 3
drink for the Liuer} Page. 3
To fry a Loine make butterd Loaues which is}
an excellent pudding as any is} p. 284
To make Lemmon Nauthe the best way. p. 299
To make any kind of Lozenges with Spiritts. p. 384.
To fry Lamb stones or sweet breads p. 310
To stew a Lambshead. p. 316
To make paõ de lo p. 326
To make Lemondade p. 331
For putryfred Lungsp.207


251

L.






M.

For Melancholy  Page. 1.
An Excellent Medecine for any sore Mouth or throat. p. 68.
To hash a shoulder of Mutton. p. 274.
To make Mince pyes of Neats tongues. p. 280.
To boile Mutton Necke or breast. p. 281.
To make Mackeroones. p. 380.
To make Marchpane Cakes. p. 380.
To make red Marmalade of Quinces with Gelley}
betwixt} p. 385.
To make white Marmalade p. 388.
To make Meade p. 393.
To make my Lady Barkley's meadep. 394.
Milk water p. 203
To Make Manjur Blanco p. ... 341.
to Drye Musherooms for Sauce p. 340



252

M.





N.

To make Nectarella. p. 275
To make a Neats Tongue pye cutt in Slices. p. 280.
To dry Neats Tongues. p. 294.



253

N






O.

The Flowre of oyntments p. 63.
To stew Oysters. p. 284.
To make Orange Biskett. p. 295.
To preserue Oranges. p. 377.
To make Orange Marmalade e best way. p. 378.
To make Marmalade of Oranges. p. 382.
To make past of Oranges or Lemmons p.387.
To make an oyle called e Queens oyle to}
make the hayre grow} p. 74.
To make a Spanish Olla p. 333.



254

O.





P.

Dr. Burges his Directions in time of Plague Page. 5.
Opening Pills p. 9.
A Purge for a Child. p. 13.
The Great Palsie Water also for the Apoplexie. p. 183.
Ingredients for perfumes and make of Beades. p. 193.
To make a Pye. p. 273.
To make Rice Pan-Cakes. p. 276.
To Fricasse Pigeons. p. 282.
Mr. Cardonnells Receipt to sowce a pigge or Turkie p. 283.
To make a Quaking pudding. p. 284.
To make fine Pan Cakes. p. 285.
To make a dainty Calues foote pudding. p. 289.
To make a fried pudding. p. 290.
To make Sir Kenelme Digby's Pudding. p. 293.
To make Hogs Liuer Puddings.  p. 295.
To stew Pippins. p. 297.
To make a Blood pudding. p. 297.
For the breeding of Pheasants. p. 298.
To stew Pairs. p. 299.
To make Hogs pudding white. p. 299.
To make Hogs pudding blacke. p. 299.
To make Ielly of Pippins. p. 379.
How to dry Plums the Lady Mandeuills way. p. 386.
To dry more Plums in the same Syrrope. p. 387.
A pudding. p. 306.
My Lady Portlands pudding. p. 307.
To make an almond pudding}
with the pyth of an oxe back} p. ibid
To make a Caule pudding. p.308.


255

P.

To make a Neates tongue pudding. page 309.
To stew Beeres palats ibid
To make a posset. ibid
To make pasty Grist.  p. 311.
To make almond puddings in}
gutts} p. 313.
To make a Puff. p. 314.
Mrs Fanshaws To make a sack Posset p. 320.
To make e red powder good for miscarrying p. 73.
To make French Porrage of a Duck. p. 325.
To make spanish Pastilles to burne p. 195.
To perfume Gloues p. 201.
To make a Compound for a pomo p 202
To Make Puffs; p. 337
To make Puffes p. 216.
a fine powder for linnin p. 199
a course powder for linnin p. 290
To Stew Pippins p 338.
To dry Porke like Spanish Bacon p 338.
To make a baked Oatmeal puding p. 399.
To Pickle Cowcumbers in Slices 340.
For the Palsie a powder 484
To Pickle Cucumbers like Mangoes 343
To Pickle Mellons like Mangoes 343
To Pickle Wallnutts white 343







Q.

Cleare Cakes of Quinces the best way. Page. 381.
To preserue white Quinces Mrs. Holycrofts way. p.382.
How to preserue Quinces redd. p. 384.
My Lady Greyes white Quinces. p. 386.


256
Q.






R.

For a Child that hath the Ricketts. Page. 13.
Another. Ibid.
To make sweete Water of Roses e best way. p. 189.
To perfume Damaske Roses. p. 194.
To make Conserue of Roses e best way. p. 379.
A Medicine for the Ricketts  p.  20.
To Pickel Radeshes  p.  323.


257

R.






S.

To make a Suppository effectually to worke. Page. 1.
An Excellent way to make Suppositors. p. 7.
A most rare Glister for the Spleene. p. 14.
A Medecine for an ache or shrinking of e Sinews. p. 65.
Mr. Stones Searecloth. p. 66.
An oile for the Stomach. p. 66.
An Excellent oyntment for a Breast with which
I haue
A Spetiall Plaister for the Sciatica or Goutish hu-
}
mour which hath done many Cures} p. 67.
For the stinging of a Snake or Adder either in Man}
or Beast} p. 68.
Dr Steuens Water p. 187.
Sweete Water. p. 188.
Receipt for sweete water. p. 190.
Francisco Moreots way of perfuming of skinns.  p. 192.
Snaile Water or Worme water. p. 191.
To make a Sacke possett
To make a thistle Sallett. p. 284.
A Sillabub. p. 286.
How to make Sawcedges. p. 288.
To Escaueche sole, Trouts, Besugo or Sea Breame}
Sardine or pilcher} p. 293.
How to make Syrropes  p. 377.
To perfume Sugar. p. 388.
To make a fine Syllabub  p. 314.
To make Synamon water  p 331.
To make surfitt water  p 198.

258

S.

A drinke for Scuruie p.15.
The great Surfett Water p. 182
A Vinegar to wash the Teethe for the Scuruy p.015 .
To fry Sweetbreads or Lambstones p.310
A drinke for the Scorbute - p.16.
A Water for the Scorbute - Id
Pills for the Scorbute - p.17
A Gargale for the Scorbute - Id
Cordiall in ffeauers, Small}
pox, Meazells, against the} Id
Scorbute}
To pickle a Sallet of Redish - p. 323
The spirit of scuruuy grasse - p. 21
The excellent Eeceip for the Stone, or stoppage
of the vrine} p. 022.
Sufet water - P 205
Short Obseruations and experiments p 40
A posset for the Spleen p 22
To make sugar water p 398





T.

A rare Medecine for a thrush in e mouth for } Page. 13.
a Child or old Body}

To make Taffaty Tarts. p.276.



259
T.





V.
An Excellent Medciine for the bleeding of}  Page. 3.
a Veine inwards- - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - -}
To stanch the bleeding of a Veine inwards       p: 4.
A most excellent Vomitt.                                       p. 6.
A Vulnerary Liquor.                                                p. 11.
To make the Vlier Water.                                       p. 70.
To bake Venaison or Beefe in pots to keepe }  p. 279.
good all the yeare-----------------------------------
To fry a Loine of veal.                                            p. 281.
A most excellent Receipt of Veale Ielly            p. 303.


260





W.

A Wound Drinke and for the Kings Euill. Page. 8. A Plaister to kill the, Wormes. p.11. A Glister for a Child that hath Wormes taught } p.11. by Doctor Baily. }

To make the true Weopon powder. p.65. To make Water of Life. p.186. To make wormewood Water. p.187. A Water comparable to gold. p.189. A good way to make Water Grewell. p.273. A Receipe to make one hould } p.14 Their water }

The great surfet Water. p.182.

The Lady Allens water for } the stomack, small pox, or } p.179. surfett}

The Receipt for the pre = | p.179.
------------------------- | ------

  tious Water of Wallnutt


  A Medecine for the Wormes. p.15 Another for the same. Ibid. To preserue green Wallnuts } p.389. my sister Elizabeth ffan = } shawes way }

A medicinall Worken-- gruell. p.316. To make Angelica Water p.199. To make sweet water p 215. To make Conserue of Worme=wood p 022 to keep walnuts moist all winter p.400 the Lady hewiits Cordial watter p 432



261

W.

How to fine Raison wine 349





How to order each Herbe or Flower
before it is distilled.

First a soft Fire maketh sweete water and sweetnes to continue
long.
2dly. Coales still the best Water.
3. Wash nothing that you will still: but wipe it with a cleane
Cloth.
4. All Hearbs Flowers and Seedes must be gathered when the
Dew is of them.
5. That which You will Still must lye at the least sixe houres
before you still it.
6. All Spices corrupt your Water, except Ambar Gris, Ciuett & Muske.
7. Scumm your water well.
8. Keepe your Still very cleane.
9. Wash your Still but not often; then dry it with a dry Cloth.
10. A Glasse Still is best.
11. Borrage must be distilled the hearbe with the Roote chopped
together.
12. Hysope the Leaues stripped from the Stalkes, when it bares blen
Flowers.
13. Camomile in the midst of May the hearbe and Flower being
chopt together.
14. Dill the Hearbes in the beginning of May.
15. Fumitory the whole Substance chopped in the End of May.
16. Mint either red or other; the Hearbe stalke & Leaves chopped:
in the middle of May.
17. Roses cutting away the white Endes of the Flowers.
18. Rosemary the Flowers Budds and Leaves stripped from the Stalke
in May in the Flowering.
19.


No scribe's index number appears on this page.
This recipe continued from 263v.

19. Centory the Hearbes and Flowers chopped in the end of June.
20. Violet Flowers in Aprill.
21. Wood bynd the Flowers in the beginning of June.

To know the right Besar Stone.

Take a peece of cleane Paper and rubb some Chalke on it: then rub
your Besar Stone; if it be good it will make the paper yellow. You may
try it thus to take a wire, and make it red hott in the Fire; then touch
the Stone: if it be good it will not stir, if it be bad it will hiss and enter
into it

These conversion notes appear in a different hand without a title.
A pound physicall consisteth of 12 ounces, a pound
comon consisteth of 16, An ounce consisteth of
8 drames, A drame consisteth of 3 scruples,
A scruple consisteth of 20 graines.




