I HERBALL = 


F \\ NS; ? ok GENERALL 
Tx-A (FSW It*N tHiltorie of 
N 174 fon | Ph = 


. "TY = 


Alc ed by þ ( _ \" 
(* «. 2 
0 Jaondon./ Mite [T/E, 


cHiRyRGE ks. 


mprinted atT ondon bv 
John Norton 


Quot deſcripta vides( Mecenas) nomina florum, 
" Mite 23ahcr bot 104 mente precor. 


$4 


L 


"hs, 


CEA) q 
> | : _ 
7» {00 


FO ENO 


LT 
ny 


bak £ 
* Pa. 
G a. ; "0P RD — 
m—_— 4 "I ; 
— > 


rikep q 
= — * " uy 
oY : A WY VS gy 
j f ; -, 2" 
A _ 
<< -- - 


TO THE RIGHT | HONORABLE, _| 
HIS + SINGVLAR GOOD LORD 'AND |} 
MASTER, SIR WILLIAM CECILL KNIGHT, BARON I 
of Burghley, Maſter of the Court of wards and Liveries,Chan- op 
cellor of the Uninerſitie of Cambridge, Knight of the moit noble = 1 
order of the Garter, one of the Lords of hir > \aieilies. ,_ 
mot honorable priuie Connſell, and Lord _ | w 

High Treaſurer of —* F4 1 08 
England. | | wt. | 


: 
1 02s 1-49. hone mk. 


/ 


XS Mong the manifold crearures of God (right Honorable and SH | | 
IF my ſingular good Lord ) that have all in all ages diuerily & 12 
SE )) entertained many excellent wits, and drawen them ro the * Bf 
#3) contemplation of the diuine wiſcdome, none haue prouoked Þ 
= mens ſtudies more, or ſatisfied their deſires ſo much,asplants | 
N Ya, > hauc done, and that vpon iuſt and woorthie cauſes : Fer if 
A Wa delight may prouoke mens labour, what greater delight is 
EG thcrcthanto behold the carth apparclled with plants, as with 
CEP arobcof imbroidered workeſet withorient pearles,andgar- 
niſhed with great diuerlitic of rare and coſtly jewels ? It this varietie and perfe&ionof 
colours may affe@rhe ie, itis ſuchin herbes and flowers, thatno Apelies, no Zeuxis 
cuercould by any artexpreſſe thelike : if odours, or if taſte may worke farisfaction, 
they are both ſo ſoucraignein plants, and fo comfortable, tharno confettion of the 
; Apothecaries can equall their excellent ycrtue. Burtheſe delights arein the outward 
ſenſes: the principalldelighris inthe minde, ſingularly enriched with the knowledge of 
theſe viſible things, ſerting foorthto vsthe inuiſible wiſedome and admirable work- 
manſhip of almightic God. Thedelightis grzat,butthe vie greater,andioyned often 
withneceflitie. Inthe firſtages of the worldthey were the ordinarie meare of men,and 
haue continued cuer ſince of necefſaric vic both for mcates romaintaine life, and for 
* medicine to recouer health, The hidden vertue of themis ſuch, that (as Plinic _— 
| | 3 ==: 


. UDC YER RT ove gr PC I UT CE I PIO —rennpry 1c A RG . 
ap Gs epi ers ay rs watered, b 
itn: * AMT woo 4 A Age ow 


The epi Dedicatorie. 


pit. the very brute beaſts haue founditour: and (whichis another vſethathe obleru) 


CAp.<, 


Plurar.de 
eiſcr.aul. 


& amic. 
Plm 1.25. 


$2þ-2, 


wth: from thencethe Diars tooke oe ger. of their art. 
| f 


Furthermore, the neceſſarie vie of theſe fruits of the earth doth plainly appeere 
by the great charge and care of almoſt all men in planting and maintaining ot gar- 
dens, notas ornaments onely, bur asa neceſſatieprouiſion alſototheir houſes. And 
here beſide the fruit, to ſpeake againeina wordoof delight; gardens, eſpecially ſuchas 
your Honor hath, furniſhed with many rare {imples,do fingul arly delight,when inthem 


' a man doth behold a flouriſhing {hew of ſommer beauries inthe middeſt of winters 


forcce,anda goodly fpring of flowers, when abroad a leafe is notto be ſeenc. Beſide 
theſe and other cauſes, there aremany examples of thoſe thar haue honored this ſci- 
ence : fortopaſſe by a nultirudfof the Philoſophers, it may pleaſe your Honor to call | 
toremembrance that which you knowe of ſome noble Princes that hauc toynedrhis 
ſtudie with their moſt important marters of ſtate : Mithridares the great was famous 
forhis knowledge herein, as Plurarch noteth: Euax alſo king of Arabia, the happie 
garden of the world for principall ſimples, wrote of thisargument, as Plinie ſheweth : | 
Dioclctian might he hauc his praiſe, had he not drowned all his honorin the blood 
of his perſecution. To conclude this poim, the example of Salomonis before the reſt 
and greater, whoſe wiſedome and knowledge was ſuch, thathewasableto ſetourthe 
nature of all plantes, fromthe higheſt Cedarto the loweſt Moſſe. Burmy very good 
Lord, that which ſometime was the ſtudic of great Philoſophers and mightic Princes, 
isnowhegleced,cxcepritbe of ſome few,whoſeſpiritand wiſedome hath carriedthem 
among other partes of wiſedome ahd counſell, ro a care and ſtudie of ſpeciall herbes, ' 
both for the furniſhing of their gardens; and the furtherance of their knowledge : 

among whome I may iuſtly affirme and publiſh your Honorto be one, being my iclte 
one of your ſeruants,and 4 long time witneſſe thereof: for vnder your Lordihip Il have 
ſcrued, andthat way imploycdmy principall ſtudie, and almoſt all my time now by the 
ſpace of twenty yeeres. Tothe large and ſingular furniture of this noble Tland, I haue 
added from forren places/ll the varietic of herbesand flowers that I might any way | 
obraine, Thauelaboured with the ſoile to make it fit forthe plants, and withthe plants 
to make them to delight i in the ſoile, that ſo they might liue and proſper vnder our 


climate, asintheirnariue and proper countrie : whatmy ſuccefle hath beene, and what = 


my furnitureis, Ileaueto the report of themthar haye ſcene your Lordſhips gardens, 
andthe little plor ofmy ſpecial care and husbandrie. Bur bicauſe gardens are priuare, 
and many times finding an ignorant oranegli igent ſucceſlor,come ſoone to ruine, there 
bethat hauc ſollicited me firſt by mypen, and after by the Preſſe, tomake my labours 
common, and to free them from the danger whereunto a garden is ſubic&: wherein 
when I was ouercome, and had braughr this hiſtoric, orreport of the nature of plants 
ro a iuſt volume, and had made ir, as sthe Reader may by compariſon ſec, richer than 
former Herbals, I found ir no queſtion ro whome I might dedicate my labours: for 
conſidering of your good Lordlhip, I found none of whoſe fauourand goodnefſeI 
might ſoonerpreſume, ſeeing I bale found youeuer my very goodLord and Maſter. 
Againe, conſidering my durie and your Honors merits, to whom may 1 better recom- 


mend "y labours than tohim, name Lowe "_ ſelfe, and all thatIamablein any 


ſcruice 


The Epittle Dedicatorie. - 
- ſeruiceordeuotionto performe ? Therefore vnder hope of your Honorable and accu- 


ſtomed fauour,[ preſentthis Herball ro your Lordſhips prote&ion; noras an exquiſite a 


worke(for know my meanneſlc)buras the greateſt gift and chiefeſt argumentot dutie 
thatmy labour and ſeruice canaffoord: whereof if there be no further fruit, yerthis is 
of ſome vſc,that I haue miniſtred marter for riper wits,and men of deeper iudgementto 
poliſh; and toadde tomy large additions where any thing is defectiue, thatintimethe 
workemaybeperſc&, ThusIhumbly takemy leauc,beſeeching Godto grant 
you yet many daiesto liueto his glorie, tothe ſupport of this ſtate 
vnder hir Maicſtic ourdread Soueraigne,and that with 
greatincreaſe of honor inthis world, and 
all fulneſle of glorie inthe — | 


world tocome. 


>. 


Your Lordſhips mo#t humble 


and obedient ſeruant, 


IO. IOHN GERARD. 


b 


The Hite D Dedjcatirie. 


Plinid3, ERME beaſts haue foundirout: and (whichis another vſethathe obſerueth) 
gh: ever/bene Diars tooke the beginning of their arr. 

Furthermore, the neceſſarie vie of theſe fruits of the earth doth plainly appeere 
by the great charge and care of almoſt all men in planting and maintaining ot gar- 
dens, not as ornaments onely, but asa neceſlatieprouiſionalſorotheir houſes, And 

| herebelide the fruir, ro ſpeake againe ina wordot delight; gardens, eſpecially ſuchas 
your Honor hath, furniſhed with mahy rare ſimples,do fingul arly delight,when inthem 

a man dorhbehold a flouriſhing ſhew of ſommer beaunies inthe middef of winters 

forcc,and a goodly ſpring of flowers, when abroad a leafe isnotro be ſeenc. Beſide 
theſe and other cauſes, there aremany examples of thoſe that haue honored this ſci- 
ence : fortopaſſe by a multirudCof the Philoſophers, ir may pleaſe your Honor to call 
troremembrance that which you knowe of ſome noble Princes that hauc toynedthis 
ſtudic with their moſt important marters of ſtate : Mithridates the great was famous 
for his knowledge herein, as Plutarch noreth: Euax alſo king of Arabia, thc happie 

= garden of the world for principall ſimples, wrote of thisargument, as Plinic ſheweth : 
Dioclctian might he haue his praiſe, had he not drowned all his honorin the blood 
of hisperſecution. To concludethispoim, the example of Salomonis before the reſt 
andgreater, whoſe wiſedome and knowledge was ſuch, thathe was able to ſerourthe 
nature of all plantes, fromrhehigheſt Cedarto the loweſt Moſſe. Burmy very good 
Lord, that which ſometime was the ſtudic of great Philoſophers and mightie Princes, 
isnownegleRed,except itbe of ſome few,whoſeſpiritand wiſcdome hath carried them 
among other partesof wiſedome and counſell, ro acare and ſtudie of ſpeciall herbes, 
borh for the furniſhing of their gardens; and the furtherance of their knowledge : 

. among whome I mayiuſtly affirme and publiſh your Honorto be one, being my iclfe 
one of your ſeruants,and a long time witneſle thereof: for vnder your Lordihip I haue 
ſcrued, andthat way imploycdmy principall ſtudic, and almoſt all my time nowby the 
ſpace of twenty yecres. Tothe large and ſingular furniture of this noble Tland, I haue 
added from forren placesall the varietic of herbesand flowers that I might any way | 
obtaine, Thauclabourcd with the foile ro make it fit forthe plants, and withthe plants 
ro make them to delight in the foile, thar ſo they might liue and proſper vnder our 
climate, asintheir nariue and proper countrie : whatmy ſucceſle hath beene, and whar 
my furnitureis, Ileaueto the repott of themthar have ſeene your Lordſhips gardens, 
and the little plot ofmy ſpeciall careand husbandrie. But bicauſc gardens arepriuare, 
and many times finding an ignorant orancg TT ſucceſſor,come ſoone to ruine, there 
be thathauc ſollicired me firſt by mypen, and after by the Preſſe, ro make my labours 
common, and to free them b_ the danger whereunto a garden is ſubie& : wherein 
when I was ouercome, and had broughrthis hiſtoric, orreport of the nature of plants 
ro a iuſt volume, andhadmade ir, asthe Reader may by compariſon ſec, richer than 
former Herbals, I found'ir no queſtion ro whome I might dedicate my labours : for 
conſidering of your good Lordlhip, I found none of whoſe fauourand goodnefleI 
might ſooner preſume, ſeeing I haye found youcuer my very good Lord and Maſter. 
Againe, conſidering my duric and your Honors merits, to whom may 1 better recom- 


mend wh labours than I naps Lowe PI and all tharlamablein any 


ſeruice _ 


{ 


The Epiſtle Pf "Hi 


| ſeruice deuotionto performe ? Therefore vnderhope of your Honorable and accu- 
ſtomed fauour,l preſent this Herballto your Lordſhips proteQion; nor as an exquiſite 
worke(for I know my meanneſic)buras the greateſt gift and chiefeſt argument of durie 
tharmy labourand ſeruicecanaffoord: whereof if there be no further fruit, yerthis is 
of ſome vie,thatT hauc miniſtred marter for riper wits, and men of ementto 
poliſh; and to addetomy Pape itions where any thing is defeCtiue, thatintimethe 
worke may be perfe&. Thus Ihumbly rakemy Foote Gyperoftis in God to grant 
youyer many daiesto ſverohis glorie, tothe ſupport 
vnder hir Maicſtic our dread Soue raigne,andthat with 
greatincreaſe of honor inthis cod 
all fulneſle of gloricinthe 
world tocome, 


Your Lordſhips moſt humble 
and obedient ſeruant, 


IOHN GERARD, 


07% Ye". WRT a4 te 


NO NN EE Ce TT OE OE LC Yo OR ON gs 0 WIRE MAPat We od $4" fs BOUND Cao AA AGRþs 2 bien ARE Eh 1 42 IR IE oP'« K "Oy 
F . . 
= 
- 


+ *-9%+ 200%. od eB Ws- , —_ + 91 0 ebe te 


9 43% > hs, GORE E <1 I A ev ng 
A ape nt > 4s | 01496: ages 


' LANCELOTVS. BRVNIVS MEDICVS REGINEVS 
IOANNI GERARDO CHIRVRGO 
 peritiſsimo,& rei herbariz 
_ + callenriſſmo S.D.P, 


Vmſingularum medicinz partium eognitio atque intelligentia libero 
homine digna cenſenda eſt ; tum earum nulla vel antiquirate, vel digni- 
©) tate, vel vrilitare, vel denique incunditate , cum ſtirpium cognitione . 
A iure compararideber. Antiquifſimam ceameſle exeo liquer, quod quum 
£2 cxterz medicipz partes (ficutreliquz eviam artes) ab iphs hominibus 
WJ (prout cos dura preſfitneceſfſitas) primum excogitatz & inuentz fue- 
NM runt : ſola herbarum arborumque cognitio ante hominem formatum 
<p condita, cidemque mox creatoab ipſo mundi architefto donatavideri 
v\ poreſt. Cuiustanta apud antiqua fecula cxiſtimatio ac digniras erat, 
| <-N | vt &jpſius inventionem ſapientifiimo Deorum Apollini veteres tribue- 
; | PITS $& rint, & reges celeberrimi in ſtirpium viribus indagandis ſtudium Iabo. 
wh wo : ue ſuum conſumere, ſumm#4ſibi apud poſteros laudi honorique 
fururumcenſuerint, Iam vero plantarum veilitas, atqueetiam neceſſitas,ade late pater,vt eius im- 
menſitarem nullius vel acutiſsimi hominis animus capere, nedum meus ca/amus exprimere quear. 
Stirpium enim complurimz nobis in cibos, alimentumque cedunt : innumerz aduerſus morbos 
 remedia ſuppeditant: ex alijs domos,naues, inſtrumenta tam bellica quam ruſtica fabricamus: ali- 
quotetiam carum veſtes noſtris corporibus ſubminiſtrant. Inquibus fingulis recenſendis diutias 
perſiſtere, hominisefſert intemperanter aburentis & otio & literis. Quantas aurem, & quam varias 
voluprares ex ſtirpium five amoenitate ocyulis capiamus , fue fragrantia naribus hauriamus, ſine 
fi in carum conditorem impietate inficiarinon poſſumus, Ade vt abſque ſtirpium ope & 
ſubſidio vita nobis ne vitalis quidem haberi debear. Dt 
Quumigiturres plantaria rcliquis omnibug medicinz partibus antiquitate antecedat, dignitate 
nullicedar, vrilitate inſuper obleRationeqz czteras longe ſuperet, quis futurus eſt, adeo, aut inſen. 
fatus vt non exploratum habear, aut ingratus ve non ingenue agnoſcat, quanta vniuerſis Anglis 
commoda, quantaſque voluptates tuus mi Gerarde in ſtirpium inueſtigatione 8& cultu labor inde. 
feſſus, ſtudium inexhauſtum, immenſique ſymprus hoc de ſtirpibus edito libro allaturiſune, Mate 
iraque iſta tua virtute, iſtoque de repeblich bens merendi ſtudio, & quod infigni tua cum laude 
ingreſſus es virtutis glorizque curriculutn, eidem infiſte animose &gnauiter, nequeare plantaria 
promouenda prius deſiſte, quameam & re ad vmbilicum iam ferme productam iple plene abſoluas 
atque perficias, Sic enim & tibi adhiic ſuperſtiti gloriam paries immortalem,& poſt obitum tantam 
_ tuinominis celebritatem relinques, vt tuarum laudum poſteros noſtros nulla vaquam captura fir 
obliuio, Bene vale. Ex AulaReginea Weſtmonaſterij,ipſis Calendis Decemb, t 5 9 7. 


| : | -* A 4 


MATTHIAS DE LOBEL._ 
| IOANNI GERARDO 
felicitatem. 


6, in ſnu gauiſu fum(Gerarde amiciſime )dun typogra- 
* pho formis ex Plantarum ne conmmiſe vid; , "Auth 
fummas, _ die perituras laudes _Anelia tibi Rei Is Foes wBi- 
nerſam, meaicatrics artis partem, antiqut{ammn, incunaiſamum e& wviilic- , 
y ſtudnon, retegere as debet. TS rafin enim Theophra#tz, ws — 
Neotericorwn antem, cen 1405, Brunfelſi, I 22, Ruelly, Ma tthioli, Ge _— 
Dodonei, Turners, Cluſi, Daleſeampy, Camerary, Tabernemontani, Pen, cogiione 
| noftramq, nonam methodum & ordinem, a Gramme & nottoribas ad Tritt- gau. 
| '  Cea, generat m 7 ſpeciatim, materno idjomate;< Anglige gemtitue cultiſimne, 
Reipublice voluptabili commods, recludis; quo ipſa ftimulata, herbarum delitias e&& hortorum ſuani ſimon 
C& ameniſimun cultwn anplettetur, maxmorum Imperatorian, Regum & Herown tam priſcoriom quan 
' wuperorumn exemplo. N ec ſatis hoc tibi fuit ; ſed mult mags inſaper preſtiti#ti, quodcopiam mult arun 
elegantiſimaruwn plantarun in Avglia ſfonte naſcentium ab alys hattens pretermiſſarwn, hiftoram 
deſerip/iitiqnagua hoc ſtudio captorim viilitate & oblettamento : Singulas enim regjones peculiares quaf+ 
dam plant 25,quas im al ys non Pat reperius, gignere certun. Neque magni tibi fuit hac inſfettione & 2 
iu Nature typis noſe 3 quippe qui. diu herb as indigenas, inquil;n4s & nes cur nuperrime ſolo 
erwnpentes & pululantes tum adultas, ſemme g, pregnantes, hortulo tno ſuburbano alni#t; & fout;t; : Ex- 
actum enim cognoſcendarwn ex figura aut facie ſuper ficiaria herb arwn ſtudjun generatm conſittit (Dieſ* 
corideteite) in frequenti & aſidua, temporis mn, imſjetione. Sed alia eit interiorts & ſubitantialis 
forme plantarion, que oculis cerni non poteit , folers cognitio; quam etiam, gnantun potes percuntlando, 
ſeniorum Grecorum Medicorum more, aperire conaris. Solebant autem antiqus ſuorun Medicaminum 
experiment, in Reipublice viilitatem, ſcriptis tabellis dare, quibus apud Epheſeos templi ſyluatice Diane 
parietes veitiebantur. Compertun etiam eft Hippocratem diſcend; cupidion, tis regtonibus pera- 
gratis, dem preſtitiſſe, + in methodum commemorabiliorem retitu;ſſe & illuttraſſe. Melins enim et Ret 
publice quan noſtris commodis proſpicere. N on eſt igitur quod huius inuid:oſ procacts etatis conniciatores 
maledici Zoili ſeripta tua obtrectent : dediſti cnirh gratis quod potuiſti, cetera dectioribus indicys relin- 
quens;e xort inis $4 exoticis incompertarum pendadbuc virium mangonizatis elenocings alkettis Floriſt a- 
rwn floribus 4 Flora Dea meretrice nobil; dittie, valetudini & wtilitati porius conſulens, quam voluptass, 
valere muſs. N onnulli ſquidem ex alys libris herbarum trarſeriptores rapfodz, ignotu ibi vinisplantis ad 
medendum maxi: neceſſarys.aſignant incertis, dubijs &ſuppoſtitys tirpibus aut ſonplicrbu facultates 
legitimi ſimplicsmedicamenti, ma ximo errore & ſunmia periclitatione(wny enim ſec ſanplex compoſit io- 
nem ineptam readit pernertit aut deprauat )quibus nec tuto nec remere credendun;multog, etia minus mul- 
ti herbarumexperimentisfallacibus qubus etiam y_ niſhnotifamis morbis ſprplicibue.compoſitis & im- 
plicatis, eorumdemg, ſeni{umis ſjmptomatibus, vtendum ne inoportunm earn wſu« ſeins venemen quary 
remean ſit. Sunmeenim egrotantium diſpendio & exercitatiſymorum Medicorum t edio periclitatores PraſFgioſss 
procaces, contemptis & neglettisartis inſtitutionibu, Hippocratis £ Galenipraceptes, per ſalutis diſeri- noacafrs. 
mina & homimun flrages medentum tentamenta agunt. Omitto, breu:tatiz ergo, vulgz oprfices, textores in, aug, 
ſelluarios, ſordidif@mos fabros, interpolatores, circulatores forenſes & veteratores ſenticadignes, qui pro- > inie= 
fefionibus & mechanicis artibus ſuis fa#iditisſeelerato inſanie lucro, ſe Medicos T heephraſfeos quem wx pom 
wnquam ſummit labris deguitarunt profitentur.N on inuenu#te Sylurus in huinſmodi homines inuehbit dun (own 
ait, Quam quiſque nour artem,hanc exerccat vnam,atque excolat, &totus in ea verſetur, &c, Ez bags far 
ſub finem prefationis fa 90 ait, Faxit Deus vrquiſque quam exercer artem,pernoſcat, & Medicus 4 
nihil eorum quz ad morbos citd & tutd curandos vtila vel neceſſcria efſe conſueverunt, ignorer. 


Przualet Medicus vbi Pharmacopcei fides ſuſpeacſt, qui iple fimplicia&compoſitapernoſcit 
moquam infamize notam imprudens inurit, dum ignarus horum ſimplicium medicamentorum, 
tanquam aſinus quidam ad omnia Pharmacopcei rb" motis, velut annuir :quid quod ilfi 


ſzpeectiam volens Pharmacopceus illudit, Abſurdi s eſt ac ſxperidiculus qui Medicinam facir, 
harum rerumignarus; & Pharmacopceo ignorantiz ſuſpetum meritd ſe reddit. Plaraſpouirregu/re 


mn 
ridus, Pliny & Galeni ſeripta, paſſin toto orbe perun/gata, tanquan: fontes uy orwodi 


COMM SABRE A KCl 7% 1 AREA dE eros hn - 


8-3 


apud Spluinom, ehidens lock. Atedico ghamplarims perſeiiabndl, viſetis faperque adartew niedicarricom 
perd;ſcendam, annas paucos haudguaguam REYES eh ii F ba; & Dinini ſenis verba 


| Bitola a obi mnquit Ego enim ad finem Medicine non perueni, etiamfi tam fencx fim. Er _ per 1mitia 


wn. Aphor:ſmorum vitam breyem + artem lowgam pronmcianit. Quomods ergo tutd mhntur multi lar- 

uati Medici ant Medicaſtri tam repent creatiulla Medicine parte, Medicamentor tone facultatibus 

t perſpeitis ? Huiuſmod; adulatores, aſſentatores, dubitatores xixatores, periclitatores & Gnathonicos para- 

 fiftratos hiftriontbus qui in trag ntroducuntur ſimilimos fecit Hippecrates. Quemadmodumenim 

©. Ui (i2quzt) figuramquidem & habitumm ac perſonameorum quos referunt habent, illiipftaurem 

MET” Vere non ſunt : Sic & Medici fama quidem & nomine mult1,* re autem'& opere-valde pauci, :/taque 

gun. com paulo ante Medicinam onniun artium preclariſamam eſſe dixerit : Verampropter ignorantiam 

* corumquicamexercen,&ob vulgi ruditater, quitalespro Medicis iudicat Mhbenien cores de- 

venifſe, ve omnium artium-longe vililima cenſeatur. Ar vero hoc peccatumob hanc poriflimum 

cauſamcommitrti videturz folinanque Medicine nulla poena in rebus publicis ſtatura eſt, preter- 

quam i iniz, Xe anmen & famanl ederet, aut ii inſygnts ignomini: inureretur ob huiaſmods 

ardua & noxia diſcrimina, bonus ille er ſyncerus Dodoneu (quanmis multzs herbas ex alis + Fuchſia 

rranſeripſerit, cuius methods v/7u cſt, quem 4, inchoauerat, wt ipſemer mihe —_ wvernacula Germanica 

anferiori Lingus vertere) qt notiſamis yſq, paucis ex tot herbaruwn millibus, quinquagenis aut 

ſeptuagenis herbis quibus viebatur, potims rontentus furt, quam mnumeris ſibi ignotis periclitari : melins 

enim omnino medicamento carere abſtinere,cr nature Committere,quam abut. Vtinam buiusnoſtr 4 atatis 

quamplures anſo om books fattitantes,eo Urn eg nn CF voto + ge; Illis id forſitan ne- 

un eueniret, | is ( Hippeer ate defuntto) diſcipulis ſuis inexpertis & parun eXET - 

Ot Ys idea f 09 (wt — traditumeſt) hl A IND bn Cathents, 

Roma & per vn:nerſam Greciun centum & ſeptuagmta annis, interditta & exul fuit. Meritd igitur 

cantt & tutt agendurs; Opiatis > Diagrediatis, Colocynthide, Tithymalis, Eſala, Lothyride, Mereurto, 

Stibio, & ſonuibms moleit: ſemis ſomplictbus cuen c autione vtendum : optimis ducibus & experientiſams 

ſenioribus preceptoribus atherendion, quorum ſub vexillis fidiſame & tutiſam? rara & preclara, ob 

barbariem fert extinits, patrum C anorum remedia, maximo & priſtino artis ornamento & proxims 

wvtilitate renouantar, & in vſum revocantur ; neglettis, ſpretis, & excluſis Empiricis verboſis, inuidioſis, 

ſuſpenſis,ambagioſis & exitiofis opinionibus quibus Mundus immundus regitur & labitur ; qui cum decipt 

velit, decipuatur : in cuins fallacias perappoſite finxit & cecinit otimhos werſiculos eruditiſimus college 

D. Iacobus Paradiſins nobilts Gander alluden; ad noment anti verſutiſimi herots N oftradams Sale- 

wenſis Gallopronmcie, [+ | | 

"T2 wy XN oftra-damus, cum verbs damus, quia fallere nofirum; 

5 Etcumwverba damns, nil niſi Noftra-damns. 
V ale. Londant ipſis Calendis Decembris 15 97. 


- IN. GERARDT Botanologian 
| | Pupdruges. ! 


Ws | Limmusecce Gerardus : ; atedit anoptimus herbas? 
| Quid nt? non not as (ed dedit ilie nouas, 
Ergo ne inuideas, vide as cum nomen & omen 


purdbys, miren ef ardua quanta gerit. | 
Oins dra, vdraile, mlparn, 74 Miyuan'T 1a3s: 
Sic liber e# promus condu ut hortia erat. 


Et aan 9polwy c alin ; olum, fab i : 
dy age wn a#puker £57 9-4 


ANTONIVS HYNTONVS 
Medicinz candidatus, 


eAd Fohumian Gerardum C birurg um 
Herbarnong, peritifimn, 


N Vila oculoshominum ſpeciesmagisallicitilla, 
_ Quamprzſtante manuduxitgeneroſus Apeclles; 
Nullaaures animoſq; magis facundia, quamquz 
Scfuſamloquitur Ciceronisab orediſerti : 
Hzccadem hunclibrum commendat cauſa Gerarde, 
Cuiprolaude fatisralinatumeſle parente, 
Artifices cui interdextras pro numine, nomen 
Nobilius reliquis herbz,plantzq; magiſtris. 
Illi erenim Europz ſuccos, Aſizq;liquores 
Quzquearente ſolo fitiens parit Africa, tratant: 
_ Tuveteruminuentisnouaconſuis omnia, fiqua 
Indus vterque deditnoſtram Nw ſalurem, 
Siuvealiunde vehit noſtrasmercator ad oras, 
Hocipſo vrilius, Quiaquz ſuntcreditaſcripris, 
Illa manu expertus medico,& bene diues abhorto 
Explorata diu mulrumq; cmitris in auras 
Qurz curent hominumlanguentiacorpora, mulri 
Przſtantesq; viridocuere fideliter artem. | 
Sed11 ſuſtuleris planras, quem yerbainuabunt nn 
| Sicanimo ficfronte minax, In prxlia miles 
Profilit, atſtritocedirviforiaferro. 
| Quz tibiprotantoceditvidoria ferro 
Lo | Praia perſoluet, Myrtilauriq; coronas ® 
he Iſtam nouitedax mercedem abalere yeruſtas, 
Artibipro ſtudio impenſifq; laboribusiſtis, 
Queishominum curas ſarramretamg; ſalutem, 
 Veopitexrerum, cuſtosy; authorg; ſalutis 
ternaſtatuit frontem redimire corona, 
| G6, Lamaw Mediew. , | 
B1 In 


* 


In hiſtoriam plantaram Þo.Gerardi ciuis & Chirurgi 
|  Londinenſis, A.lacobi lohnſtonij Scoti 


Ballincrifz Reg pagiportionari 
© Epigramma. 


Eſine quz vaſtis pomariamontibus Arlas 
Clanſerat (Heſperij munerararaſoli) 
Auratis folijs auratos deſine ramos 
men, 9942 pendula __ S 
Singulacum ino periere, & vil 
pc montis riguit viſcera verſus Atlas, 
Alcinoi perijtqui,cedatpenſllis hortus, 
' Quemcelebrat priſcitemporis aura fugax : 
Vna Gerardini ſpecies durabilis horti 
© Aeternofame marmore ſculprta manet. 
Hic quicquid Zephyrus produxit, quicquid & Eurus, 
Antiquus quicquid& nouus orbis haber, 
Intulic in patriam naturamqz exprimit arte : 
Sic nullo ceditrerra Britanna ſolo. 
 Quodmagis eſt Grajum & Latium concluditin vno 
Margine,& Anglorumiam facit ore loqui : | 
Sicerit zternum hinc vt viuas horte Gerardi, 


Cultoris ſtudio nobilitate tui. 


7n Plantarum hiftoriam, 4 ſolertiſlimo viro,Reiq, Herbariz 


peritiſſimo, D.loanne Gerardo,Anglice edi 
| Epigramma. A 


Þ &regian certtlandem decus immortale refertis 
Tu, focyg, tui, magnun & memorabile nomen 

(Hlnftris D EV ORG X) raptoributorbis IBERIS 
Deu:ticclaſſe TAN,GLORV M; Tu, (Dicaſta 
Maxime EGE RT O N E)veterem ſuperins Rhadamanthun, 
HE ROV M merit iut4, cenſendus n albo, 

Nec law vweſtra minor ( ſacr e pitt atis alumni) 
Ouimentes hmnninum diuimapaſcitis (ſea, 
Ornatis Patriam cuntti, nomeng, Eritannun 

| Auget#, vobisg, viam munitis ad aſtra. | 
co, ite, &inpartem ſaltem permittite honoris 
Phebe: Veniant V ates, quipeliere gnars 
Agming mor borum, honan inſiazantia vit 4. 
Hurus & ingentes, ſerena fronte labores p 
ANGLO-DIOSCORIDIS, Patrie, veſtr eq, ſaluti 
Excipite exhau#tos : pawlion hic dinortiteimHORT OS 
Ows CHORTET A colit, quos Flora exornat,c3 ones 


y 


XN aiades, & Dryades, Charites, Nymphag, Britann4. 


Corporibus hic grata ſalus, animicg, voluptas. 
Hic laxate animes: HABITAVIT NV MEN IN HORTIS. 


a ads | | Fran. Hering Med, D. 


Thomas Newtonus,Ceſtreſhyrms,D,Fo.Gerardo, 


amiconon vulgar, S. 


O# tot ab ingenuis conſeripta volumina my#tis, 
EN Her barum vires qui reſerare docent, 
Gy Tu tandem prodis Spart:1m4, hanc gnautter ornas, 
Dum ohms panes HARE  ſtudes. 
Nec facts hoc, rutilo vt pojfts ditarier auro, 
Nectibj vt accreſeat gr andis acer ui opums, 
Sed prodeſſe volens, veſtitos gramine colles 
Perluſtr as, & agros. frondiferumg, nem. 
Indeg, P eonias (apis mar) colligis herbs, 
In + tuum ftirpes congerts alueolam. 
Mille tit ſpecits plantarummilleq, note; 
Hortulus indicjo ef, quem colts ipſe dome. . 
 Pampineawites redolens cedrmns, innuba laurns, 
Notatib;, notaeſt progutsolma tibs. 
Balſama, narcyſſies, r hododaphne, nardus, amomyn, 
Saluia, dittammus, galbana,nota tibz. 
Quid multu? radix, ſtirps, flos, cum cortice ramm, 
| Spica g, cum ſil:quis e#t bene nota tibt. 
: Gratulor ergo tibs, cuntticg, (Gerarde) Britannts, 
N amptwicog, tuo gratulor ,atque meo. 
Nan Ceitreſbyry te ac me genuere parentes, 
Pe Tumeliore tamen ſydere natu eras. 
« | Matte animo,pergasg, precer ,captums, laborem 
OY Vreeetiam wlterins. V initur ingenio. 
CAwrum habeant aly, gemmas, niti1osg, propos, 
Plantas tu & flores ſeribe Gerarde, Y ale. 
« 


Vere & exanimotuus, Thomas Newton, | 
Ilfordenſis ieggparms, 


= Thomas T horney Maſterin Chirurgerie, to his 
learned friend and louing brother in Arr, 
M.Fohn Gerard. 


| O thaueTheard,and oft haueread | 4 
| Inbookesof learned lore, | 
That Man, the name of Zirele world, | 
Or Microcoſmos bore. [oY 
th ——_— whoſe minde doth range 
 Thecircled world about, 
dt a _ Globe) conceiues 
| worl ing throughout, 
As thisinall, ſo axlrng: Aon 
Thisthing ew 
By ſpeciall note ({weete Gerard) heere S 
T2” Wherein I 


Preferring ſtill the common good, 
Negle@ting ſtill thine owne, 
And art contentthatwe ſhall 
_ _" Theſcede which thou haſt fone: 
Noprivatehi CS aine 
Could dauntthy harrs ;defire 
' To _— others: which thou tak'ſt 
For thy ſufficient hire, 
Diſcharg'd heerinthou truly haſt 
WB nets ms no 
foorth to publike 
teaſes of thine art: 
Nero boneng my hewde, 


N 
But, of rar MSc by! by proofe, 


ugomenof 'thewiſe. 
Of fim wedo behold 
ithin our Engliſh ſoyle, 


More ſtore Bonny + ne OY 
learned 
PR br ay ea 
So aptly couchtinplace, 
As Imuchmuſe, howſuch aworke 
— Couldfram'debein ſuch ſpace. 


Y Weether appealing, 
which rom ioparnof the mad, 
As ſomegreatClerks do 


Fn commendation of M.lohn Gerard for bis diligents 
in fimpling, by W.Wefterman. 


Bedaſht with aglers and with ſpangs of gold. 


My friend likes not to mount aboue his reach, 

Or meddlethere where diſtance maketh dour : 

High things archard to learne and bad toteach, 

And no lefle dangerous to goabout: 

The ſunne weſceputs oftthe eiefightrour, _ 
And vpright gazers minding not their feete, 
Stumbling do lay their length vpon the ſtreere. 


A lowly courſe more fitter for his looke - 
Doth pleaſe him berrer,than theſe loftic ſhowes: 
The fruitfull earth he makes his daily booke, 
And turnes ſuch leauesas all his ſenſes knowes : © - 
He marksthe ferrill ground whereon he 
And viewes the plentie of our Earth, 
Which yeelds ſupplic againſt diſcaſe and dearth. 


. Qur mother Earth poſſeſt with womans pride, 
Perceiuing Gerard to be beauties iudge, 
And that bir treaſure. is not vneſpide, 
Of hir faire flowring brats ſhe is noſnudge : 
' Buthere and there where Gerard loues to trudge, 
| Hir verdant mantle ſpreading round abour, 
She boaſts the pleaſance of hir goodly rout. 


They all take Gerard for chiefe friend of theirs, 
To whom they framea garland fora | 
Of tharpure loue,whicheach to other beares ; 


OlertheredRoſe and FINeR. vs 
Vouchſafe their preſence in his garland twine: 
Lerthole faire flowers of our Engliſh field, _ 


Vanicherdeloogthxir fragrant odours yeeld 


PP 


To 


b) 


\Tothe well affected Readerand peruſer ofthit 
booke, St. Bredwell Phifuion, | 
| greeting, 


T2. GY Penis the campe wer 
2 men of great birt 


Tab:rna- | 
muncanus, F&F EC. 


Pliſhedwroith ſurpaſiing warietie, to ſuch ſpreading growth c3 ftrength of exerie lm as that it may ſeeme 
ſome heroicall imp: of illuſtrionmrace able to draw the eies andexjettation of euerymn wnto it. Somwhat 
rave it woill be heere for a man to moout a queſtion of t1 4s nature, and depart againe wuithont ſome good 
[atisfattion. Manifold woill be the vſe both tothe Phiſition andethers : for euerie man delighteth in 
5. knovwleage naturally, wohich(as Ariſtatle ſaid) ts in proſperitie an ornament,in aauerſiti- a refuge, But 
this booke aboue manyothers wwill ſate wvith the moZt, bicanſe it both plentiouſly min:ſtreth knouwlecge, 
which is the foode of the minde; and aath it alſo wuith a familiar and pleaſmg taſte toenerie caparitie. 
Now, 4s this commed:tie is communicated to all and many ſhallreceine much fruit thereof; ſo 1 vw1ſh ſome 
may have the minae t2returne a benefite againe;that it might not be true in aithat luuenal ſaith,Scire 
volunt omnes,mercedem ſoluere nemo: that #,All defire ro knowe,none royeeld reward, Let men 
thinke that the perfettionof this knowuledge is the high aduancement of the health of man: that je: fe- 
ton ts not tobe attained,but by flrong endenour: neither can ſtrong endeuour be accompliſhed, vwithout 
free maintenance. T his | ath not he, vwhos forcedto labour for his daily bread: but if he vyho from the 
Jhort howvers of his daily and neceſſarit trauel!, ſtealing (as it woere) ſame, for thepublike behoofe, and 
ſetting at length thoſe peeces togither, can bring foort ſocomely 4 garment 45 this, meete tocouey or pus 
auvay the ignorance of many : vhat may be thought he ryould do sf publike maintenance did free him 
from that priuate care and vnite his t! _ to be wholy intent to the gener all good.O Reader of ſuch men 
as this ſtick not to rob themſelues of ſuch vuealth 4s thou haſt to inrich thee, vuith that ſubſtance thou 
| vvanteſt, detr att not toſhare out of thine abundance to merit and encourage their panes. that ſo,fluxible 
Cic offc.1. riches and permanent ſciences, may theone become a prop wnto the other. Althoughpraiſe andrevvarde 
Fe foined 4s companions to fruitfull endeuours are(mn part )deſired of all men, that undertake boſſes, labours, 
comm, in Of dangers for the publike bohoofe;bicauſe they adde ſinevues (as it vuere) unto reaſon ,andable hir more 
"*  andmoretorefine hir ſelfe : yet dothey not imbrace that honor inreſpet? of it ſelfe, nox in reſpeft of theſe 
| | | | that 


% 
\ f iy 


that conferre it wpon them, but 48 having thereby an tint er, tha therets ſome thing 111 
them vwoorthie efimation 4g Men : wobich then i th their ligence to deſorne i wore abun - 2 a 
dantly. CAdmirable and fer the mitation of Princes, 045 that at of Alexander @&vho ſitting Ariſtotle Ns 
to compile commentaries of the brute creatures, allovved him for the better performance thereof, cextaine®” 
thouſands of men, 1nall Aſia and Greece, moſt _— obſerners of ſuch things, tv gine him information ton= | 
ching allbea#ts fiſhes, foules ſer pents andflies. What cameof it ? Abooke woritten, woherein alllearned 
men mall ages (mee do exerciſe themſelues principally, for the knowledge of the creatures. Great ti the 
monber of theſe that of their owone priuate, hane laboured in the ſame matter, from bu age dowyne to our 
preſent time, vohich all do not in compariſon ſatisfie vs. Whereas if in thoſe enſuing ages there had riſen 
illnewy Alexanders, there (certainly) vuould not have vvanted Aniſtotles to haue made the exidence 


our age to giue me comfort; Ferdinand the Emperor and Coſmus Medices Prence of Tuſcane are herem ©" 
reeiſtred fo furthering this ſcience of plants,in folbvuing of it themſelues and becomming skilfal! therein: 37. 0udij 
wuhich courſe of theirs could not be holden, vwu1thout the ſupporting and aduancing of ſuch as were ſtudi- 
#5 toexcellin this kinde. Bellonius likewviſe (ovwhom for honors cauſe I name) amanof high attempts vein. d 
in naturall ſcience greatly extolleth his kin F liberalttie vvhich endevved hin woith free leifure to folbuv Of ob 
the fludie of plants, ſeconded alſo herein by Montmorencie the Conſtable, the Cardinals Caſtilion and 
Lorraine,vvithOluuerius the Chancelbr; by vuhoſe meanes he v145 enabled to performe thoſe his notable 
peregrinations in Ntalie, Africaand Afjia : the ſoveete fruit vuhereof, as vve haue receined-ſone taite 

by hu obſernations, ſo wwe ſhould plentionſly haue beene filled with, if wiolent death by moſt accarſedrob- 

bers had not cut him off. _And as I finge theſe examples of comfort gry .\on nations ſo ve are(1confeſſe)' 

much to be thanifill to God, for the experience vye haneof the like things at home. If (nenertheleſſe) onto 

that Phiſicke lefture lately ſo well eretted nen wr1ho hane this Uyorldes goodes ſhall have harts alſo of that 

ſpirit, to adde ſome ingenious labourer in the skill of ſanples, they ſhall mightily augment and adorne the 
whole ſcience of Phiſicke. But if to that likewrviſe they toyne a third, namely the art of Chiniicallprepara- -. 
tion; that out of thoſe good creatures, vwwhich God hath ginenman for his health, pare ſubitances maybe 
precured for thoſe that be ſitke :(1feare not to ſay it though 1 ſee hovy Momus ſeornerh ) this preſent gene. 

ration wvould purchaſe more to the perfection of Phiſcke , than all the generations paſt ſince Galens 

time have done : that 1 ſay, nothing of this one fruit that vuonuld growve thereof, towvit, the diſconermg 
andabol:ſhing of theſe pernicious impoitures and ſophiitications, which mountpromiſmg Paracelſians enery 
where obtrude,through vuant of a true and conſtant light among # vs to diſeerne ther: by. TInwvuhich © 
behalfe, remembring that mournfull ſpeech of graue Hippocrates ; The arrof Phiſicke truly excelleth Hipp.de 
all arts, howbeit, through the ignorancepartly of thoſe thar exerciſcir, and partly of thoſe that 
judgeraſhly of Phiſirions,itis accounted of all arts the moſt inferiour: 7ſay i like manner, theart of 
Chamiftrie ts init ſelfe the moſt noble inſtrument of naturall knowuledges; but through the tgnorance and 
impuet-e partly of thoſe that moſt audaciouſly profeſſe 1t vuithout sk{l and partly of then that mpudently 
condemne that they knowve not jt ts of all others moſt baſely deſpiſed and ſtornfully reiefted. A princivall 
remedie to remoone ſuch contumeliows diſzrace from th:ſe tuo pure virgins of ene ftocke andlinage,is this . 

that I haue nowv inſmuated, even by erefting the laboratorie of an mauſtriow Chimiſt, by the foveete 
garden of flour;ſhing ſanples. The Phiſicke reader by their meanes, ſhall not onely come furniſhed vwith | 
authornies of the. Ancients, and ſenſible probabilities vr he teacheth, but vvith reall demonſtrations 

alſo in many things, wohich the reaſon of man, vvithout the I:ght of the fornace, vwould never hane rea- 


ched unto, Thaze vttered my harts defrre, for promoting fir ft the perfettion of my profeſſion, and next 
by neceſſarie aufeniphc h:althie pd of men. If God op 5 harts Les the | 
former, it cannot be, but that the happie fruites ſball be ſcene in the latter. Let 
the ingenioms learned mdge vuhether I haue reaſon on my 
| ſide: the partial addifted ſet I ſhun, as 
men that neuer meane good 
to poſteritie, 


George Baker, one ofhir Maieſties chiefe Chibawes in 


ordinarie, and M. of the Chirurgions of the citie. 
of London, to the Reader. 


_ 


> Riſtotle a Princl amongſt the Philoſophers, writing inhis Meraphy- 

'X \ ſicks of rhe nature of mankinde, faith, tharmanis naturally inclined 

and deſirous of ſcience. The which ſentence doth reach vs, tharall 

| creatures (being vertuouſly giuen)do ſtriue to perfe@ion,and drawe 

D necreinwhathecantothe Creator, andthis knowledge is one of the 

| Wy ana) parts whichdothconcerne the perfection of ynderſtanding: 

for bo the Wi doth follow, thatall ſuch are ge nerally inclined ro knowe the meanes by 
the which he may conſerue his life, health, and reputation. And although irbe neceflarie 
for manto learne and knowe all ſciences, yetneuerthelefſe the knowledge of naturall 
philoſophic oughtto be preferred, as being themoſt neceſſarie; and moreouer,itdoth 
bring withita fingular pleaſure and contentment. The firſt inuentors of this knowledge 
was Chiron Cemaure of greatrenowme, ſonne to Saturne and Phillyre : and others 
fay that it was inuented of Apollo, and others of Eſculape his ſonne ; eſteemingrhar 
ſoexcellent g ſcience could neuer proceede butfrom the gods immorrall, and thatir 
was impoſſible for manto finde our the nature of plants, it the __ worker whichis 
God,had not firſt inſtructed and raughtthem. For,as Plinie ſaith,it any thinke thattheſe 
things haue beene inuented by man, he is vngratcfull for the works of God. Thefirſt 
that wecan learne of amongſtthe Greekesthathauc diligendy writtet of herbes,haue 
beene Orpheus, Muſee and Heſipde, hauing beene taught by the Egyprians; then 
Pythagoras of greatrenowme for his widens; which did write bookes of the nature 
of plants,and did acknowledgeto learnerhe ſame from Apolloand Eſculape. Demo- 
_critealſo did compoſe bookes of planes, hauing firſt trauelled ouer all Perſia, Arabia, 
- Erhiopia and Egypt. Many other excellent fpirits haue taken great pleaſure in this 
ſcience, which to accompliſh have h2zarded their liues in paſſing many vaknowen 
regions, tolearne the true knowledge of Elleborus, and other medicaments; of which 
number were Hippocrates, Cratcua, Ariſtotle, Theophraſt, Diocles, C atifticr, Pam- 
piulus, Mpntius,Hicrophile, Dioſcorides,Galen,Plinic, and many others,whichI leaue 
to narnc,, fearing to be too long. Andif | may ſpeake withour partialitie of rhe author 
of this booke, for his great paines, his noleflſe expences intrauclling far and ncere (for 
- the arraining of his skill) was neuer contented with the knowledge of thoſe {imples 
which grow intheſeparts,bur vpon his proper coſt and charges hath had our of al parts 
of the worldall the rare fimples which by any meanes he could attaine vnto, notonely 
ro haue them brought, butharh procured by his excellent knowledge to haue them 
growing in his garden,which as the time of the yeere doth ſerue may be ſeen: forthere 
all you ſec all manner of ſtrange trees, herbes,rootes,plants, flowers, and other ſuch 
rarethings, thatit would make aman woonder, how one of his degree, not hauing the 
purſ> of a number,could cuer accompliſh the ſame. I proteſt ypon my conſcience, do 
notthinke forthe knowledge of plants, thathe is inferior to any : for I did once ſee him 
tried with one of the beſt ſtrangersthat cuer came into England, and was accounted in 
Pariſc 


| | 
Pariſethe onely man,being recommended tome by tharfamousman M.Amb.Pareus, 
and he being here was defirous to go abroad with fome of ourherbariſts,forthe which\. 
I wasthe meaneto bring them rogither; and one whole day we ſpenttherein, _— : 
the moſt rareſt ſumples: bur whenitcametothe triall,my Frenchman did notknow 
ro his fower, What doth this man deſcruethatharhraken fo much paines for his coun- ' 
rrie, inſerting outa booke tharto this day neuer any in what language focucrdid the 
like 2 Firſt for correting their faults in ſo many hundred places bei -Hallly named,mi({- 
raken the one for the other; and then the picures of a great nn, 62 of plants now 
newly cur. If this man hadraken this paines inlralic and Germanie where Mathioluas : 
did write,he ſhould haue ſped as well as he did : : For(ſairh he) had ſogreat adefire euer = 
ro finiſh my booke, that I neuer regarded any thing inreſpe& of the publike good, 
notſo much as tothinke how I ſhould finilh ſo great acharge, which had neuercaried 
our, butthatby Gods ſtirring vp the Emperor Ferdinando of famous memorie, and 
the excellent Princes had notholpen me with great ſummes of money,ſothatthe Com- 
mon wealth may ſay, thatthis bleſſing doth rather proceede of them than from me. 
There haue beene alſo other Princes of Almaine, which haue beene liberallinthe pre- 
ferring of this booke; and the moſt excellent EleQor of the Empire the Duke of Saxo- 
nic, w okich ſentme his poſte with much money roward my charges. The liberalinie of 
thewhich, and the magnificence towards me, I cannot commend ſufficiently. The 
whichfollowedin theirliberalitic were the excellent Fredericke Count Palatine of the 
Rhine, andthe excellent Toachim Marques of Brandeberg, which much ſuppliedmy 
wants; andthe like did the reuerend Cardinall and Prince of Trent, andthe excellent 
Archbiſhop of Salrzperg, the excellent Duke of Bauare, andthe Duke of Cleues,the 
Duke Megapolencis Prince of Vandalis,the ſtate Republike of Norcmberg; the libe- 
ralitic of whom ought to be celebrated for cuer: and it dothmuch reioiceme thar | ha4 
thehelpe and reward of Emperors, Kings, Electors ofthe Romance Empire,Archdul. », 
Cardinals,Biſhops, Dukes and Princes; forit giuerhmorecrediteto our labqurs tha! 
any thing that can be ſaid; 1 Thus far Mathiolus his owne writing of the liberaliric of 
Princes towards him, What age do weliuein here,thar will ſuffer all vertueto go vnre- 
warded > Maſter Gerard hath taken more painesthan ever Mathiolus didinhis Com- 
| mentaries,and hath corre&ed anumber of faulrs that he paſſed ouer,and Idare affirm: 
 Inreuerencebe it ſpoken ofthatexcellentman,thar Maſter Gerard doth knowe agre1: 
number of ſimples that were not knowenin his time : and yet doubt whetherhe ſha!) 
_ raſteof theliberalitic of cither Prince,Duke,E arle,Biſhop,or publike eſtate. Lerama' 
excellneuer ſo much inany excellent knowledge, and heis notſo much regarded as / 
icſter, a boaſter, a quackſaluer or mountebanke : for ſuch kinde of men can flarter. 
diſlemble, make of rrifles greatmarters, inpraiſing of this rare ſecret, orthat 
excellent ſpirit, or this Elixer or quinteflence; which when it | 
ſhall come tothe rnaall, {hall be found 


but boaſting wo 
Val. 


o 


—— 


| To therourteous and well-willing © 


| Readers. 


Z1 Lchough my paines haue not been ſpent (courteous Reader)in the gracious 

7g diſcoucric of golden mynes, nor in the tracing after filuer vaines, whereby 
PF [1 my natiue.countrie might be inriched, with ſuch marchangize as it hath 
x b moſt in requeſt and admiration : yet hath my labourfT cruſt )} beene other- 
ol wiſe profitably imployed, in deſcrying of ſuch harmleſſe treaſure of herbes, 
| rrees and plants, as the carth frankly without violence offereth vnto our 
| | moſt orcetinge vices. HarmeleſfſeI call them; bicauſe they were ſuch delights, 
\(*lf as man in the perfeReſt eſtate of his innocencie did carſt enioy : and trea- 
Cz =", | ſure I may well rermethem, ſeeing both Kings and Priaces haue eſteemed 
— =; ay them as Iewels; ith wiſe men haue made their whole life as a pilgrimage, to 
——DD_  ___—_= ttaincto thc knowledge of them. By the which they hauc gained the harts 
of all, and edthe mouthes of many, in commendation of thoſe rare vertues, which are contained 
in theſerterreſtriall creatures. I confeſſeÞlinde Plato is now adaies more [ought atrer, than quicke ſighted 
Phabu,and yet this duſtie mertall,or excrement of the earth (which was firſt deeply buried, leaft it ſhould 
bean cicſore to greeue zhe corrupt hart of man) by forcible centric made 1nto the bowels of thecarth, is 
rather ſnatched at of manto his owne deſtruction, than diredtly ſent of God, to the conifort of this life. ' 
And yet behold ir-the compatſiing of this worldlie drofſe, what care, what coſt, what aduentures, what 
myſticall proofes, and chymicall trials are ſet abroach;'when as notwithſtanding the chicfeſt end is bur 
yncertaine wealth. Contrarywile, in theexpert knowledge of Herbes, whart pleaſures ſtill renewed wirh 
varietic ? what ſmall expenſe 2 what ſecuritic ? and yet whatan apt and ordinarie meancs to conduct man 
_ totharmoſt defired benefir of health ?:*Which as I denontly wiſhvnrtomy native Counrrie, and ro the 
carcfull nourſing Mother of thEtame; ſo having þent my labours to the benefiting of ſuch as are ſtudi- 
ouſly praRiſed in the conſeruation thereof, I thought it a chiefe poiat of my dutie, thus our of my poore 
Kore, to offer vp theſe my far ferched experiments, togither with mine owne countries vnknowen 
treaſure, combined in this compendious Herball (nor vnprofitable,tho"gh va poliſhed ) vnto your wiſe 
conſtructions and courteous conſiderations, The drift whereof is areadic introduRion to thar excellent 
Artof Simpling, which is neither ſo baſe nor coaremprible, as (perhaps)the Engliſh name may ſceme to 
intimate; but ſuch is ir,as altogither hath been a ſiudie for the wiſelt, an exerciſe tor the nobleſt, a paſtime 
for the beſt. From whence there ſpring flowers, not onely to adornethe garlands of the Muſes, to decke 
the boſomes of the beautifull, ro paint the gardens of the curious, to garniſhthe glorious crownes of 
' Kings; but alſo ſuch fruitas learned Droſcorides long trauelled for; and princely CAfrtbridates reſerued as 
precious in his owne ronare cloſer : Afitbridates I meane, better knowen by his ſoucraigne Mithridate, 
than by his ſometimeſpeaking two and rwentic languages.Burt whatthis famous Prince did by tradition, 
Enax King of the Arabians did deliuer in a diſcourſe written of the vertues of Herbes, and dedicated 
Vatothe Emperour Nero. Eucrie greene Herbariſt can make mention oof the herbe Ly/imachia, whoſe 
vertues were found out by King Lyſimachw, and his vertuesno lefle eternized in the ſelfeſame plant than 
thename of Phydias, queintly beaten intp the ſhield of Pala, or the firſt letters of eArax or Hyaciatbus 
(whether youpleaſe)regiitred jin that beloned flower of Apollo, As for eArtemiſia, firſt called mipberis,whe- 
ther the title thereof ſprang from «pris, Deana hir ſelfe, or from the renowmed Queene of Caria, which 
diſcloſed the ve therot vnro poſteritie, itſuruiucth as a monument to reujue the memories of them both 
for cuer, Whar ſhould we ſpeake of Gentieza, bearing till the cogniſance of Gentizes? or of divers other 
Heibes,taking their denominationof their Princely inuentors? What ſhould I ſay of thoſe royall perſona- 
ges,Iuba, Artalns,Climenus, « Achylles,Cyras,Haſyniſſa,Semyramis Diocleſian? but onely thus,to beſpeake their 
princely loves to Herbariſme, & their euerlaſting honors (which neicher old Plmics dezd,nor yong Lipfies 
liuing,will permit ro die ? ) Creſcent herbe greſcetis amores creſcent herbe creſcetts honeres,But had this woon- 
red facultie wanted the aurhoriſement of Tuch a royall companie : one King Salomon, excelling all the reſt 
for wiſedome,of grearet royaltic than they all (though the Lillies of the field outbraued him) he onely (I 


1 


#5 
te 
"x 


: 
: 
_ — 


— May)might yecid hereuntoſufficient countenance and commendation, in that his lofty wiſdome thought 


no ſcorne to ſtoupe vnto the lowly plants, I liſt not ſceke the common colours of anciquitie; when not- 
withſtanding the world can brag of no more ancient monument than Paradiſe, and the garden of Eden : 
and the fruits of the carth may contend for ſeignioritie, ſeeing their mather was the firſt creature that 
conceined,and they themſclues, the firſt fruit ſhe brought foorth, Talke of perfe& happineſle or pleaſure, 
and what place was ſo fit for thar, as the garden place where Adem was ſer,to be the Herbariſt 2 Whither 
did the Poets huntfor their ſyncere delights, but into the gardens of Alcizow,of Adonig,and the qrehards 
of Heſperides? Where did they dreame that heauen ſhould be,bur in the pleaſant garden of Eh/fwm? Whi- 
ther do all men walke for their honeſt recreation bur rhither, where rhe earth hath moſt beneficially 
painted hir face with flouriſhing colours? And what ſeaſon of the yeere more longed for,than the Spring? 
whoſe gentle breth inticeth foorth the kindly ſweetes, and makes them yeeld their fragrant ſmels 2? Who 
would therefore looke dangerouſly vp at Planets, that might ſafely loke downe at Plants? And if _ | 

| | c 


To the Reader. 


the olde erbe, Que ſupranes, nibilad nos; I ſuppoſe this new ſaying cannot be falſe, Que infrancs, ea 

maxime ad nos. Ealie therefore is this treaſure to be gained, and yet pretious. The ſcience is nobly ſuppor- 
ted by wiſe and kingly fauorites : the ſubieR thereof ſo neceſſaric and deleQable, that nothing can be 
confeaed,either delicate for the taſte, daintie for ſmell, pleaſant for fight, wholeſome for bodie, conſerua- 
tive or reſtoratiue for health, bur ir borroweth the reliſhof an herbe,rhe ſauour of a lower, the colour of 
a leafe, the iuice of aplant, or the decoQtion of a roote : and ſuch is the treaſurethat this my treatiſe is 
furniſhed witha),wherin though mine art be not able ro countetuaile nature in hir linely portraitures; yet 
haue I counterfeited likeneſſe for life, ſhapes and ſthadowes for ſubſtance, being readie with the bad pain- 
rer, toexplanethe imperfeRions of my penfill with my pen, chooſing rather ro ſcore ypon my pictures 
ſuch rude marks, as may deſcribe my meaning, than to letthe beholder to geſle at randon and mifle, I 
haue heeres therefore fer downe not oy the names of ſundrie plants, but alſotheir natures, their pro- 
portions and properties,their affe&s and efteRts, their increaſe and decreaſe,their flouriſhing and fading, 
their diſtin& varieties and ſcuerall qualities, as well of thoſe which our owne countrie yeeldeth, as of 
others which I haue fetched further, or drawen out by peruſing divers Herbals, ſer foorth in other tan- 
guages, wherein none of our countrie men hath ro my knowledge taken any paines, (ince that excellent 
worke of Maſter Door Twrzer: after which time Maſter Lyte a worſhipfull Gentleman, tranſlated Do- 
doneus out of French into Engliſh; and fince that DoRor Prie#?, one of our London Colledge, hath (as 
I heard) tranſlated the laſt edition of Dodonews, which meant to publiſh the ſame ; but being prevented 
by death, his tranſlation likewiſe periſhed: laſtly, my ſelfe one of the leaſt among many, haue preſumed 
to ſet foorth vnto the view of the world, the firſt fruits of theſe mine owne labours, which if they be ſuch 
as may content the Reader, I ſhall thinke my ſclfe well rewarded, otherwiſe there is no man to be blamed 
þur my ſelfe,being a worke,I confeſle, for greater clerks to vndertake, yer may my blunt attempt ſcrue as 
a whetſtone to ſer an edge vpon ſome (harper wits, by whome I wiſh this my courſe diſcourſe might be 
both fined and refined. Faults I confeſſe haue eſcaped, ſome by the Printers ouerſight, ſome through 
defeRs in my ſelfe to performe ſo great a worke, and ſome by meanes of the greatneſſe of the labour, and 
that I was conſtrained toſeeke after my liuing, being voide of friends to beare ſome part of the burthen, 
The rather therefore acceptthis at my hands (loving countriemen) as a token of my good will, truſting 
that the beſt and well minded will not raſhly condemne me, although ſome thing haue paſſed woorthic 

reprehenſion. Bur as forthe ſlanderer or enuious,l pafſe not for them, but returne ypon 
 themſclues, any thing they ſhall without cauſe either murmure in cor- 
ners,or jangle in ſecret. Farewell. From my houſe in Hol- 
burne within the ſuburbs of London, | 
this firſt of December 
1597 


Story and unfained friend, | 
 Fobn Gerard. 


—_— —  —— mr 


THE FIRST. BOOKE: OF 


THE HISTORIE OF 
P-L AN TS; i 


Containing Graſſes, Ryjhes, Corne ,Flags, Bulboſe, Lk 


or Onion-rooted Plants. 


The Pr Jeme. 
[= 4.05009 ee ofrlN' this hiſtotie of lants iewhuld Ancith yn of antrodi:- 
"Nv [” WIRD FR| tion,any curious di iſcourſe vpon thegenerall diuifien of plants,conrai- 
Ax IJEhaN gi nedin Latine vnder Arbor, Prutex;/) x,Herba: or to ſpeake of the 


|| ditfeting names of their ſeucrall par 
Ris} toong can well expreſlce. Orto goab 
Ry! | guile rhee by the inell or taſte, $0; the temperature of plants : 

Jo} when as all and cucry of theſe in thei: Place ſhall haue their rrue face 

A SSSFS<ES.landnote, whereby thou mailt both knowand vie them. 

30 Oe "5075 oy * Inthree bookes therefore, as in three gardens, all our plants tbe. 
ſtow <d: ſorted as ncerc as mightbe,in kindred and neighborhood. 

Thefirſtbookehath Gans $ Ruſhes, Corne,Flags,Bulboſe,or Onion-rooted plants. 

' The ſecond,all forts of herbes for meate, medicine, or ſweere{melling ve. + - * 

The third hath trees, ſhrubs, buſhes, fruit-bearing plants, Rofins,Gums, Roſes, Heath, Moles, 
Muſhroms,CoralLand their ſeuerall lindes. 

Eachbookehath chapters, as for cachherbea bed: and cuery plant preſents thee with the La. 
tineandEngliſhnameinthe cicle. 

'Then followes the kindes, deſcription, place, time,names, nature, and vertues, agreeing with 
the beſt received opinions, 

Laſt of allthouhaſta general] Index as well in Latine as Engliſh, with a carefull ſupply] likewiſe 
ol an Jac bilingnts of barbarous names. ; 

And clus. hamigigiuenthee a generall view of this garden,now _— friendly labors we will 
accompanie thee, andlead thee througha graſle plor, little ornothing of Herbariſtsheerto- 
fore tquehed:; andbeginwith the mol common, or beſt knowen Grafle, whichis called in Latine, 
Gramen pratenſe. Thenbylitle and little condudt thice. through moſt pleaſant gardens, and other 


dc] :ghttull placeswhege any herbe or plant may be found.fir for meate or mediciac, 


Of »Medow graſſe. | ' Chap.1. 


$ morcinLatine _—_— 
© totceach thee, orrarher to 


| % The hinaes. 

7 Hes: be ſundry and infinite kinds of grafſes not mentioned by the ancients, citheras vn- 
; < 4 neceflaric tobe ſet downegor vaknowen to thein : onely they make mentionof lome ſew, 
whoſe wants we meane to ſupplie, in ſuch as,hauc come toour knowlecge, referring the 

= reſt tothecurious ſearcher boy ſumples. 

* The deſcription 
S7 Ommon Medow grafle hath very finall tufts of rootes , with thicke hairie threds | 
A 9; depending vpon the higheſt turfe, mattingand creeping on the ground witha 
Vo xo ] moſt rhicke and apparent ſhew of wheaten leaues, lifting vp long, thin, iointed 
eV 4 and lightſtalks, afooteor a cubire high, growing ſmall and ſharpe at the top, 
OD with an care which isloole and hanging down ard, like the tuft or top of the 
common Reb de called Y/allatoria, 

Swall Medow graffe differeth from the TALSr in yarictie of the ſoile : foras the firſt kinde 
groweth in medowes, lo doth this Small graſle clothe the hillic and more ci grounds rages; and 
A 1 arrea 


"2 THE. FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
| barrenby nature : a grafſemore hit for ſheepe, than for greater cartell. Aridbicauſe the kindes of 
grafle do differ apparantly in roote, tuft, ſtaffe, leafe;ſhearh;earevr creſt, we may aſlire our ſelues 
of their ſeuerall vertues, formed by the Creator for the vſe of-man, although that rhey haue been 
by a common negligence hidden and vaknowen. And therefore inthis ourlabor, we have placed 
cach of rhemin their ſcuerall bed, where the diligent ſearcher of nature may, if ſo he pleaſe, place 
bis earned obſeruations. FP 


I Gramen pratenſe. T 2:40 | . 2,.Gr amen Pretenſemings. 
Medow grafle. L 4 2:30 _ © Small medow graſfe, 


| | i '% The place. t 
Common Medow grafle groweth of ic ifs waſte or vnſowen,cuery where:bur the Small Medow 
gralle for the moſt part groweth vpon dric and barren grounds, as partly we haue touched in the 
deſc ription, F#"4 | | 
'*% The time. BE, | 
Concerning tlie time, when graſſe ſpringerh and ſeedeth, Iſuppoſe there is none fo ſimple but 
knoweth it,and that ircontinueth all the whole yeere, ſeeding in June and Iuly, Neither needeth it 
any propagation or replanting by ſeede or otherwiſe, nonor fo much as the warerie grafles: but 
that they recouer themſelues againe, although they haue been drowned inwater all the winter 


long,as may appeere in the wilde {etines in Lincolnſhire, and ſuch like places, 
| T1] |. _*% Thenames. | 
Graſſe is called in Greeke 24«5;, of the Latines Gramen, as it is thought 2 gradiendo, quod geni- 
culatis internodys ſerpat crebroq, nous ſpargatradices : for itgroweth, pocth and ſpreadeth itlelte 
vnſet or vnſowen naturally ouer all fields or grounds, anne ea with a perfe@greene, Iris 
ecrely mowed, in ſome placestwife, andin ſome rare places thriſe: then is it dried and withered 
by che heate of rhe ſimne, with often rurning it. And now itis called Fexwm,neſcro an afenore aut 
fete. In Engliſh Hay : mFrench Le herbe dupraiz. | 
A if os Sh '*% The nature. | 
The rootes and ſeedes of grafle are of more vic in phiſicke than the herbe, and are accounted - 


HISTORIE. OF: PLANTS. 
all writers ,mnoderately to open and prouocke vrine, | 
*% The vertues. rs | 

The decoctionof grafſe with the rootes of parſley drunke, helperh the diſſigic and prouoketh A '- 
vrine. be: | 90 : aff 

The rootes of graſſe, according to Galer, doe glew and conſolidate togithernewand bleeding B 
wounds, ..- 4 | So # . 

The inice of graſſe mixed withhonie and the powder of Sothernwood taken indrinke, killerh C 
wvormes inchildren, butif thechilde beyoong, or tender of nature, it ſhall ſuffice tomixethe iujce 
of grafſeandthe gall of an oxe orbull rogither, and therewith annoint the childes bellie, andlay a 
con— vpon —_— ws hb . | FE; 5 

Fernelizs faith, that grafle doth helpe the obſtructions of the liver raines and kidneies, and all D 
cuill affeCtions of theraines called Nephritis. - $6 ; | ES. 

Hay ſodden in watertill it be tender, andapplied hot to the chaps of beaſts tharbe chap-fallen E 
through long ſtanding in pound,or ſtable withour meare,,is a preſent remedie. | Ft 


' Of Red Dwarfe graſſe. Chap.2 


1 Gramen minimum rubriun, 
Red Dwarte grafle.. 


3 


I Warfc | yg the leaſt of all graſſes. The roote is very ſmall,hairie,and white,with many 
hollow ſtrings : the tuftor care is of a reddiſh colour, and not much differing fromthe 
grab called 1/ch.emor, though the eare be ſofter broader,and more beaurifull. RE 

2 The ſecondkinde of Dwarfe grafle differeth nor from the former, but that both rootes'and 

fiowers of thisare whirte,and the leaues ſomewhat hairie aboue,and reddiſhnext the ground, _ . 

3 Smallhardgrafle hath {mall rootes compatt of little ſtrings or threds, fromthe which come 

foorth many ſower, ruſhie leaues of the lengrhof an inch and a halfe: the tuft oreare is compaR of 

ns 0-4 ws nothing elſe than chaffe.. This grafle is vnpleaſant, and no key wk 
rcattell. | | 

4 Ruihgrafle hath many ſmall ruſhie leaues,tough and pliant as arethe common Ruſches :wher- 


vpon dogrow ſmall ſcalic orchaffie husks,in ſteed of lowers,li 
£o0te is threddie like the former, wit | IT Bnthatan TAE 299 ſinaller. The 


A 2 3 - Gramen 


LY 


'THE/ FIRST BOOKE' OF THE 


3 Grape minus darinſentwr. 
Small hard graſle. ii 


|..F 
[Þ 
ON © 


(9 


eee iS 0 hs Theplace. | | 
, The Dwarfe grafle doth grow on heathic, lay and dric barren grounds in moſt places of Eng- 
The white Dwarfe grafſe is not ſo common as the former,and doth grow very plentifully among 
the hop gardens in Eflexand many pes. F | | 
Small hardgrafle groweth in moiſt freſh marſhes and ſuch like places. 
Ruſh grafle groweth in falt marſhes neere vnto the ſea, where the marſhes haue been ouerflowen 


with ſalt water. 


| Los | t* Thetime. | 
Theſe kindes of grafſes do grow,flower,and flouriſh,when the common Medow graffe doth. 
| | | * ' * The names. | | 

Ir ſafficeth whathath been ſaid ofthe names in the deſcription, as well in Engliſh as Latin, onely 
chat ſome haue deemed white Dwarfe grafle,to be called Xerampelinum. 

Ruſh graſfſe hath been taken for Holoftkewn Matthiol:. nfs 

|»  t% Thenatureandvertues. 

Theſe kindes of graſſes do agree as itis thought, with the common Medow grafſe,innature and 

vertues, notwithſtanding they hauc not been vſcd in phiſicke as yettharI can reade of. | 


Of Gorne graſſe. Chap.,. 


 raupacs Se 3 |»: 1:1 bib The deferipedaw. 
I C Orne eraſſc hath many graſſic leaues, retembling thoſe of Rie,or rather Ores, amongthe 


b 


which commeth vp fleader bentie ſtalks, kneed of iointed like thoſe of corne, wh 
doth grow a faire tuft or pannicle, not much vnlike to the feather-like tuft of common 
Reede,burrounder compa togither like vato Miller. Theroore is threddie like thoſe of Ores. 
2 Recdegraſſc hath many thin grafkie leaues,like vnto the former. The buſhie top, with his long 
featherlike pannicles do reſemble the common Recde, whichis lightly ſhaken with the winde : 
nave vpon along lender reeden ſtalk, kneed or iointed like corne. The roote is ſmall and 
rous. | [4 


Tr Gramen 


HISTORIE”OF PLANTS. 


= We ', % The place. © i | 
Theſe kindes of grafles do growefor the "ae" cs neere ynto hedges,andin fallow fields in moſt 
laces, | ET 

Their time of fpringing,flowring and $75 oo be referred tothe common Medow grafle, 

The firſt is called in Engliſh Corne grafſe. Of Zobelizs in his learned obſeruations dHgrorum 
wventi ſþica,and Gramen agrorum: of others Gramen ſegetale, either of the likenes it hath with corne, 
or that it groweth among corne,the which I hauenort a" ſeene, + /* | : 

The ſecond is called in Engliſh Reede grafle. Of Zobel;xs in Latine Gramen harundinaceum, or 
Gramen agrorwn, latiore arundinacea & comoſa prory for that his tuft or pannicles do reſemble 
the Reede. And Spica ventiegrormm: for by reaton of his feather top,whichis eaſily ſhaken with the 
winde, _ % The temperature and vertues. 

Theſe grafſes are thought to agree with common grafle, as well in remperature,as verrues, al- 
tough not vſcd in phiſicke,as yetknowen, 


Of eM, illet graſſe. _ Chap.4. 


|  "  Thedeſcription. 
I Illergraſſc bearetha tuft or care like vnto the cox Reede, alchough nor ſo great and 
| | chicke,bur rather like to Au Mill or Millet whereof irrooke his name. Theſtalke or 
leaues do reſemble the Bent,wherewith countrie people do trim their hotſes. = 
2 inf. yas Warergrafle in roote,leafe,tuft andreeden ,dorh very wel reſemblethe gr 
calledin Latine Gramen ſulcatum,or Piftum : and by our Engliſh women, Ladies Laces, itis 
 tript or furrowed with white and greene ſtrakes, hke ſilke mew : bur yerdiffereth from that, thar 


| 


6 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


this Water graſſe doth ger vnto ir ſelfe ſome new rootes , fromthe middle of the ſtalks and joints; 
which the other dothnor. P- ho gy 2 ind 


I Gramen Miliaceum. ; 2 Gramen 714715 4G udkICm. 


: if I 
, , - "= 5 ot -, 
; _ o & 75 of MO 
* WH , 


| 
| 


*% The place ime names nature andvertues. 
They grow in fennie and waterie places, at the ſame time that other graſſes do: and haue their 
vertues and natures common with other grafles, for any thing thatwe can finde in writing, The 
reaſon of their names may be gathered our of the deſcription, | 


Of Darnell graſſe. (, Bap.s, 


| [57 |. Thedeſeripticn, 
I Arnell grafſe or Sorghimwn, as Lobelius hath very properly ſet downe, hath a browniſh 
ſtalke, Gicke and knortic _ with long ſharpe leaucs like vnto the common Reede: art 
the top (hereof groweth a tuft or care, of a browne colour, ſomewhat like Sorghwn, . 
whereof it rooke his name. as alſo of the Italian corne Pannicke,jt is called P anniculatum: 
2 WildeRecdeor Gramesn har en, Or Panniculatwn, called alſo Calamogreftis, is far leſſer 
than Couch grafle,or Dogs graſle 3 &yet in ſtalks and leaues more rough,rugged and cutting. Bad 
foode for cattell,vnlefle they want,or be'very hungrie : bicauſe that, as the husbandman ſay,it 
| isacauſe of leannes in them, thirſt, and confumprion, curterh their toong, ſtraiteneth the ror 
throte, and draweth downe blood intothe ſtomacke or mawe: whereof inſueth inflammation, and 
death for the moſt part. And nor onely this Cal/amogro#icis hurtfull,burallo all other kindes a- 
ring leaucd reedes, flags, ſedge, or whinne, which haue as.it were edges , and cur on both fides like 
kniues as well mens fingers as cattels mourhes. This herbe is in a meane berweene reede and grafle. 
The roote is white, creeping downward very deepe, Theſpike or eare'is like vntothe reede, being 
ſoft and cottonic, ſomewhat reſembling Pannicke, | | | 


pF 


.5 
1 Gramen 


"HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 7 


x vat Sorghinwn. | 2 Gramen harundinaceum ganniculatun. 
Darnell 4 Wilde Reede. 


They grow in ws nit places like vnto the hate: 
 t*% Thetime, 
They flower and fade at the ſame time thatthe others do. 
17: +1: The names. 
In Lincolneſhire,jtis called fle or Henne: in other places of the land; Wilde Reede: in 


Latine Calamogroftis, out of the Greeke, zaxapeypion« As for Meir natures ang vertues, we do not 
finde any greatvſe of chem worth th fxingdonme. 


Off Panic praſſe. Chap.6. 


% The -deriptio 


is p ied with chaffie and downie tufts, ſet ypon cite ſtalke, of 


s highor = ned ira Vas co, orthe molt hare. 
an 


ompa togjcherinmaner of atm}, from 
ns the which are ſundric 


;beiringarthe topa ſpikie ruftor 
A4 5 1 Gramen 
® 


THE) FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


1 Gramen Panniculatun. 


Pannicke aol 


Theſe kindes of grafles do prowe 


Gramen panniculatun is called He 
& Aceroſim. Some have taken it fc 
called Gramen plumeſum: andin En 
pleateth others rome _—_— 


 Thereis no vertue aſcribed} vnto 1 
protitable,both for man and beaſt. 


Tort 


at Pads 
the ſtalke riſeth 


T2 


in Fl 
__ in Grecke,an 


alle 


2 Grames | ſpluaticin. 


"Ea 


lace andtime. 

sandpaſtures,atthe fe time that others &. 
' *% Thenames. - 
dof Lobelius in Latin Gr amen Torentoſwn 
r the ſecond kinde of C #is + butmoſt commontyiris 
pliſh a Bent, or Feather-top grafle. Gramen ſyluaticum,or as it 
s called inourroong Wood "Land Shadow grafle. 

*%* The natureand vermmes. 

_— for the vicof ofphiſicke but they arereckoned vn- 


Foce-til graſſe.. Op Js 


J1 The tt ri ton. 
hy I 


nk orblades like 


The Rte Foxe 
a ſtrawie ſtalke Fro 
_ colour, 


oo . - 


a "nt IEEE A 


aQofmany Cnall 
0 gl _opeutat _— 


the lk rop orc 


_ 


I  Gromen 


jompa 


HISTORIE/ OF PLANTS, 
Gramen Alopecuroide Gramen Alopecaroides nia. 
ons Re tale aſl. -— © SmallBoxe-uil call 7 


3 Gromen 4 Gramen 


\3 {I Foxc-taile legrafle, _ + "Sal nes Foe calle gre 


10. THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


| + The deſcription. 
a Reat baſtardFoxe/raile grafſe hath a ſtrawie ſtalke or ſtem, which diuiderh itſelfe'within 
(or _—_—_— intoſhootes'or ſuckers,the which do roote againe vponthe vpper cruſt of the 
mth. His leafe Kymall and graffi ic,and hath on his top one tuft orſpike,or care of a hard 
chafhe pence. 
Small baſtard Foxe-taile graſle doth reſemble the former, i thatthis kindedoth notcaſt 
toorrh ſuch barren ſhoores as theformer,and thoſe which he doth —_ out,doth bearea ruft for the 

moſt part, bur ſmaller than the ather,and not ſocloſe packed rogither. 

* Theplice and time. 

gall do grow inthe moiſt furrowes of fertill fields, at the ſame 


» 
= ©41 "42 
- RE —_ 
—— _ 
. 4 T 
87 


Theſe wilde baſtard Foxe-taile g 
time that others do. 
| *.The names. 
They are fo calledbicauſe their tops are likevnto a Foxe raile, 
| & The nature and vertnes. 
They are 4s vnprofitable for our ging the former, 


Of great Care-tail graſſe... | #5 


1 Gramen Typhinum — 2 Gramen T mus. 
_ Great Gaotale gralle. \ Small Cattrale ot. 


: 
. 
'\ 
*hY, F 
Fd! 
i\F! 
"F* | f 
's ' 
it I 
\ 
YA 
p / 


ha. 
R_ 


= # 
bh . 


p (Coen ia thyery th rootes, GP of m - frnall 
which may mrthe whole roore, ee riſeth vpn 
ſomwhar like wot » kneed TEE foote] 
| O Gravra tech Aurrtts. ©. | + 
2” WU: iy inchatichlhrean . The 


POS \ roote 
CY | 


"HISTORIE OF! PLANTS. _ 
rooteis thicke, andcloucd like ruſh onions. or cines, withmany {mall firings, or hairie threds an- 


*% Thepleceand the. | c 
Theſe kindes of grafſes do grow very well necrethe fea fide, 2s:Gramen Cyperoides doth, and flou- 
riſh at the ſame timethar allothers dogyuyver ot oats nt 
MY 083201 v | 11303 I" 39] 2 , ; e 7% The names. 371 pd 3 6 pops 6 a 
__ TheLatins bor:ow theſe namesof the Greckes, and callir _ of Typhea Cars 
taile :and ir may it; Engliſh as well be called round Bent grafle,as Cars-talle grafle, 
| nature and vertues, .. 


There is nothing written ofa flicte with the ſeen = G 
| "7" _ "*YOFCyperus grafſe. (hapi9." 


1 \Gramen cone ides, 
. Cyperus Grafle. 


Nd * The deſcription. 

I Yperus grafle hath rootes ſomewhar like Cyperus whereof it tooke his name. His leanes 
, arelong andlarge like vnto the commonreede. The ſtalke hyvptothe height of a 
| cubire, or more in ſome places : vponwhich do oweiCats knobs oreares, ſpike 
faſhion, ſomewhar like vnto Cars taile or reede mace,very chaffie;rough and rugged: differing but 

little, ſauing that jr beareth bur one ſpike vpon one ſtalke and no more, and this many, = 
2 Ruſhie Water grafſeharh his rootes like the former, with many fibres or ſtrings hanging ar | 
them; andcreepeth along vpon the vppermoſt face of the earth, orrather mud wherein ir grow- 
' eth Pg ateach ioint one lender benry ſtalke,ſerwith a few ſmall graſſic blades ox leaues : brin- 
ging foorthat the top in little hoods, ſmall feather-like tufts or eares. "3-1 A 


t The 


Gn OY 


"8 THE FIRST BOOKE OP THE 
| ** Theplaceand time. 
They growe as [have inſinuated,in witie I grounds, inthe fame ſeaſon "at I FR 
| ; x T Bames. 
Their names I have likewiſe touched,andare manifeſt of themſelues, 
| * The natureandwertues. © 
The ancients haue written queues 0 of their natutcand ings, bur leaue chem roprofibl forche 
vic of man and bealt, [x F.. 


Ln 


— 


1 Gramen 4QUAEICWD.., iz 
Ward grafle.* *-* | 


| 


| &The d:ſeription 
# 1 Ater 7 $30 OS, Poa ir, Water burte grafle, hath leaues much like vnto the 
\ Y common Medow grafſe,bur ſornwhat broader Among which riſeth vp a ſtalke of two 
foote high, bearing ypon his ſmall and tender branches certaine little rough knobsor 
heads, like vntothe ſmall burre ough much lefſer.His roote is ſmall and threddie. 
2 Spiked Water grafſe inhis leaues reſemblerh che former, The ſtalke is ſmall, ſingle and naked 
withoutleaues or blades: bearing alongft the ſame toward the top, ſpike faſhion, aneare or ſpike 
nor vlike vnto Darnell : and is made of certaine ſmall chafhie buttons, reſembling the burtonie 
flowers of Sea wormwood, His roote is thicke and tough,full of fibres or threds. 
| 1% Theplace andtmee.. ' 
They differ not from che former kindes of grafſesin place and time:and their names are manifeſt 
= The nature and wer tnes, | | 
Thciroature and vertues are referred vato Dogs graſſe,vhercot we will ſpeake hecrafter. \ _ f 
O 


- 


HISTORIE'OF PLANTS. on _ 
Of Flote grafe. (hap. "Y 


1 Gramen faniatile, | 2 Graves faniane fc icatwn, 
Flore gra, | Spiked Flote gra 


my with ſmall ſtrings or thieds : from the which.riſeth ooked ſtalks, 
, winding and folding one within another, * many fs which horſes 
eate —_— 'Ar on op of theſe (talks and ſomewhat lower,there * thruſt foorth many tufts or 
taſſels,of an curnedinndis colour. - 
2 Spike Flote graſle, or ſpiked Flote graſle, beareth at the top of each lender Ntalke, one oneſpited 
care and no-more, and the other many, which maketh a difference berweene them; oth "<1 
are like onethe other,His roote is compaCt and tufted,and made of many thrummic threds, 
- -  % Theplace andtime. 
The placeandrime in which they growe,differeth not from the other Water graſſes, _ *” 
*% The names. if 
The firſt is called Grames fluuiatile,and allo Gramen aquis innatans : in Engliſh Flore grafle. 


 Theſecondiscalled Gramen flunjatule ſpicaton : : likewiſe Flote graſic and Floter _ Sicaule 
they ſwim and flote in the water, | 


' * T he de Haas, A : 
ao pablo and round roote, ſomewhat chicke like vnto TT =o. | 1-3 
eaues, 


*% The nature and vertuts. 
Their natures and vertues are as vnprofitable as the reſt. 


# 0 f Kneed oraſſe. Chap.12. 


* The deſcription, 
"Kong eraſſchall rand vpright ſtrawie ſtalks, with ioinrs like ro the ſtrawe of corne, 
and beareth ſmall trig lcaues or blades,fpiked arthe rop like vnto Liſanachia, fore Cerwleo, 
or 
] £1 


bY; 


X . 4 
NE | 


<a> vegdtan.p ten pile wb s 
4 »” - « - 
- by 


Wo tape ughu* 
* 


we THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
loue ſtrift as we termeit,)of a darke browne colour. His roote is haitie or threddie. FT 
. Tra graſſe hath many longand lender ſtermes, iointed with many knobbie and 
D ok knees, likevntoreede ſer with brode flaggie leaues ſomewhat ſh e pointed: bearing at the 
rop a ruft of pannicle, diuded! into ſundric Gnallfranches of a duskiſh . Hisroote is threddic 
like the other.” 7 ; «+: | 


pneneants > A Gee 
ag Fe 12 
a 


GD ye re 


$4" LES. 48g ya —_— 
0 a — —_ — _ - 
age” ba af D.n® p 4. % — 


—_ — 


_ 
CY 


% - 
y - 
= _ Z 
_ ” 2 
pe, 
: y XZ: ; 
of Cerrina 
as 
_ 4 
A - -_ - 
- - ” 
"—_ - 4 o 
4 rey - g—_ yy ' _ 4 
w 
a : 
—— La m—— - % 
\ i 
a y' } 
ALT, \ , F 
- ef - # k y ' j 
Et qc tl Yn ooo 8 « 
= —— : bd ; > 
Ra } ” : = / 
W o : 4 ” 
: pF ' 
* % 
—_ =d CY \ 3 
a 
= —— - > oh EG - PEI INES as þ 
» _ = - F Py ”w 
PP = r z 
ay 5 — »- _ nt 44 . " o 


| [35s 2 * The place and time. 
Theſe grafſes do grow in ferell moiſt medowes : nor differing in time from others. 
| 12:4 * The names. ED 
Itis ſocalledbicauſeithath i joints like as it were knees,and cherefore termed Geniculatwn,kneed, 
| * The nature and vertues. 
We haue nothing delivered Vs by the ancients of their nature and 2306 0/5 


P m_ graſſe. Chap.1z-- 


| | % The deſcription. 
Earded hath vodemdllen leaues | , fomewhathoarie, or of an ouerworne 
ruſſetcolor. The ſtalks one or two ioints at the moſt,and many eares on the top,with- 
outorder : vpon ſome ſtalks more cares, on others fewer, much like vnto the care of Hol- 
chus Pliny,or Hor dew ſpurium  pontantwn. ln Engliſh Baſtard Barly graſſe. £ 
2 Small Pannicke , graſle as Lobelizs writeth, in rootes, leaucs, ioints or knots and ſtalks,is like the 
ED that theearcis 6s andchaffic, 


2 þ Age 36 


THE BIRST BOOKE! OF THE 


1 Gramenpaluitre Echinatun. wo” Gramen exile a 


ow 
k 


. ; wr We 
% bs Ee? LTH vj Y 
ES"? LCN A 


£S Hf 


| The place and time. 
They grow in watery ditches,as yob may ſee in going from Paris Sn beldge to Saine Gems 


fields, andſuch like places : where afo are ſome of the paſſes which we haue ages deſcribed, 
tobe ſcenc. | | | 


* | & Thinner. | 
The firit is called He chog graſſeand i in Latine Gramen Echinatun, by reaſon of thoſe prickles 
whichare like vntoa Hedgehog, | 
The ſecond Hairie graſie,Gramenexile Hir mtun Cypereides bicanſei itis ſmall & little, and rough 
or hairie like a goate: and 4 pci bicauſc his rootes do ſpread and creepe like the Cyperus. 
| + The natureandvertues. 


Their natures and vertues are fruteleſlc as many ofthe others are, and therefore nothing is deli- 
ucred vs of them by ou our wrIItcrs. : | 


Of. Hor eWood aſe Op2s: 


| | w* Thedeſers iption. 

Airie Wood qraſſe hath rough leaues, ſomewhat like the precedent, bur the leaues of 
"Hi: this arc longer, and proceede from a threddie roote, which is very thicke and full of 
ſtrings,as the common graſſe doth : with ſmall ſtalks riſing vp from the ſame rootes : but 
the top of theſe ſtalks are diuided i intoa number of little branches. Andonthe endofeuerie one of 
them ſtandeth alittle flower orhuskelike the top of Alluns Pr ſinum,or common nRamdons; wherein 

the ſeede is contained when the flower is fallen, . Te 
\ 2 Cyperus Wood grafſe hath man v4 aſſic Janes, roceeding from aroote m many 
hairie ſtrings or three: ; among w nh dere vp ld ſtraight ps vprighr ſtalks, on whole 

rops 


or fruitful. 


HISTORTE: OF PEANTSET” ys 


T Gr amen Panittion.” | 2 Diode PAN perm, 
Bearded grafle; | rae (nt 26 UE 


f£- 
AzS þ 


* Theplece and time. 
' Thefil of theſe two doth grow neere vnto mud wals, or ſuch like placesnot manured, , yetfertill 


The ſecond j ſhallow waterie plaſhesofpaſture $,and at the ſaidrimewithorhers, 
*% The names. | 
Iris called Pannicke,þicauſc it is like the Italian core called Pannicke. 
*% The nature andvertues. 
They are vnprofitable for phiſicke, and therefore there is nothing left vs of chaie vertues and 


Of Hedgehog graſſe. (| hap. I4., 
nh * The deſcription. 
' Honacnntanma gt 
iro OY _ atthetop ofcueric JYOneUL Cereal 


2 Theſecond, ,whith is hairic grafle, isas as rough and hairic a5 2 91 . His rootes doſpreadand 
creepe iderche mud and mire as Cyperus doth: inde wy the ſtalks are certaine pricking 


© x A I 1 Gramen 


— 


and Ales, or rather ſpikic cares, not much vnlike the catkins or rags 


* he plac and time. 
Theſe rwokindedWgrom inwoods forthe moſt part, or ſhadowie "_ wdmayin Eng 
be calledthe Hairie Wood ,odgraſſe. The tiweis _ with the reſt, 
*% The names. 
fi, plinecharchey are rermedby gename, bak they grow in woodr hade,as we haue 
d. 


* The natures and vertnes, 
| Thexcienoingr be adof thirmanmesandvermes, 


fd Of Sea Spit grafſe. Cer 16. 


*% The de 
EE tans Men inches long,riſing from a buſhie threddy 
e inhandling, as for the moſt part all Sea graſſes 
_ ſmall ruſhic ſtalks : alongſt which are 
the care of Lauander. 
thicke roote, with ſome ſmall hairie rhreds fa- 


ſtened thereunto = ofwhich Hh doanchnt and rough leaues like the former, bur ſomewhat broa- 


der :and | , Which haue on borh fides finall knobs or butrons 


? =—_—_ 
F , i % . ] = _ 
- FA & \ 4 £ KA ; 4 4 I P , 
q* t . 4 ; 4 C - 
: - * w * _ Fd # - . 
* 4 of . id ks 
. 


1/1HISDORIE) OF PLANTS." I7 - 


F 


me 


Aracy 


QF. THE 


S 


F 


» -F 

; 

| 4 ol 4} 
n | i 

| _ 1 b; 

Þ #* 


Pa 


. 


—& 
>< 

' +» 
© 
[©] 
fs] 
wy 
tb 
Wo! 
T 
_ 1 


en 


I Gram 


Mar, 


"e- rs or ng 
4A LIM F wt i 
; "> ihr i EET 9, 


$ Un ad wg __. 5.2 — AG Ie $42 Ny 1 Mt He _— ON 
mos At | - ne kn 


. : 
HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 19 


The third hath many ruſhic leaues,tou and hard, of a browne colour,wellreſembling ruſhes : 
heeowks compa of m any rallough nd long op NN His ſtalke is bare and naked of .leaues 
varo the top,on which it hath many ſmall, pretic and ch 

4 Theſourths like the rhirdſaung hariti aller: talk lf nal andnaked andarthe top 
ſuch hnkes3 are in ruſhes, 


Grawen re C 10 = Sheds vides 
; Great ypreſſe =. "oa Scaal Cypreſſ i / 


7 Thefiritf theſe two kindes 
very like vnto the right Cy 
urs og | mite doit ong xroad,rough,ſ 
artnee Elke Cogale. ita bi d ſquare, like ntoare de, ; 
chaſe mbellor uſt oth log, wi: {Os 
The ſecond kind hath xroad.rough.and < ene wroteon 
Falk ng ER ag dhe gllcd won pe Ladies 
aces, as WE ir. yd vnto Recde | q———_ 
phe el ingk ad chafhe ſi DR. g,and __ opintin _ it. | 
Ca 7 Grameny 


- 20 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE | 
7 Gramen aqua __—_— woe 


10. $6411 14 (PP uk 
MN rg nc 11g 


VA,/ 


WAY! 


| FP 
| Lf! ; 
tz} . 
T1 g 
'T, 4 
{1 
: 
4 


n ) 4 : : : 
\ MLM I" 
WW 1 . 
l/s 850; 
1 i : 3 j 
WR. f/ 


DY IN \\ V4 


— af al (WV Ds "Y | 
W-/ AR YARN At =—s 


£2 PLZ Rs —— © The 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS.. ul 
—— nt »:% The 


drhreddie. 


hich rite mapodked, bodgh.and rulhicſtalks, hauingroward the top 
ſcalic and chaflic knobs px buttons, 41008 | 21 vb Cal 10 20120 10 2004.95.44 | 


12 Gramen harundinaceuwn minus: 

_  SmallReedegrafle. _ 
7 *t P # . 
i b& 1 2 


ho * \ 
=_- 5 
a " * 
« K < %. f 
A = Bo L 
- %\” wed - 
— \\ D 
—— % 
= \ J 
% 


£& | * Thedeſeription. "F5, | 
11 Thefirſthathmany faireand {> vom alks, riſing from a thicke knobbie and rough 
roote, jointed and kneed like vnto te, His leaues are very well like the common Reede, 
hauing at the top a feather-like care, ſpike or knop of a chaffic ſubſtance, like vnto the common 
Reede whereof it tooke hisname. | [4 he fu DOWD LW. 
12 Theſecond kinde doth not differ from the precedent,fauing that this is ſinallerthan ir. 
22 7... # Theplace $ime names natures and vertues. IR | 

All the graſſes which we hauc deſcribed in this chapter, do-growe in matiſh and waterie places 
neete to the ſea, or other fenny grounds, or by muddie and mirie ditches, at the famertime thar the 
others do growe and flouriſh. Their names arc eaſily gathered of the places they growin,or by their 
deſcriptions :and are-of no vertue nor propertie for medicine,or neceſlaric vicas yerknowey, 


Of Couch grafſe or Dogs praſſe. - Chap.17. 


BY Fs | *% Thedeſcription. TOE gh + | | 
_ He common or beſt knowen Dogs grafle or Couch grafle, hathlongleaues like ynro the eg 
{mall Reede,ſharpe atthe point, cutting like a knife ar the edges. The ſtalke is acubirand —_ 
ahalfe long, with joints ot knees like wheaten ſtraw f theplume ortuſtis like the Rape, | X 
x "ts Fo. 


22 THE FIRST pOOKE. OF THE 

but ſmaller andmore chafhic : ir creeperth inthe hither and hither with long white rootes, 
jointed nn gy platted orwrapped one within ano- 
ther very intricately, in ſo muchas where ithappenerh in- gardens among pot herbs, greatlabour 
muſt be ukluboſor incan de deſtroied! | | vw AT at: 
2 Knottic Dogs grafſeis like vnto theformer in ſtalke and leafe. The tuftor eares long and chaf. 
fie, ofa browne colour. The roote is like vnto Saffron, knobbie or knortie, Gerhmoliantncſer 
vpon another, like the rootes or bulbs of [eveins Italicus,or —_— corne flag. | 


1 Grewes Conlon. (an + i 


R 7 . is Thrpdine.” | 
1 Thefirſtgrowethin gardens andalel ord che landed plagueof thei the fields, no- 
thing pleaſing to the husbandmenz for after thar the fieldis plow 0 to 1-52 neg 
the rootes er with harrowes and rakes: andbeing fo gathered laid vpon heapes, 
chemon fire tip hovid growe ogai 
2 Theſecondgroweth Ct eur ds and ſuch like laces, bur noteuery where as the other : I 
haue found of theſe in grear plentic both growing,andp wr arg. Frame at cad 
{ed, inthe fieldsnext ” Satnr Iames wall as ye eto Cheley, andinhe ct as ye go from the 
rower ill of LondontoRagcliffe. - | 

*% The time. 


The time anſwereththe time of the other graſſes. 

' *%* The names. ae fs 

It is called Coninwn or 's ainale, and Y mols, countrie menof Brabant do avg, tg" 

others Ledt grafle. Of che recians &gwp: of the tins bythe common name Gramen. Itis of 
ſome named<2«v-:in Engliſh Couch grafſe,Quirch graſle, 

Gramen Caninun —__ or $A is called in neliſh Kogbbie or Knottic Couch w_ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 23 


| wot *% The nature. *. 
The narure of Couch grafle, eſpecially the rootes agreeth with the nature of comman grafle:al- 
hchat Couch Bro e bean vnvelcome gueſt to fields and gardens, yet his phiſicke vertues 
do recompence thoſe hurts : for it openeth the ſtoppings ofthe liuer and raines, without any mani- 
feſt heate. | | " | | 

The lcarned Phiſitions of the College and ſocietic of London, do holde this' Bulbus Couch 

graſſe in remperature,agrecing with the common Couch graſle but in vertues moreeffetuall,. 
bk: 4 * The vertues. + | ' 

Couch grafle healeth greene wounds. The decotion of the roote is good for the kidneies and A 
bladder: it prouoketh vrine gently, anddriueth foorth grauell. Disſcorides and Galen doagtce,thar 
theroote ſtamped and laid ypon (pope wounds doth heale them ſpeedily. 

The decoction thereof ſeructh againſt griping paines of the bellic, and difficultic of making B 
wately | | | 

Marcellus an'old author maketh mention in his 26.chaprer, that ſeuen and twenty knots of this C 
Gramen nodoſurs boiled in wine till halfe be conſumed, prefled foorth, ſtrained and giuen to drinke 
to him that1s troubled with the ſtranguric, hath ſogrear vertne, that after the patient hath once 
begun.to make water without paine, itmay not be giuen with wine any more, but with water onely, 
By whichwords it appeereth, that.this knotred grafle was taken forthat which is Property called 
Gramen Or i 9 Ko and hath been alſo commended againſt the ſtone and diſcaſes of the þladder. 

The Jater Phiſitions do vie the rootesſomrimes of this,and ſomtimes of the other differently. 


Oo Sea* | > | LO at - - -1 


I Gramen Canin marinuw. - _ 2 Gramen Canine marinan alterun. 


Cad 


24 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


% The deſcription. 
He Sea Dogs oralle py like vnto the other before named : hisleaues dana, 
ps 6 ſlender, and very compact togither, ſervpon a knortie ſtalke, ſpiked at the top like 
the former: alſo the ma he. wr ww. and creepeth hitherand thither vnder the earth, 
occupying much ground,by reaſon ofhis great increaſe of rootes. 
2 Theſecond Sea Dogsgrafleis according vnto 7'0bel fomwhar like the former : his rootes are 
more ſpreadingand longer, diſperfing themſelues vnderthe ground further than any of thereſt, 
The leaues are like the former,thicke buſhedatthe top,with a cluſter or buſh of ſhort thicke leaues 
one folded within anocher, The: ſtalke ard tuftis ofa middle kinde berweene rm and the com- 


mon Couch grafle, 
* The aa VEertues. 


They grow on the ſea ſhore,at the ſame timethar others do, And are ſo calledbicauſe my grow 
neete the ſea fide. Their nature cand vertues are tobe referred vnto Dogs graſle. 


Of wrighDep graſſe. — Chop. 9. 


I WOT 'ONY | | j | 2 Gramre Striatum. 
Vpright Dogs gra e\ ___  LadieLacegrafſe, 


2 , | 
i The dferiptios 


| t Dogs graſſe or C or Q" ich grafſe, byreaſon 0 4 lon 1s it AE islike 
 —_ | dharh ar eucry knor mos b el xg ſtringsof hairie ſubſt 


+ ©. b4 Ces 
—_—  ——  — 
- 


yWRhichng 
> papers. s OF ribs, r fifakes rann _ 
the -— faſhioning rhe lame he $0 — of white and = lilke, 


_ 


very beaurifull and faire to 
behold; 


P 4 ”»” 
Eg” 


—— 4 \ $1 bs. 6 
6 ; " 


me ® 
_— 4 
aw: at "moe#5.ntf 
ef * : 
DRE ns 


», 
, TP 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. us 


behold; it groweth tothe heightof wilde Pannicke. The roote is ſmall and hairie%and white of co- 
lour like the Medow grafle,hauing a faire buſh or creſt ar the top,like the common Reede. - 

| £255 Pw 
I Vpright Dogs grafle groweth in well ret = EW and fertill fields. | 
2 Ladics Laces growerh naturally in the wooddy and hilly places of Sauoy, and anfrercth com- 
mon graſle in his time of ſeeding. 

| Ir is kept and maintained in our ' Englih gardens, rather for pleaſure than for vertue as yet 
knowen. 


; *% The names. 
L'Obelins calleth it Sulcatumand Gramen ſtriatum, or Gramen pittum: in Engliſh the Furrowed 
aſſe,the White Chameleon grafle,or traked graffe : and viſually ofour Engliſh women itis called 
Ladies LACES/OE Painted graſfle. In Frenclr Aigavflerges harmes, | 
*% The nature axed veriues.. 
The vertues are referred to theDogrgrafſes. 


| 


eta htmt 

Die ESSE ugira $57 Y ” T renee 

"= faint Fro rect nn et HAIR erewith theGer. 
= LOkeernard 


.= 26 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
"3 '. 2 Theſecondkindeof Dewgrafſeor I{chemon differeth lietle from the firſt kinde efDagy graſle, 


ba. reſembling one theather in pannicles,tutts and ſtalks, ſaving that the creſt or tuft is or ſtrer- 
| ; ched out abroad like a Cocks foore ſet downe vpon the ground, whereupon it was called Gal erws 
LApulei. The ſtalke is cleere and vpright, ofa gliſtering purple colour, or rather violer. The tuft is 
' diuded into foweror fiue branches: the former Dew ey ſhe lcaues or blades are like the 
common Medow grafle. 
he place and time. 
17 Thefirſt groweth naturally i in Ed by oro ,lcalic, and in the territories of Goricea and 
h Carinthia, as CAfatthiolus reporteth. 
þy | 2 Theſecond groweth neere vato rough banks of fields,as my ſelfe have ſeenc in the hilly banks 
F neere Greenhithe in Kenr.lt differeth not in time from thoſe we haueſpoken of. 
*% The names. — 

1 The Germans cali it [tmeidatuyrhat isto fay,Ce/z ros,wheteupon i it was called Gramen Aa 
ir ſcemeth to be Milium ſylueftre, ac Spurium quoddam genus, a certaine wilde and baſtard kinde of 
Millet. Leonicenm and Rnellius do name it Capriola and ſapguiraria: ſome would haue itto be Gra- | 
men aculeatien Pliny, bur bicauſe the deſcription thereofis very ſhort, nothing can becerrainly affir- 
med. Bur they are fi r decciued, whothinke it to be Coronoptts, as ſorne very learned haue ſer downe : 
| butcuery onein theſe daies is able to controul that error. Aſatams and Rondeletins haue called it 
Iſchemon Pling, and Gall crus Apulei : L'Obelius calleth it Gramen Manne eſeulentwn, for thatin 
if Germanic ay other parts,as Bohemia and lraly,they vſe ro eate the ſame as a of bread corne ; 
| 25 alſoto make porrage, as we do with Oremeale : for thewhich [as ſeitis there ſowen ascorne, 

and ſent into the YI X and there fold by the pound. aEngidh it may be called Manna 

raſſe, or Dew graſle 

: ip ucoet gc et ever Panican hetero POIs 

ſpecies altera : the other 


oak 


. nature. 
VESD taſte ſweete like checommon Dogs grſl 
* The wertaes. 


oy terbemnadeof this grll hogs greale, andleuenof houſhold bread, it 


A epoeinſa 
cureth the « | 2] | 
B Asinthe onT fl nip wut oreare — 14s Ape 
Wear as 1m. ver,and ſom! Ne cagls rocs. Apuletzy reporte 
donely amr tarog 


= - thateare which is diui xfully h 
entake pate. ; 


W P = | = Cote noſe. (Gap; T% "IV 


| * The rt. #9 " S 


SE Tart 


1 ET 


"oY 


* Fd gp +. 2G 
*h CE nd w_ mY as ve *, . mas r " IE Mews 
mV: __ 7 . yon ep eters. 1 gt et ee 
4 5 OOO OO Ae res - .» ' ; IE Ping; wx _ 
791, OK TO ao. -6 2 ” F< FI 4 4.7% ke wh: 2 Us 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 27 
r Gramen Tomenteriun. 8 


an 


he pil epoaty oe er i hemoortdighinon end beſ bo 
1 Cotton $, uch like moori as itisto beſcene a 
at the funherend of! hears ny packers theri a age 55s 
ofrom London t6 H ; inwhich: growe likewiſe many other rareſimples, as you 
all vnderſtand heerafter in this — Ir cored eewifd iy Milghoms neere London. 
2 WaterGladiole groweth in ſtandin les, motes , par ts ont ditches. I found it in « 
plentie, being in-companie with a worfhipfull gentleman Maſter Zobert YVilbrahow, ata 
fifreene miles from London called Buſhey. It groweth likewiſe by the famous river Thameſ#, not 4 
froma peece of dcalled the Diuels nockecchieth neere Redriffe byLondon, and many other 
places. The ſeaſon anſwereth all others. 
| | * The names. 
1 Gramen tomentoſion is called likewiſe + een of Cordas, Linun ROW and Gnafa- 


liwn Framed Jag 4.1nEn 2” Cotton fr a _ 

2 ater Gladiolcis called of ZObelins, ob peroides flori mw Flowing Copy-ii c 
0 wr Hanes 45, 

ON falle. tine wakdror alt of final 


ruſh. 1c, faith he, for that bis ſtalke is like theR 
Cyperus : Floridas, bicaule it hath on the top of cuery 
flowers, in faſhion ofthe Lillie of Alexandria, the whichitis very like andtherefore] hadrather 
callir the Lille graffe. | 
 t% The natwreand vertues. 
Cordus ſaith , that Tuncus bombicinusſodden in wine , and ſo taken, helperh the throwes and gri- A 
pings of the bellie;thar women hauc intheir childing, - 


There be alſo ſundrie kindes of grafſes wholy wnknowen, or artheleaſt not cabal of the 
| oldwriters, whereof ſome few are touched in name onely by the late and new ivriters: now for as 
much as they haue onely named them, AE Ed ame arc: 


, 


__— 


43 THE FIRST BOOKE. OF THE 


and diligence of painfull ſearchers of nature, and proſecute my pi abour, to.v 
diuers ſorts and manifold kindes of CyperuqFlags,and Ruſhes : bicauſe that there i; 
many of the graſſes before abner dis difference C s, m— is = orreſem- 
blew ,Ithought expedient ro vine nextvnto| 0 : Cl 
rndhck ps $4 followeth, / Fs | 


. 


— 
we 


E733 


pa <; (WW \ 
St 6 2\&\N 
W's aa <0 At CO 4 \ 


4 


Fi: #3. 2 ORR | 
I  [=25 INelif: Galin ale hath leaucs like voto common Recde, butleſſer and ſhorter, 
8 MN: 21 His ſtalke is ” ſquare, two cubits high: vpon whoſe ſtand ſundry bran- ' 
"| a0 090m maeanes Ky F0 ewe 4 ikes, The roote js blackeand 
$941very long, creeping hither and thither, occ much ground by reaſon of his 
= 2%) |preading : of a moſt reand pleaſanc ſi NETS bebkew, 
2 Spaniſh Galingale or ae) 24 us hath his leaues riſing our of the ground like the former, 
The ſtalks do anfwerir in ſquai atthe top whereofdo ſtand fiuc leaues,amongftthe rufr,ſtar 
faſhion : among the which alſ6 do lt fowerchaffie leaues, faſhioned like the leaues of an Aſh 
. tree. The what lantis moſt impaticntof our coldclimate: forir doth periſh withthe firſt froſt, as 
my ſelfe. haue often prooucd i n mine owne garden in London, hauing the rootes ſent me from 
Spaine. 
3 Round Cy qrevech/almoſtrokhb height and greatnesof Reede: the tuft or floweris very 
like vntothe former: the leanes arc broder,and vines in number, The rootesare many AlagDy, 
ouall in Fant arenas with many ſtrings or threds, altogither withour ſmell, 
4 Cats-taile grafſc hath oy long Pn lcaucs, comming from a fibrous or threddie roote, 
among 


=|  HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 29 


aglers, relemblingthereede mace,or Geeta End lack colors 


tins as well Cypirms as Cyperms : of ine Jes 
iscalled of Guillas L; 


® ns \ < *, ” f | F # 2" 4 #04 : | " 
© omisdount brogt or boat 100 ett 1 2617219 
" Fa «| ay = F : wy : E. 1 £8 
rt fins [O- #1 ot} vba 2d ont 
= .' 
F ; : LE oi t- of 


; : #14 
WY" ' R . : 3 19 ; 
s o : 


3 TLIC ; 


— l + S % 
RFA he's [4 £2 4% 
115193; 3 25338 © £5:% £4 ; 


i SS + » 3 Z 4 
I & 
- 2 - "© 'o I j Fa 
:and poiſon of NICs 
. ; 


| Ferneling 


ie mem- 
om_ 


30 THE: FIRST BOOKE OF THE _. 
D ramaledonligthenemens Cypervledin baths, helpeth the coldnes and Ropping of thema- 
rrix,and prouokeththe termes.} - 
E ; He weenhalothr increaſed bloody warming _ warming the bodie and making Goo LE 3 WON- 
cItU reſhing ilarating minde, c Abe 
their lnelineſſopetioring Wer 2 decaied,and a fivecte br 
F Thepowderof Cypermedoch not onely drie vp all moiſt vicers cither of rhe 
bers,orfundament,bur ſtaicth the humor, and T7” 
according tothe iudgementof Fepnelins, 4 
| Of Se 144 (oh Obpay 
I JuNcus angie. 
SeaRuſh ule. | | 


| tolcadevs totheknow fs, ths jeg oke 
. = fem. Tioga s,which be rem | rt 1tec 
RIA: Their tuft or erbreakerh mth a lrde bencaththe rop \ponckc chef 


44HISTORIE/OF PLANTS./ | of 
cheruſh vpon little ſhort ſtems like grapecluſters,wherein rt the ſeede afterthe 
faſhion if poine, The rooeabender ndhllotin hoogwo ours 17 yo 


nag in. 

= ire ney ck ing 52> S301539347 me 1 yy 
the ſharpe Raſh, is likewiſe echbinorrand: will lenlwven -ormted differiin 

Fo m_— lev bucharder, rougher and ww) np houſes and chambe 

than any gf the 3 Ichi they turneto duſtand fileh wich much 

ereading _ conrrariviſe this 2_ is lo harg,rhet! itwill laſt ſound much longer, 


3 Juncus Ficus Maxine. 'X ek 4 hte ws acut we. 
Great ater Ruſh or Bull Ruſh, | Sharpe Ruſh ,or hard Ruſh, 


14 jj J 7, : 


| » *% The place. | 
I Iu Marini greminews, Francis Penny of famous memorie, POE NET 
herbariſt, found this Searuſhin the coaſt of the Mediterrane fea, inthe way-as he trauelle to 


Piſcaire, and hath not as yer been found in England. 
2 Junculeaitgroweth in fertill fields,and medowes that.are ſomewhat moiſt, 


3 Jullcus aquaticus _—_— rg $,and by riuers ſides i in molt places. > 
4 Juncus acute I= grounds, ef —_— Pow parc plowed 


land.Ineede nor ſpeake of their ek ime Demo being ſo common as they are. 


Bames.. 
The Ruſh is called in Grecke iv : in Latine Juncmus : in high Dutch Sinken : : in lowe Dutch 
Bieſent in Iralian Giapco : in Spaniſh June : in French Jons : in Engliſh Ruſhes, | 
The Grecians haue called the Bull ruſh iagciro. 
Iuncus Lewis is that raſh which Dioſcoridescalled yires nels. = 
Jencm eexriwiscalled in Greeke 95v@.In Dutch Bſeren Byeſen, | 


* The natore, 
'Theſeruſhes are of a drie nature, 


22 THE FIRST BOOKE' OF. THE 

A Theſeedeof ruſhes dricd at the fire, anddrunke with wine alaied with water, ſtaieth the laske, 
and the ouermuch flowi ICI 24-2 EY «Los 

B Galenyeeldeeh this reaſon therof, bicquſe ir temperature conliſterh of an earthie eſſence, 
moderately cold and waterie, and meanly hot : and therefore doth the more eafily drie vp thelower 
parts, and by little and lirtle ſend vp the cold humors to the head, whereby it prouoketh drowſines 
anddefire to ſleepe ; but cauſeth headach,whereof Glen yeclderh the reaſon as before, 

C Thertenderleaues that be next the roote, make a conuenicnt ointment againſt the birings of the 


ſpider called Pg "7 | -| _ | | PS] 
D The ſecde of the Bull ruſh is moſt ſoporiferous ; and therefore the greater caremuſt be had in the 

adminiſtration thercof,leaſt in prouoking ſleepe,you induce a drowlines,ordeepe llecpe. , 
Of Reedes.. Chap-24. 
7 HS | 
| F' vo The bindeff' "7 

F Reedes the ancients haue ſer downe many ſorts. Theophrafmhath them all firſt 

() into two principallkindes,and thoſe hath he diuided againe into mo forts. The two princi 


> aretheſc,. Auletice,ot Tibiales harundines, and valletoria. Of theſe and we 
will pcakein their properplaces. | hb Wittc 


1 Harundo Vallatoria. 
CommonReede, 


| | |  Thedeſeription. | | . 
MM He Common Reede hath long ftrawic ſtalks, full of knottie joints or knees like 
Iv >. vnto corne,whereupon do grow very long rough fiaggie leaues. The tuft or ſpokic 
WA N /g] care doth grow atthe -" a the ſtalks, browne 6t colour, barren and without 
E389 B23 leede.. And doth reſemble a buſh of feathers, which turneth into fine or 
EI= 5 cotton, which is caricd away with the winde. The roote isthicke, long, andfullof 
[5 = | _ ſtrings, 


we 


” /HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. || 33 


themſelves far abrode,whereby ir doth great! veto | 
Reede is the greateſt of all reedes, hauing mnoliogtng] Gmoitareof 
,of a wooddiefubſtance, ſet with very great leaues , be oy 


rthir 
ent 
' : | 
4 Calamus (a inal L Obety, | 
Small + Reede. 


4 444 by $40) 
+ yatny + 


* 


uy 
Wd - Th 
| ET, ili ll 
W 
Ig Wile 


il I Ml 


x 0001 
ka 


ih LAlSanI) Nia "4 14,2) Wi 03d 


W171 z, ith 


y 


CEE 
ry 7 k 
Rt 499 hd; 


3 TheſcReedes Z0bel;wshath ſeene inthe Low countries b efrom Conſtan inople,y w 
asitis ſaid, the people of that countric haue procured them from the parts of the Adriatike ſea de 
ious ſubſtance, ſo that there is no hoiſo 


where they do are full ſtufr with a { 
ag bed: aud other reedes, encapechins and there certaine ſmall pores or paſſages, of 


the ſame, asin Canes 
s of a pins point; in manerſuch a pichas is to befound inthe Bull ruſb, but more = 


the bi 

and ide. | | 

4 Theſecond differeth in ſmalnes, otherwiſe they are very like; which may proceede of the fer 
tilitic of the ſoile where they do grow: andare viedfor darts,arrowes,and ſuch like, 


5 Thisgreatſort ofReedes or Canes, hath no particular deſcription toanſwer your IG te ; 
the manner of growing 


for that as yet there is notany man which hath written thereof, eſpecially 

ef chi ibeateatedy or rom others : ſo that irſhallſuffice that ye do know 
that that great Cane is vicd es 4s near and thercabout, of aged and wcalthic 
citizens, and al{o noblemen and ſuch, great perſonages, tomake their walking ſtaues of, caruing 
rojes of imagerie, for the beaurifieng of them: 


them atthe ropwith ſundric ſcutchens, and prety 
andſothey of thebetter ſortdo gankiſh them borh with filuer and golde, as the hgure doth moſt 


livelyſet foorth yntoyou. 
6 nlike maner the ſinaller ſort hath not as yer been ſecne g growing of an char hoveberncurizus 
it hath beene vſedin 


in herbariſine, whereby they might ſet downe any cerraintie Chen on 
Conſtantinopleand thereabout,cuen to this day to mike folate, pens withall,forthe (omIg ir doch 


very = ſerue,as alſo ro make Pn ſuch like things of Ps 
| 5 Naſtos 


— 


\ 


; 


9 nd THE FIRST BOOKE'OF/ THE 


Naftes Clu 6 Arundo ta. (, 35G3d6 4 4 ke 
Dec wakinganes Gs Thecommon reeds! ns Ain diag es 


1m fm 1 dog any ger or of riuers almoſt 
L1 4]; 2... euery where : and the other the 

| Cane for fiſhers, grower in agg and thoſe 
hot regions, 


* Therime. 

They flourifh and flower from Aprill to the 
end of September , at what time they are cur 
downe for the vieof man,as all do know. 

* The names. 

The common Reede is called {4 -d> and 
Harwundo wallatoria : : in French Zoſeau: in Dutch 
Reet : in Iralian Canme « far fiepo : of Dios,Phra- 
gmitis : in Engliſh Reede. 

 CArundoC is, or after ZObtliue, Arands 
Donax: in ench Canne : in Spaniſh Cana: in 
Italian Calowi a far Connechia : in "6h Pole 
reede,and Canegor Canes, | 

Reedes arc hot anddrie in the Ccond degree, 
as Galen faith, 


* The vertues. 


The rootes of reede ſtamped ſinall, drawe 
foorth thornes and ſplinters fixed in any part of 


mans bodie, 
| The ſame with vineger, eaſc all 
1 OOO : 


And likewiſe ſt edeheyhedi hot i Alarpe inflammations. The aſhes of themmixed with 
vineger helpeth the ſcales and and {curſe of the head, and helperh the haire to grow in Alopecia, or 
falling of the haire. 

) Thegreatreedeor caneis not'viedin phiſicke, but is eſtcemed to make ſlearresfor weauers, ſim- 
drie ſorts of pipes, as alſo tolight pool that ſtand before images, and to make hedges and pales - 
as we do of laths and ſuchlike : and alfo tg make certaine diuilions in ſhips to diuide the ſweete 

orengesfrom the erty pomecitron oy limons likewiſe in ſunder,and manyother purpoſes. 

| dic downdof thi common reede fall of {acre wh of any which ei it, be they tharchers, or | 
bortemen, or deans a cometh agen crafresin 42 hard tobecured. | 


of Sugar Cane. Chap. 25. 


| 630120 The de ſcription. 
[- Vgar Canc is a pleaſant and profitable Reede, having bong ſtalkes, ſeaven i. er HD, 
i " gh , iointedor kneed like vntothe great Cane: the leaues come foorth of euery joint on 
FS of theſtalke one, like vnto wings,long,narrow and ſharpe pointed. The Cane ic 
"IY Or Galle, isnot hollow as the other Canes or Reedes are; bur full, and ſtuffed with a ſpungji- 


 - ousſubſtanceintaſteexcecding ſiweere: the roote isgrear andlong,creeping along withinthe vp- 


per criiſt of the earth, which is likewiſe ſiweere and Pleaſant , bueleſſe hard or wooddie then -other 
Canes orReedes : from the which there doth ſhoote foorth manic yoong ſciences, which are cut 
away fromthe maine or mother plant, bicauſe they ſhouldnor Ao. away the rn ery from 
the old ſtocke,and ſo get vnto themſelues alirtle moiſture,orelſe ſome ſubſtancenot much woorth,, 
and cauſe the ſtocke to be barren,and os TIT] the OP which ſhootes do wo Ev: plants 
to fer abroad, for encreaſe. _ 
+ The 


[ 


Harundso Saccharing, | ; 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 3s 


a? OP 4 *T | es | ans, 
Sugar Reede.” > /* The ſigar Canegroweth in many parts of Eu- 
a | rope at this day, as Spaine, Portugale, Olbiaand 
| HZ: . in Prouence. It groweth alfo m Barbarie,generally 


OT 


TD 
| Nv 


almoſt every where in the Canarie Ilands, and in 
__ thoſe of Madera, inthe eaſt &weſt Indies,and ma- 


4 a PF; nic other places, My ſelfe did plant ſome ſhootes 

['/ N\F7//, thereof in my garden , and ſome in Flaunders did 

[i —_ [| 4 the like : bur the cold £ our Clymate made an 
Wi / \ \s wu 7/7 end of mine,andIrhinkethe Flemmings will haue 

s/ \'#/// the like profit of their labour. 

L/ Ya * * Thetime. 


This Cane is planted ar any time of the yeere 


in thoſe hot countries where it doth naturally 
| growe, by reaſon they feare no froſtes ro hurt the 


4 
- 
"4 my 
- p 
= 
ow " af | 
$ _—_ ; - 


*% The natureandvertnes. © 

The Sugar or iuice of this Reede is of a tempe- A 

rate qualirie: itdrieth andclenſeththe ſtomacke, 

maketh ſmooth the roughneſle of the breaſt and 

Iungs,cleereth the voice, and putteth away hoarſ- 
nes,the cough, and all ſowrenes and bitternes, as 

 ſſaachaithin Dis. | . 


Cf 
y | yoong ſhootes at their firſt planting. Vl 
C i | * The names. | 
A\=/; | The Latines have called this plant _£rwnd: 
WD \Y 8. Saccharing,with this additament Indica * bicaulc it 
AN \ / was firſt known, or brought from India. Offome ir 
2 0 J | is called Calamus Saccharatts: in Engliſh Sugar 
> y Cane:in Durch Suptckerriedr. 4 


F 5 ; 
ha 
' | of + 
L x. - " 


: * Thevſe. | 
Of thefiuice of this Reede is made the moſt nts and profitable ſiveere,called Sugar,where- 
of is madeinfinite confeions,confeftures,firupes,and ſuch like, as alſo preſerung and conſeruing 
of ſundrie fruits,herbes and flowres;as Roſes, Violets, Roſemary, flowres, and ſuch like, which ſtill 
retaine with them the name of Sugar,as Sugar RE Violet,&c.The which to write of would 
requite a peculiar volume,and not pertinent vnto thus hiſtorie,for that it is not my purpoſe to make 
of my booke a confectionarie, a Sugar bakers furnace, a gentlewomans preſeruing pan, nor yet an 
apothecaries ſhop or difpenſatorie,buronely to tovehthe chiefeſtmarter rhat I purpoſed to handle 
inthe beginningthat is,the nature, properties,and deſcriptions of plants, Notwithſtanding Trhinke 
itnotamiſle to | vnto youthe ordering of theſe Reedes- when they be new gathered, as I re- 
ceived it from the mouth of an Indian my ſeruantyhe ſaith: They docut themin ſmall peeces;8&pur 
them intoa trough made of one whole tree, wherein they puta great ſtone in maner of amilſtone, 
whereunto they tic a horſe, bufle, or ſome other beaſt which draweth it rounde: in which crough, 
they pur thoſe peeces of Canes, and1o cruſh and grinde them,as wedo the barkes of trees for Tan- 
ners, or apples for Cyder. Bur in ſome places they vie a great wheele, wherein flaues do tread and 
 walkeas dogs dointurning rhe ſpit:and ſome others do feede as it were the bottome of the faid 
 wheele, whereit are ſorneſharpe or hard things, which do cur and cruſh the Canes into powder, 
And ſome likewiſe haue found the inuention to turne the wheele with water workes, as we do our 


iron mils. The Canes being thus broughr.nto' duſt-or powder, do put them intogreat caul- 

drans witha little wa \— 21s they boile nfs there be no oy contig leftin nd 

de. 'Then'do they frathe theiri through mars and ſuch ooh on + and putthe liquor to boile 
ine-vntothe con e of hofiie, which being cold, is like vits - in ſhewe and: hand- 
g, bur Mofter*and intoall parts of Europe, where iris by the 

Sugar bakers artificially whitenes,as we ſee, | 5211 009 nt, 000 1 


, SAT | of _ 


THE FIRST BOOKECOF THE. 


_Ofe the foorng ayer Chap. 26. 


Harunds florids. |  _._ 

Flowring Reede, The deferqrion. 
' > Louriſhing Reede hath athick and far ſtake, 
; Encetptans 


| the gomdgntager eau; taper 
wiſe: whereupondo [oa very faire brode leaues, 
| full of ribs orfinewes like vnto Plantaine, in ſh 
| reſembling the leaues of white Hellebor , She 
| great Gentian, but much broder and euery 
| way. Arthetop of which ſtalks do grow e 
& | flowers, of agreeneor herbie colour; which being 
J  . faded, there followe round , rough , and prickly 
| knobs.like thoſe of ater burre ,of 
4. 2 browne colour, and trom be middle of thoſe 
L. ſnobe _ ſmall leaues. tio 
.thoſekno imam c's wy Round: 
_ |"Jex, ofthe bigne« ofthutlndit pants,” Wherooe 
£ | is thicke, kn; y andtuberous,with certaine finall 
| thredsfixedthereto. | 
© The {aq 
\] |  Itgrowethinlealie,in garden of Padua,and 
ZN many other places of thoſe Go regions. My ſelfe 
XA - bauc planted it in my garden diuers times, but it 
W  neuer came to flowring or ſeeding, for that it is 
| very impatient to endure the iniuric of our colde 


SSN | climate. 
\\N | | * Thetime. 
| , Ir muſt bee ſet or ſowen in the beginning of 
\ Aprill, in a por with fine earth, orina bed made 
of horſe dung , and ſome canhiſtrawed thereon, in ſuch manner as Cucumbers and muske Me- 
lons are. ct 
* T 


The name Stade is ;diuerſly attriburedto fundeie of the reedes,but principal vnto AV 
calledof Z Obelins Canmacori : : of others Arundo florida, and Harwnde florida: in En the Flow. 


_ ringReede, | 
| * Mga OAPI OR | | 
There isnor any thing ſer downe as touching the temperature and vertues of this ME 
reede either of the ancjents,or of the new Or PP writers, | 


of Pape Ret Chap. 27. 


| + Thedeſrium 
Poniaen many large laggic leaves, PE CO ELF Tr US FORO | 


mediately from atuft of rootes tofr ,among the which ſhooterh vp naked 
L ea; para wipune Sr proc w/o gh ndl LE 
contender planing ruft of OR dvr wil, 


| 


; % [ j . 
£ 


OF. PLANTS. 37 


| % The pace. LED 

This kinde of reede doth growe in'the borders of 
rivers about Babylon,neere the citic Alcaire, inthe 
borders of the river Nilus, and ſuch other places of 


thoſe countries. 


SETS. % The wry" | | | 
The time of ſpringing and flouriſhing,anſwereth 
that of the common The | 


| |  # The names. | | 
This kinde of reede, w Rp haue engliſhed Pa- 
rreede,or Pa nt,is the ſame,(as I do reade, 
ow paper wy ov! wh in Egypt, before the Sy 
tion of paper madeof linnen clouts, was found out. 
Ir is thought by men of great learning and vnder- 
ſtanding in the Scriptures, and ſer downe by them 
for truth, that this plang is the ſame reede mentio- 
nedin the ſecond chapter of Exodus : whereof was 
made that baskert or cradle , which was dawbed 
within and without with ſlime of that country, cal- 
led Bitumen Iudaicum, wherein Moſes was pur be- 
ing committed to thewater , when Pharaoh gaue 
commandement that all the male children of the 
_ Hebrues ſhould be drowned. © 
| * The nature, vertues and ve. 
V/A. | The roores of Paper cede doth nouriſh ;as may A 
—R AMES appeecre by the. people of Egypt , which do yie ro 
» FAN OR INE ? © chewthemintheirmouthes,and fallow downthe 
FE it wnhonn, dans % », luice: finding therein great delighrtand comforr. 
The aſhes burned, affivage and conſume hard apoſtumes, tumors and corraſtue vicers in any B 
part of the bodie, but chiefly in the mouth. | TH. 
The burnt paper made heerof doth performe thoſe effets more forcibly. & 4 C 
The ſtalks Dok haue a fingular vie and privilege in opening the chanell or hollow paſſages of D 
the Fiſtula,being purtherein: for they do ſwel,as doth the pithiof Elder,or atent made of a ſponge. 
The people rar Niles do vſertoburne the leaues and ſtalks, but eſpecially the rootes. 
The frailes wherein they pur raiſons and figs, are fomtimes made heerof : but generally with the F 
herbe Spartwm,deſcribed in the next chapter. wt | 


Of «Mat Weede. (jhap.28. 


| % The kindes. 
Therebe diuers kindes of Mat Veedes,as ſhall be declared in their ſeuerall deſcriptions. 
| *% The deſcription. | | | 
1 f=r7 He herbe Spartum, as Plinyfaith, ones of it ſelfe, and ſenderh foorth from the 
SY PT &f roote a multitude of {lender ruſhic leaues, of a cubic high'orhigher, tough and plia- 
72 Fo ble,of a hoarie colour, which in time draw narrow rogither, making the flat cafe to 


: 


2 becomeround, as is theruſh. The ſtub or ſtalke thereof ohh hae cop —_ 


feather-like rufts comming foorth of a ſheath or huske, among the which chaflie husks|is con- 
tained the ſeede,long and chaffie. The roote confiſteth of many ſtrings, folding one within atorher, 

by meanes whereof it commeth to the forme of a turfe or haſſocke. N | fs 
2 Theſecondlikewiſe ?l;nze deſcribeth tohaue a long ſtalke,not vnlike toreede,butleſſertwhere- 


- 
: 


on do grow many graſſie leaues Fough and pliant, hard in handling as are the ruſhe  (pokie 
chafhetuft gfoweth at the top of the ſtalke, comming foorth of a hoodor finewie ſheath, ſuch as 
incloſeth the flowers of Onions,leckes,Narciſlus, and ſuch like before they come to flowrinjz, with 


eede androotes like the precedent. | 


C3 I Spartinn | 


C4 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
1 Spartumn Pliny Cluſo. | 
Plintes Mat Weede. | 


/ FF 


. 


15 —— 
p_ ——— 


o IS. \ : % & W/ FP 
JY , : A Ih 
'D SS FIALY 
LY noo—_ \V | 
d SANS AY 
# 1 ; i 
A ; \ 
JG KS 5 \\ 
\ 
4 


/N 
\ 
E 


| 4 /HISTORI® OF PLANTS. - 49 
3 Engliſh'Mat weede hath a ruſhie roote, deepely creeping and growing in heapes of ſand and 


cight ofa cd rhepponget grows woolhe {pike like vato ſpike grafle,vher- 
thaffie ſeede.O rm are Un orcare.| 
Matweedeis like vnto the former, fauing thar the rootes of this are long, 
; but donorthruſt deepe into the gromd as the former do, mereepe ot- 
©. | 


4 odnbnogrem nan tr; | S | 
Mart weede do grow Eno bp {re countries adioyningzlikewiſe in 
gland neereynto the ſea fide, eſpecially in the welt parts: about Norfolke alſs 
_—— Coeds ke RN Far 3:78) 
The time anſivereth the other reedes, 
5 '* The nones. © by 


hangings for ch; 
do make beds oft 


nt 11 = Of Camels haie. (Chap.29. 
- "51141 Seatianthion. | | _ 2 Scananthun adulterinum. 
T Camels Hay. | Baſtard Camels Hay. - 


h # \F f. Y 
118811Y 
| A \W\ | I 1 


1 


LL & 
» | - a LC 
Cer O 
4 "Pp « 4% 
ih _- 


\ 
® 
e* 
LT P 4 
p " 
” | s 


THE FIRST BOOKE| OF THE 


wn poi, whey ik Ff 
creo de ey nallchaftc 
nM | 


raine bi of TP. | tle ON 
carthin maner of the Couch | Ec leaves,at 
cuery knot one, and toward th or creſt is chaſhe, 
' not vnlike tothe Foxctaile g _ withour 
{mell, ns 
[14 * The place... 
They RAPS. +4 WY DOE PLART 2 
* The time, by 
Their time anſiwereth the otherrecdes and flags. 


The names. HE Pants | F510 
Camels haiec is called in Greeke | FE Lindy in Latin Juncas odoratus, and Sconenthun , i iN 
ſhops Squinanthwn, Ry Flr uni : in French Paſteur * CR : in \-7 nels ws | 


and Squinant. 


+, % Thenature. | «bla 
| They doheatemoderately andre afringent. nat; darits eb; | 
* The wvertaes, | | 
A Camels haieprouoketh vrine,mooueth the tearmes, and breaketh TY" the ſtomacke. | 
B Irtcauſethaking and heauines, of the head: Galen yeelderh this reaſon thereof, bicauſc it heateth 
moderately andbindeth with tenuitie of pares. 
According to MO 14 iudgement, it diſloluerh knot and hard lumps in anypart of the 
bodie. 
D Theflowers or chaffie rufts are profitable indrinke, for them that piſle blood y waics: itis gi- 
uen in medicines,thatare miniſtred to cure the pains and gricfes of the guts,ſtomacl liver, 
and raines; the fulnes, lothſomnes, and other defedts of the ſtomacke ; the droplie,c 


ſhrinking of ſlinewes, _ | = 
E Theſameboiledinwinehelpeth the mation of thematrix, if ewakia do Gicouer 
ve rhercof,andbath hir felte often withit alſo. "0 ov "3 


& Burre Reed . Chap.30. 


* The deſcription, 


He fiſt of theſe plants hath long narrow leaues , , which are double edged, orſharpe on 
both ſides prichal creſt on the back fide,in ſuch manner raiſed vp, thatit ſcemerh ro 
be or three ſquare. The ſtalks grow among the leaues, andare two or three foote 
long, being diuided intomany mor Sri ner with many prickly husks orknops, of the bignes 
of a nut. Theroote is full ofhairie ſtrings. . 
2 The gr Water Burre differeth notin anything from the firſt kinde in rootes or leanes, ſage | 
chat the firſt hath his leaues riſing immediarely from the tuft orknop of the roote : bur this kinde | 


& 

S - 
z 
1 

_w 
f 


hath a long ſtalke comming from the roote, — (alittle aboue the carth ) the leaues ſhoote 
out round abou the ſtalke fucceſſ , ſome leaues ſtill growing aboue others, euento the top of 
the ſtalke, atid from the top thereof downwards by certaine diſtances. Iris garniſhed with y 
round wharlesorrough coroner —_— and there among the ſaid wharles one Fingle 


| leafe ofa pile greenecol our. 


1 cprgenin 


\ 


© HISTORIE QF PLANTS | a; 


* The place. 
Both theſe kindes are ——ey throughout England, and do domes an 
neere vnto conn clullygron owin the fennie omds of incolaſhiecand ſuch like 
. Places, in the ditches about s/o is fields, andin the ditch right againſt the place of exe- 
cution, at theendof Southwarke ncere. ap SI Thomas Warerings, 
*% The time. 
| They bring foorth their burrie bullers,or ſcedie knots in Auguſt. 
* The names. 


Theſe plants of ſomeare called Sperganium. Theophraitm in his fourth booke and eighteenth 
chapter callerh them Batomas:of ſome Platanaris. Lytehath called them Reede Mace, which 
name is not very inmincopinion es rm rn IE T 
are called Ss farhe Bawon: in Italian ph tes Foagher age 

*T wage. 


They are cold anddricofcomplexion. 
* The vertues. > 


Some write, thar the roughburres of theſe ance deiadiawine/unh — A 
bitings of venemous beaſts, i cher they be dnnkerche wound waſhedtherewi S: 


Of Cats taile. Chap.31, 


? Ats taile hath long, rough PE. 1.» MPO foun 
,rough, thi a matter, like mar- 

( coopmmg tering, lems groveth alon along oe eaegs fees 
 analfioa peace, ofa ſolide ubltance, hauingarthe top abronneknopos care, 


pi, 


— V2 _ - 3” n PR _—y 
00 0 GOG  AATAY A A Er roaret>- CS no. ns DN Ant erated - + 
s wy "0" vY wy on” 
- . mY ” 
FEE. P by was " * S, _ 


[ 


_ Th FIRST 'BOOKE/OF-/THE 


ſoft, thicke and ſmooth, ſeeming to be nothing elſe bur a deale of flocks thicke ſex-andthruſt t 
ther,which being A of ri ans adowne,and iscaried away with the windeThe z6otes = | 


thicke and of {trings,and goode to Rn : is ade! thereof tobe oo 
- 4 9 18's j 1 TY + The place. | 
- ? \ | It growethin pooles, and ſuch like ſtanding wa- 
T | rers. ad ndimeain Wh ſtreames. ing 


Thaue found a ſmaller inde heerof growin in 


theditches and 
pep gninblion Sheconſero Fam 
KIN 5 LPR] 


Iul Oh. | 
NY \# Thema. of #7 } 


They arecalledin won, in Latine 4: 
of ſome Ceitrum PR in French Oates 
Aaſſes : in and Donſen: 
Iralian AMazze fords.: in Wo Bebordo, ard 
 Junto amacor : in Cars raile, and 
Reede mace. f this Cars taile CArittophas s 
maketh mention in his of Frogs, where 
bringeth them foorth one talking with another, 
being very glad thar ww the whole day 
in wn. ns. p—_—— and Phlewy, 
among Galin . Ouidlcemethto 
name this o_ Scirpue, for he termeth the 
made of the leaues, - Cats ail mats, as in his ſixr 
booke Faitorum, 
_ AH Dominus, difcedite git plaitrog morantes 
Suitulit, in plauſtro ropes matta fuit.. 
 *% Thenature. 
| Ieis cold anddricofcomplexion. | 
% \% The vertnes. 
A The of downe tamped with ine greaſe well waſhed, healeth bumings or ſealdings wichhe 
* or water, | 
B SomepraQtitioners by their experiencehauc found,rhat the downe of the Cars taile beaten wi 
the leaues of Beronie,che rootes of Gladiole, and the leaucs of Hippoghoſſon into powder,and mi 
with the yelks of egs hard ſodden, andfocaten, is accounted a Fr medicine, againſt 
diſeaſe in children a called in Grecke Ernenwn,which is,when the gut Inteſtinum cecun,is talle! 
into the cods. This medicine muſt be miniſtred cuery day faſting forthe of thirticdaies, 
quantitic whereof to be miniſtred at one timeis 1.5. This being vſed, asbefore is ſpecified, 
not onely helpe children and ſtriplings, butgrowen men allo, if in time of their cure, they vic 
conuenicnt ligature or.truſlings , and fit qonſounding plaiſters vpon the greeued place, accordi: 
to art appointed for that purpoſe in chirur 
C This downein ſame places of tl clleofEl Ely,and the lowe countries adivining thereto, i is garhe 
' redand well ſold,to make s of, for plowmen and people. | 
D Ithathbeenalſo often prooued heale kibed or humbled apr: they are termed ) being ap- 
plicd to themgither before or after the skinis broken, = 


Of Stitchwoort. Chap. 32- 


Technion, or (as Reel termerh it) Holofemm, is of two kindes, and hath round 
ſtalks full of joints, leaning toward the ground, Areuery ioint grow two leaues one agat 
another. The flowers be white,compad of many ſmall Sdonggr.i the mancrofa pal 


-{RISTORIE' OF PLANTS. © 43 | 
Te - hakeof s,whi ſerin forme of a ſtar, bur | 
The ſeconds like the former in ſhape of leaues and flowers which are {erin forme of a ar, : 
the leaues are, orderly placed, andin good proportion by couples two oY ng of _—_—} 
colour declining tgcrunlog: when the flowers be vaded then followe che $; are incloſe 
. 4 I; As, SY 
FS ey e 2 Greinen Lexcamthenun altern, 
1 Gromen Lemcanthemuns, | Small Strc | =. 


They growe inthe borders of fields ypon bank ſides and hedges, almoſt cuery where, - 
They flouriſh all the ſormmeer,efpecially in May andIune, | 
Ls * The names. | ; 4s 

The Grecians call this plant >irvr: jn Latine Totaoffes : in Engliſh All-bonie: whereof Iſee no 
reaſon,except it be by the figure ©Antopromis, aswhen we ſay in Engliſh, He is an honeſt man, our 
meaning is, thathe is aknaue, For vndoubtedly this isa tender , lightly brated or pound, ha- 
ng9q luch bonie or tough ſubſtancein him, according tothe ſignification of his Greeke name, 
Whereforel take it tobe 


o called by contraries : commonly in Engliſh Stitchwoort, _ | 
| 14665 K % Thenature. 4 : | " ©1477 $ 
The ſcede of Stitchwoort, as Gz/enwriteth,is ſharpe or biring to him that taſteth it ;:and co him 
tharvſeth it, very like to Mill, [> 
|" Thevertnes. | : 
They are woont to drinke jt in wine with the powder of Acornes, againſtthe paine in the fide, A 
ſtirches,and ſuch like. _ | ES ne... 

Diuers report, faith Djsoſcorides, that the ſeede of Stirchwoort being drunke, cauſerh a woman B 
to bring foorth a man childe,if after the purgation of hir ſicknes before ſheconceiue, ſhe do drinke 
it faſting thriſc in a day, halfe a dram ata time,in three ounces of w+#er many daies togither. _ 


1 Phalangiuner anofam. Branche 


3 PhalangiumCrete.C 
Q- 


S Tos . 
- "_ £ 
,' %. mz 
—_ 


| yy Of ST p 
Spiderwoort, 


THE FIRST BOOKE OF "THE 
Of Spiderwoort. | 
ached Spiderwoort, 


I 


ters, ſome aftirming that Phalangiwn is Pli 
Moly, in which error Dodonews perliſteth , [ 


= He obſcure deſcription which D;oſcorj 


— 
, 


and pling haue ſer down for Phelangiun 
hath beet much contention among) 
Pies 


plant phalangiwn, hath leaues much like - 
graſſe, bur Gr ſomewhat thicker and farter, 
and of a more whitiſh greene colour. The ſtalks 


grow to theheight of acubit, The top of the ſtalke 
is beſet with ſmall branches, garniſhed with mi 
little white flowers , compact of f1xelittle 
The threds or thrums in the middle are whi 
mixed with a fair yellow,which being fallen, 
followe blacke ſecdes, incloſed in ſmall rc 


F 


knobs, which be three cornered. The rootes are 
many,tough,and white of colour, | 


many threddie ſtrio 
ately riſe vp graflie 


cond is like the firſt, but that his ſtalke is . 


* from the which im 
caues , narrow and (| 


pol 


d: 


71891 SPORID OF PUNR Th; Ws 

foorth diuer naked ſtraight ſtalks, rs hls fidewith 
Wor TN f 927 eng of colour reddiſh, to prorien 
Sweth in Wie Poa ee EATEN 


| | * The place, > 
Aiken gre ce "y 


| * The time," : A 
I The fuſt downnth ia the beg) of Iune. vl 
2 Theſecond flouriſherh 1 in the cnd of paly,opd his ſeedei is ripein Sad 


'% The HP. 

The firſt is called of the tld andlate herbariſts , phalaigignt , bicauſe of his vertues a unſt | 
the biting of the ſp ider Phalan : :in E itis called iderwoogt! :and ſurely ir wellbe cal. 
led for this cauſe iſe; Theleaues being growen to their grearnes, ſtand\ vpoh wi 
long legs, and the knees bowing vp like the ſpiders legs when he creepeth : and the whole ruſe in 
the mi reſembling the bodice of the ſpider. Corda eallcthric Nb | 


* The nature, 
cake fairh,all the kindes are of a drying qualitie,by reaſon of their tenuitie ous 


*% The vertues. | 
Wh. eerides faith, that the leaues, ſeede and flowers, or any of Fowl) in wine, preuaileth A 
ain che birings offcorpions,andagainſt the ſtinging and buing of the ſpider called Phalan, and 
alſocher venemous beaſts, Y 7) : nt ther, pol; * 
The rootes tunned ypin new drunke for a moneth rogi —_ ON, - 
chough Ry ME ir ſelſe _—_— the bodice. 43 


. 


Of the Flower mo Chap.34. 


% The bind: Se 


EET Hebhamons kinds of Iris | rPiddGcenteeteteanienianm fs 
- Tice, inatt 43a Towe, ſom ſinell exceedin a ap meh roptrs La Sepne ani 
V9] ſmcll at all: fome flowers are ſweete inſime and ſome without : ſome of one colour, 
©! ſome of m: ours mixe: : yertues, attributed t0 ſame, others not red: 
uberous orkhp MES: ap (anon goes | 


withtwo 196 , amongſt which 
bearing flowers rags the ar 
EE are bent inwardone hoe 


econ 
New | . 109 7 01 
2 Tn: ug rbulued dar eo the pr den] 
in rootesJeauesandiſtalks burchs le: Hong r, loritirmes0 ht 
andaltogithernardwer: rhe Goretidefunirfoanaldw cola and theroot 
bro ay oy von Rug TRI rar ek ES 


«IT. 


FIRST BOOKE-OF (THE 
S. / v AF ame Wal 5 : " 
: > +8 - 
WEE | | F COT its So *+ 


hs FAC any W SIN = 
__- EGF W bet 
Dy - JE CE 


*% Theplace. 
The water Flower dhe e yellow Fi reth wellin moiſt medowes, and in the horders 
and brinkes of riucrs,ponds ,and ſtanding lakes. And x ry itbe a water plant of nature, yetbe- 
ing planted in gardens, i it peoh pererh a } 


| * The time. 
Theſe flowerin May andy ebringing foorth their 


toinedor piled togither like rele checles. 
| | * The none 


_  Dlowerdehice is called ain ers: CAthenens ann fy 
ſhould ſay, Con cxatrix by which nameitis alſo called 
Naronica , of the river Naron, by which the beſt and 

in his Treacles commendeth it thus, | 
Iridem ory Pee 4 Xeon ipe. 


"And Nara an vg 4 FHP 
8 $44 re ph Llane vcheys 
Water flags, baſtard Tenn water Toke! . 


I The rooces ofthe Flower de-luge bei 
T0 


col egon tat 


aa do reade ies: as hthey 
Latins,Radzx marics : OIT: roy 
vo woaers PE A DIeET a 


in the fourth The dr 
2nd mouth offuch as taſte 


=o an 


7 /HISTORTEO OB PEANTS! 7 th 

2 Thebaſtard > Fog de-luce, his roote is wo and drig 1 in the third —q: "IP of an aſtringene 
ol badges facultic. 5 . | 
| 2 YAGTSUTY DUEL 2 a heart 77 SIN L += 

Thietgote of bleed nk debice cleatie waſhed anf ata fewe dropsof _ A 
water, and laideplaiſter wiſe vpontheface of mar-erwoman, dajes arthe moſt, rake 
away t the black OF DIewnes of a firoke or bruiſe: G6 that iFehein of the | woman, of atiie 7 
other perſon, be verytender and delice; it ſhall be needfulltHaryeclaie4|peece of ſilke; ſid all, 
or a pecce of fine laune berweene the plaiter andeheskin :For' 6 viſcin ſuchcender bodies, i ic: 
often cauſeth heate ndinflaminiation,”! 2% 100k oe 1007! 

The juice "_ the ſame doth nor onely mightily and vehemently F* 1A ed choler, "55 —_—_ B 


eſpecially waterſh ſpecial and ung 27%. nn for them thar haue the. droplic, 
if be Sucks! in whaic 0 or Eo ,thatm | alas his beate.” VP 
andy "_ dif- C 


The dric rootes attenuate or make thin thicke EP rough ich fr arch 
ficulric purged away. 

They are goodinaloche or licking medicine for ſhortnes of breath , anold cough, and 
mities of the cheſt, which riſe heereupon. nl ay 
They remedie thoſe that h eu Glcp, ndchoſ hate rowed wit onvul 
crampsþbiting of ſerpents ,andrhe running of the raines, being 

corides;and with wine,it th downe the monthly courſe 
' ThedecoQtionis lin womens athes,for it mollifieth 
Being WON © 0 2 he ERIE x 


wellings, 


Of Flower de-luce of Flience. as 3 


I Ir Florentine. | 
Flower de-luce of Florence. 


4. _THE'FIRST BOOKE'© 


I He Fower de-luce of Florence, whoſergotes in 

| | led Ireos,ot Oriee; (whereof fweete waters, fweet | 
and tales binbep dies) hats Ages re ben Ower Of a. _— 
to yellownes,andt erootes haue not any ſmell at all;but the other is very haue | id, 
| | HIT 2 11} 1997 'Y £24 4 th 4 4®; 307 


{ 1 he 4 64 # 'm | | c 
| TO , | 


(1 4077 


| 
k 4 » . | 4 * 
| 
| 
| 
[ 


3 Iris Dalmatica major. | 
_; GrearFlower de-luce of 


" . *.# y - 


I | | Thedeſeription. 
3 ThegreatFlowerde-luce of Dalmaria, hath leaues much broader, thicker and more cloſely 
compa togither then any of the other, and ſer in qrder like wings , or the fins of awhale fiſh, 
greene toward the top, and of a ſhining purple colour toward the bottome,, euen tothe ground: 
among which riſerh vp a ſtalke of fower foote high,as my ſelfe did meaſure oftin my garden: wher- 
upon doth grow faire flowers,of alight blew,or(as we rerme it)a watchet colour. The flowers 
do ſmell exceeding ſweete,much like the Orenge floyger. The ſcedes are conteinedin ſquare cods, 
wherein are packt is. =o dp ſuchflat ſeedes like the former, The roote hath no ſmell ar all. 
4 The ſmall Flower de-luce of Dalmatia is in ſhew like tothe precedent, bur rather reſembling 
Iris Biforabeing both of one ſtature, ſinall and dwarfe plants in reſpe& of the greater. The flowers 
be of a moreblew colour. They flower likewiſe in May as the others do, bur beware that yee neuct 
caſt anycoldewarer vpon them preſently taken our of a well: for their tendernesis ſuch that they 
will, wither immediately, and rot away, as I my ſelfe haue prooued: bur thoſewhich I lert at the 
ſame time vnwarred,liue and profperto this day, 


iT 


5s It 


i» 


HISTORIE/' OF PLANTS. | 49 


5 Iris Biflora. | Ef 4 6 Iris Violaces. þ 
Twiſe flowring Flower de-luce, | > wy Vialer Flower de-luce. 


/ 


77 
M 


RJ 


SL, 


i  -| TR FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


v% The deſcription. 


5 Thiskindeof Howe hokicg camefirſt from Portingale to vs.It _ Gems in the ſpring 
time flowers of a putple or violetcolour, ſmclling like a violet, with a white hairic weledowne the 
middle. The roote is thicke and ſhort, ſtubborne or harde to breake. In leaues and ſhew itis like 
to thelefler Flower de tice of Dalmayia, but the leaues be 
| hathbironeflower ypononefſtalke, which in Autumne flowne 

like lowers,for which cauſe it was called 1ri biflors. && "1 
6 . Iris vqolacea is like vnto the z But | | 
colour. ; | if bz i378 8 

| Bil 7 llthede cription. | 
7 Conia cha FS Seettens and To. father of Herbariſts, hath ſet foorthi in his pannonick 
E He the picture of this beautifull Flower de-luce,vith gre { bragd leaues, thicke and fat, of a 
irple colonr necre vnto the ground,like the great Dalmati wer de-Juce, which it doth verie 

__ Alireſemble, The roote is very fivecte whenit is drie, and ſtrive with the Florentine 7r;c in fweet- 
nes. The floweris of all the other mof confuſedly mixed with ſundry colours, Np tnolrop gan 
pen cannot ſer downe euery line of. ake as it deſerueth, Thckemezchat that ſtande vpright 4s 
claſpe orembrace one another 0 dare pf a yellow colour; The that looke downwarde abour 
the edges,arc of a ale color. tl middle part ofwhite,mixed witha lincof yl ur hath many 
ſmall purple lines It $19 220 wig d white flower, euen to thebrim ofthe colourededge.t 
ſinelleth like the Hawthorne tbcing lightly lnelled vnto. 
$8 The Germaine Flowere "Ps {which Camerarius hath ſer foorth in his bake named Hor tus 
Medicus, hath great obby rootes: the ſtalke is thicke and full of iuice: the leaues be ve- 


ric broad in reſpe&ofallthereſt of Flower de-luces. The flower growethatthetop of the ſtalke, 
 conliſting of fixe greatleaues,blew of colour, welred downe the middle, with white tending to yel- 
lowe, at: che boeromſt ienextthe ſtalke it is white of colour, with yellownes fringed abour the 


faide white, as alſo. abourche. brimsor edges, which ſerteth faorth greatly his beautie, the ay | 
Toachimng Camerar ite, of old Camerarius of Nore , had ſenthimour of 

and did communicate. one, of the plants thereof vnto Cluſius, w ole figure he hath moſt lively Cie 
foorth with this deſcription differing ſomewhat from that, that- /oachimws himaſelfe did giue vnto 
me at his being in London, Theleaues faith he,are very large, twiſe ſo broad as any of the others. 
The ſtalke is ſingle and ſmooth.ghe lower arcerpy at the top ofa moſt bright ſhining blewcolour, 
the middle rib tending St, the ce vpper leaues b Iv OT.” ou roofe is like- 
wiſc ſwecte as /reos. | 


[% 


kf  & Theplce. | 

Theſckindes of Flower de-luces do growe ville in Dalmaris, Goritia aaloac, notwith- | 
' ſtanding our London gardens we very well ſtored with cuery one of r// 

* The time. 
Theirtims of flowring anſivereth the other Flower de-luces. 

*% Thenames. 

The Dalmatian Flower o tate; is called in Greek of Athewew & Thebrattus 8s: jt is named 
 alſotvemie,ofthe Heauenly bowe,or Rainbow: vp the ſame occaſion 5«yeg% or Admirable:for the 
Poets ſomerime do call the Rainbowe 347: in Latin 774, ahd in Engliſh Flower de-luce. Their 
ſcucrall ritles do ſufficiently diſtinguiſh them hereby they may be knowen one from another. 


% The nature. 
The nature of theſe Flower de-luces are df erable to thoſe of the common kinde, thati is to ſay, 
che drie rootes are hot anddrie in the latter end of the ſecond degree, v.11 ia 


* The vertnes. | 7 

Theiuice of theſe Flower de-luces doth not onely mightily and eeligbeitly draw choler, 
but moſt eſpecially watriſh humors, and isa ſingular good purgation for them that the drop- 
ſic,ifit be drunke in ſweete woort or whay. 

The fame is good for them that haue euill ſpleenes ,orthar ie troubled with clinips or convul- 
ſions, and for ſuch as arebit with ſerpents. Ir profiteth alſo much thoſe that hauethe Goriorrhey 
orrunning ofthe raines, being drunke with vineger as Dieſcors inks and yore with wine they 
bring downe —_ termes. | a 


i Irs 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. 
Of variable Flower de-luce. Chap.36. 


1 Iris lates variegata. 2 Iris Chalctdentce. 
Variable Flower de-luce. | | * Turkic Flowerde-luce, 


*% The deſcription, bz | 
Hat which is called the Flower de-luce of many colours, loſeth his leanes in winter, and 
in the ſpringe time recouereth chem a newe. Iamnor able to expreſle che fi CQ- 
__** loursand the mixtures, containedin this flower. It is mixed with purple,yellowe, blacke, 
white,and a fringe orthrum downe the middle of the lower leaves , of a whitiſh yellow tipped or 
frized,and as it were a little raiſed vp : of a deepe purple colour neere the ground. | 
2 Theſecond kind hathlong 6; 419 leaues of a blackiſh greene, like the ſtinking Gladdon, 
among which riſe vp ſtalkes two foote long , bearing at the top of euery ſtalke one flower, con 
paQt of fixe great leaues, The three that ſtande vpright are confuſedly and very ſtrangely oped, 
mixed with white and a dnskiſh blacke colour, The three leaues thathang owns: 6h likea ga- 
ping hood,and are mixedin like maner; but the white is nothing ſo bright as of the other, andate 
aSit were ſhadowed over with a darke purple colour, ſomewhat ſhining : ſo thar according to up 
iudgement, the whole flower is of the colour of a Ginnie hen:a rare and beautiful lower to behold, 
af 6-42 % Thedeſeription. | | 
3 TheFrench Flowerde-luce (whereofallo there is another of the ſame kinde, altogither lefler,) 
haue their rootes without anyſauour. In ſhew they differ little from the garden Flower de-luce 
that theſe latter are alrogither ſlenderer, and vnpleaſant in taſte, growing plentifully in ther 
crags of the rocks vnder the Alpes,and neere vnto the ſea. The which Perafound in the graſſie in 
ly rounds of the ſea coaſtes neere to Montpellier, The learned doQor Afſatixs a long time 
poledit to be Medrwn Dioſeorides : Matthiolus deceived himfelfe and others, inthat hefaid, thac 
the rooteof this/plant hath the ſentof the peach: burtmy ſelfe have prooued it to be withour fa- 
uour atall. It yeeldeth his flowers in lune, which are of all the reſt moſt like vnto the grafle Flower 
de-luce. The taſte of histoote is hot,bitter,and with much renuitie of parts,as hath beene found by 


P ? « ”_ = o [ 
; F2 | 
* D , | F'Y — : 4 £ "> X % 
oo 2 oy , q ww © ; | 3 .. 
" Ll E Fg . # », ” p " h . 1, 1 


THE 'FIRS 


Narrow leated F ower de-luce, | | 


T BOOKR(OF THE 


\ 


' : " 


4 Narrow le: 

- nite number © Br 

rcede , among which rife vp many ſtalkes , much 

ſhorrer than the leaues. On the endes of the ſame 

 ſpringfoorth two, ſometimes three , gn oecre 
jers,compatt ofnine leaues.” Thoſe 


. 


reſt,of a purple colour, 
low: burchole 

are ofa purple cc 
that ſtand vpright are of an horſefleſh colour, tip- 
ped with purple, and vnder ech of theſe leaues ap- 
peere three {mall browne aglets, like the roong of 


a ſinall bird, Jp | 
5 The ſmall gfafſie Flower de-luce,differeth from 
the former in ſmalnes and thinnes of lcaues , in 
other reſpects there is no difference. 
| we Theplace. 

Theſe plants do grow in the gardens of Lon- 
don, amongſt Herbariſts and loners of plants. 

The Turkic] Flower de-luce came: from Con- 
ſtantinople doth proſper wellin my garden, 
being not planted in ouer wet ground, 


5 Chamairietenuifoliz. 
j/ Grafle Flower de-luce. 


'HISTORTE' OF PLANTS. PE 53. 

| 129 '% The time: | 1:29, | 12113 29066 
Thepdemwefiragci begianingof Marc htotheendof May. | = 
| *% T he names. 1x3 * " 

The Turkie: Flower:de-luceis called inthe Taki cn alata nd aa thi add at, 


from the Than rey v1 tobe Mediawof Digbnaget: io —_—_ 


French Flower de-luce. 
Abs antentapeloviines. [694,005 
The faculties and. fn nn EIT 
ſorrs pL pri waa wn) = verywellaccord. There is ancxcellent oyle made of the 
Flowers and rootes of Flower ce fecha lhe quantitie, fr 8 Olcum tritum, made after the 
ſame manerthatoyle of Roſes, Lilies,and made: which profirethmuchro toſtrengrhen 
the ſinews indie Jper the crmperoceedingel replction;andihe diſcals called in Grecke 


Wo sof French Flower de-luce diſtilled with Diatrron ſandal, and Caro, andthe B 
water ignore ey leh ety Eo 


Of foes Geddes Chap.37. 


»Thed: O9% wi 
Ec - narrow leaves 
lie the is butſmaller, ofadarke greene colour; 
beingrubbed,of a ſtinking ſmell, verieloth- - 
ome, The he ſes are many innumber, & round to- 
ward the top,out of which dagrow flowers like the 
Flower de-luce , of an ouetwarne blewiſh colour, 
declining to , or arraſh colour. After the 
flowers be vaded, there commeth great husks or 
cods,wherein is ; congibnd aredberrie or ſeede, as 
big as a peaſe. The roote is long and threddie. 
| * Theplace. 

Gladdon groweth in many gardens:I haue ſeene 
it wilde in many places, as Inwood and ſhadowy 
places neere the ſea. 

* The time. 
The inking Gladdon flowr owrthil Augu: che 
ſeede whereof isripe in Sep 
*hThenames. / 
Stinking Gladdon is called in Latine Spatulz 
fetida: nit apothecaries; it/is called alſo - 
Xyris: in En ſtinking co and Spurge- 


woorr. 
* The nature, 
Gladdonis v.- and dry in the third degree. 
%& The vertue | 
Such is the facultie ofthe a. of all the lides ; A 
before named, thatin pownding them they a 
uoke ſneeling,and purge the hook generally 


| ms an = digeſt, and conſume thegroſle bumors, which B 
le flegme ;they procure ſleepe, and helpe the gri- 


| "<7 A" Bede, as Plinie e ſaith. If it be drunke in wine it C 
prouoketh theremnes, m—_— pin bathes for women t fit oueri, ir prouoketh the like effect 
3-4 The roate __— in maner of a peſlaric, haſtnerh the birth. They couer with fleſh, 

| D 3 bones 


/ 


54 THE! FIRST BOOKE OF !THE 
bones that be bare,being vſed in plaiſters, Therovresbdiled ſoft , and vſed plaiſterwiſe , ſoften all 
old hard tumors,and the ſwellings of the throte;called Strag.0,that is,the Kings cuilk and empla- 
ſtered with honie, it draweth out broken bones;. +. + 4: || | 
D Themealethereofthcalethall the rifts of the furndament andthe infirinities thereof, called Cor- 
. dilomatz: andopenerhithe Hemorthoides, Theiuice ſniffed or trawne vpintothe. noſe, prouoketh' 
ſneeſing, and draweth downe by the noſe grear ſtore of filthic excrenggnes , which fall into 
other parrs "mes and hidden waies and conyetances ofthe'channels. 
E -leproficeth being vicd in a peſſarie Foprovoke the tenmeszand to cauſe abortion... +! -\] 
F - Irpreuaileth much againſt alleuill afteQions of rhe breſt and lungs,being taken ina jirrle Fvecte: 
wine,wich ſome Spiknard,orin the whaie of milke, witha little Maſticke,, 1 11, 
G  Theroote of Xyris or Gladdon, is ver_ force againſt: S and fractures of the head, for 
t draweth ont all tubs,pricks and arrow heads,wi grecte: which qualitieit affeGterh. 


arr 
as Galen faith, by reaſon of his tenuitic of parts, and of his attrafting, drying,and digeſting facultie, 
bi elichthiefdy confifterhin he ecdeorSuiteuhich mightily prouoketh vrine. "g vateoli act 
H Therootegineninwine; called in phiſicke. Paſſion, p x much againſt convulſions , rup- 
tures,the paine of the huckle bones, the ſtranguric, and the fluxe of the bellie. Where note, that 
whereas it is ſaid,that the potion aboue named ſtajeth the fluxepf the bellie, hauing a purging qua- 
liric:it muſt be vnderſtood,thar it worketh in that maner as Rhaharbarwn,8 A/arum do,in that : a 
conco and take away the caule ofthe laske , otherwiſe nodgubt it mooueth vnto the ſtoole, as 
Rheubarb, Aſarwn,and the other Trides do. Heereof the counttey people of Sommerſerſhire haue 
goodexperiencewho vietodrinke the decoction of this roote; Others dotake the infuſion there- 
of inalc and ſuch like wherewith they purge themſclues,and that vnto very good purpoſe & effeR. 
I Theſcedtherofmightily purgeth by vrine as Galen ſaith, & ths cuntry people haue found it true, 
Of Ginger. Chap.38. 
"NG 


1 Zinziberi# 


The fained figure of Ginger. | 


11H1STORIB)OF BLANTS i! | 5y 


trhere haue been brought vnto meat {eyerall times ſundry plants 
16,20d all of juice, as well from the Welt Jadies; as from Barbarie and 
routed and budded foorth green leaues inmy garden in theheate of 


heregtrohigee 
other places, which hauc 


{oinmer; bur 25 ſooned's fit hath binbur rowched with t c firſt hatp Waſt of winter,it hath preſently 

riſhed 0 14 | androote,' The ttue QOrIMEe or Picture ratfit Or this tame been ſer foorth 

quan chacharh writceng bur thewerld hath been deceiued by xeoante re, which the reuc- 

rentand/ learned hetbarilt Mathias I Obel, did ſer foorth in his obferuaxiai , me wWhienk 
| 


notwithſtanding I haue heere exprefſedwith therrue and vndoubred} ku which I received 
from poor hth 4 owne hands at the impreſſion heerof. The cauſe of whoſe f _—_ as allo 
the meanes whereby he got the knowledgeof the true Ginger, mayappecre by his owne words 
ſent varome in Larine,which Thaucheere inſerted, His words betheſe, 7 - 

How hard and vncertaineiris, todeſcribe in words the true proportion of plan » hauing no 
other guide than skilfull, bur yer deceifull formes of them, ſent from friendsor othef meanes; they 
beſt do know who haue deephieſt waded inthis ſea of fimples. Abourrhirry yeeres paſtor more,an 
honeſt and expert Apothecarie'YY illawn Dries, to ſarisfic my defire, ſent me from Antwerpe to 
London the picture of Ginger, which he held to be truly and liuely drawen ; I my ſelfe gaue him 
credit eaſily, bicauſeI was not ignorant, that there had been oft Ginger rootes brought greene, 
new,andfull of inicefrom the/Indies ro Antwerpe : and further, thar the fame had buddedand 
grower inthe ſaid Dries garden. Bur not many yecres after,I perceiued that picturewhich was ſent 
| me by my friend, not to-haue been truly ſer foorth, bur before thar time to haue been drawen by the = 
old Germane Botenicxs. \ Therefore nor ſuffering this error any further to ſpread abrode, (which I 
diſcouered not many yeeres paſt at Fluſhing in Zealand,in the garden of Y/;lhiam of X aſſew Printe 
of Orange of famous memorie z throughthe meancs of a woorthie perſon, if my memorie deceiue 
me nor, called Y «nder Mill, at whartime he opened , and looſedhis firſt yoong buds and ſhootes 
about the end of ſfommer, © 549 inleaues, and ſtalks of a foote high, the yoong and tender 
ſhoores of the common reede called Harendowallatoria: ) 1 thought ir conuentent toimparr thus 
much vnto Maſter John Gerard an'expert herbariſt, and Maſter of happie ſuccefle in Surgerie, to 
_ the end he mightler poſteritieknow thus much, in the painfull and long labored trauels which now 
hehath in hand, tothe greatgood and benefirof his countrie, The plant ir ſelfe b t meto 
Middleborrough, and ſec in my garden, periſhed through the hardnes of the winter. us much 
haue Ifet downe,'truly tranſlated out of his owne nine oe Larine, though too fauourably by him 
donetothe commendation of my meane skill, - [5 abs | 


* The place. | ; 
Ginger groweth m.Spaine,Barbariein the Ct hank 2 the Acores. Our men which fac- 
ked Domingo in the Indies, diggedit vp therein ſundry places wilde. . r 
% Thetime. 
Ginger flouriſheth inthe hottime of ſommer,and loſeth his leaues in winter. 
6 5.1110) W The waves Oi 
 Gingeriscalledin Latine Zinzzber. 
Gingerheateth and drieth in the third degree, 
Ginger,as D/ofſcoridesreporteth, is right good with meare in ſauces, or otherwiſe in conditures: A 
foritis of an heating and digeſting qualitie, it gently looſcth the bellic, and is proficable for the 
ſtomacke, and effecually oppoſcth itſelfe againit all darknes of the fight, anſwering the _ 
andetfects of P ; Itis ro be confidered, that greene canded or.condited Gingeris hotand 
moiſt in qualiti zoking veneric :2nd being dried it beareth and dricthin the third degree, 


D 4 bf 


THE FIRST BOOK! OF- /THE 


Of eAromaticall Reedes. © Chap.39. | 
| 2121 74 £8. FROERS! Df TON mb Ps 3 16 2 9TONR 3507 34 7715: Nh 


*S 4 $ 
. TV T4 05k 
& VE 7 


11G fit 


| | | - *% The deſcription, _ | | 

I His ſweete ſmelling Reede is of a darke dun colour, full of joints and knees eafie to be bro- 
T ken into ſmall ſplinters, hollow and full of a certaine white pith, cobweb wiſe, ſomewhat 
| ie incating,and hapging inthe teeth, andof a ſharpe bitter taſte, Ir is of the thick- 

- nes ofthe lirtle finger,as Z Obelins attirmerh of ſome which hehad ſcene in Venice, 
2 Baſtard Calamus hath fiaggie leaues like vnto the water Flower de-luce or flag, but narrower, 
_ three foote long: the longeſt and eldeſt of which leaues are within a footeof the top, as it were cur- 
led or pleated confuſedly. The reſt of the leafe is ſmooth and euen, among which commeth vp a 
ſtalke ke the common recde, whichyeceldeth.out of the middle a certaine long aglet orbunch, 
ſuch as the Aller tree bringeth foorth. I haue not as yer ſeeneir beare his tuft in mygarden, and 
haue read thar it is barren, and by proofe haue ſeene it fo : yer for all that I belecue Cluſims, who 
ſaith he hath ſcene ir beare his flower. in that place where it|doth growe naturally , although in 
England itis altogither barren. The rooteis hvcere' in ſmell, and birter in raſte, and like vnto the 
connmon Flag. | 000% HOT þf | ; 


: x The place." i!) | Lo» 21 
The true Calams aromatics groweth Atable and likewiſe in Siria , efpeciallyin the mooriſh 
grounds atthe foote of Zibans, neere vnto the rowneof Trjpolis, where there is/ great reſortof 
Engliſh marchants,as of other nations outof moſt parts of the world. Ar which place there is alake | 
called Antilibanwn, ſituated ina valley necr adioining, the which lake in the heat of fommer is dric, 
in reſpe of the ſtore of water that it doth abound withall in winter. It groweth likewiſe in the welt 
andeaſt Indies,in the like ſoile as aforeſaid, BE Wy OOS RE, maſterd 


— 


1HHISTORIE OF PLANTS.” $9 


Baſtard orfalſe colonic doth growe naturally at the foote of a high hill neere to Pruſſia, a citic of 
Birhynia,not far from a great lake. Ir And: xceeding well in my ba » but asyetit beareth 
neither lowers nor ſtalke.It growethalſ6 wCandia Sarnr in Galatia likewiſe,and in 
many other places. 

| *% Thetime, | | 

ſhey loſe rhelr leanesin che beginningot witkeo, ——— — E* 
| ——_— | ns Of 10 nh NI or 
CBOILE 6 JHITE » 7 he name ove VN? | Lad > 0's; 

T ink an ragrRne <A great conrroverfie7 and Spada ng wrice 
abour theſe twonames Ca/amarand Horns. Thewhich hath beentaken generallyro be 6ne;an 
che ſelfe ſame plaritz-which contraurrhe na yeally-bedecided, if ney hat bave travaile@@ this 
qualirie;hadbur common fence: fortharir aero eudori; that Acoya is one, and Calan inother! 
and borhieelies, and yet differ as their deſcriprions do ſhew; Bueif my cenſtre'mighrbe's _ 
the errour hath grojwen thre the jpnorance of- the apothecaries , whohaue taken for C# 
roote called) Acorms : gerierally I nt confeſle takery among the. jgnorant forrhe true Cad) 
maticus$ the whic rt) nevirgs/ hath been obſerned ro this dayz'I thinke by reaſon chat - $1: 
vetie cheupe ripe ro be gotten; andthe tightdeere,and hard to come by: Sothatthe ſwtere or 
AER reede is called: Ge Clarice Caltrans Aromaticns, arid Calmmm' Ollovatus : WAi29 ind 
other ofthe ancient Arabians,haue called it Ca/ab and _Midirira,of Serapias Haſſobel-dervre. 

The falſe or baſtard Ca/amms is called of the Latines TAcorwms,of fome Calams ' Arom cags,but vn- 
rruly : in Italian <Acoro: the Arabians Yage, or Yg: 1n Greeke A5%, andawezy:,of diugts a5 witnef. 
ſeth _Apulcins, Horlt## $f Penerex:it is allo called Rat Nawtica Srmgentiana, Vogututaria: wn En- 
gliſh aft af er the Latine name, Ropwnny aromat'cus. 


The pature. 
Dio aide Gichahe rqotes hax. an bear Shoe do afficme, thatth haue 
= —_— LIE, | 4 


ids 


oPs. 2 
It is of great effe&, being puindrot or raken in fas rok acloſe ſtoole, ro proucke wo- B 
mens natural accidents. 
_ . Thejuiceſttained withalictle hony,alieth away the dimnes ofthe cies,and helperh much againſt C 
poiſon,the hardnes of the ſplecne; andallinfirmities of the blood. 
The roote boiled inwine, dand applied EnnYy vnto the cods, doth woonderfullie D 


abarethe bvelling of theſame,a 1d helpeth all hardnes and colle&ions of humors, 

The quantitie of two ps anda thalfe-of the roote drunke in fower ounces _ Muſcadel!, E 
helpeth them thatbe bruſed with greeuous beating, or fals. 

The rooxe is with good ſudcefle mixed with counterpoiſons, In ourage it 1s ye into Eclegmas, F 
thatis, medicines for the. ge; CR TRY when the lungs and cheſt are oppreſt with raweand- 
colde hunors. - | 

-»+ The thetee, 

\The beſt Nadi 2s Dioſcor wth Bich.is thatwhichis fubſtantiall, andwell compa,whice, within, g 
not rotten, full, and well | 

Plinjewriteth,thatthoſe which grow in Candia are berter then thoſe of Pontus, and yet thoſe 
of Candia wootle then thoſe of Hocaſteme countries or thoſe of England, pop, we have no | 
Reg 11> os beret | 


THE FIRST BOOKE..OF THE 


T Hus farhave I diſcourſed won Graſſes Ruſhes, 
> my next labour is to ſer downe for your better i 
{IF /S| the kindes thereof, vnderthe name of Graine, 
LI8S) or bread corne : the Grecians ines and pI NY todil- 
-=g9 courſe. There belong to; the hiſtoxie of graine all ſuch things as —_ . pry 
2s Far,Chondrus, Alice, Tragus,Any Pt1ſane, Polents, Meza,Bync or Mault, Zythum, and what- 
Ponnap epbeakes There be alſo ioined vnto them many ſeedes,which for a9 oe 
among the.graines,as Millet, Sorgum,Panicke, Indian wheate, and ſuch like. Galen 
yen 2yoe diokkofts of the faculties of nouriſhments, reckoneth vp the diſeaſes of graine, as wellthoſe 
Ne es a demarrating rating, orthat are wu Woes) cory ps 
worſe through the fault of the weather, or of the oile zas alſo alſo ſuch as be cumberſome, 
among them, do likewiſe firly ſucceede the graines, And beginning with come,we | 
ofaheare,aud deſcribeirinthe ficit POcnneſs preferred comer pine ik 365, 


| 


i Triticon camutica. Sogn Toes W 
2 VITeE; TRF-4x Ee taking balls + Thedforpri. 


WEEYY 


This kind of Whear A Folds cal. 
leth Spics 2wtica,is the moſt principal of 
allorher, whoſe caresarealtogither bare 
(OW cendked , without awnes orchafhe beardes. The 
- ſtalkriſerh athreddieroote, ny 610 pn many 
ſtrings,ioin orkneed,ar ſundry ſi __ 
whence ſhoot foorth graflic blades or leaues, like 
ntoRie,but broader: the plantis ſo well knowne 
| tomany,and fo profitable toall, tharthe'meaneſt 
" andmoſti b (Havant Bape. Fant ro 
__ 


2 Theſes inde When nora 
joints blades , 'is precedent , diffc 
©, "win onely ineare,amdnumberofgraines, whete 
of this kinde doth abound an eareconfiſt- 
.ing of many ranks, ſeemeth tomake the 
eare double or ſc a Fpcment;_b: 
}- is likethe other, but not bare and naked, bur briſt- 
MN led or bearded, with | finall and 
ciles or awnes,not vnliketo thoſe of Barley. 
3 Thethjgd kindis like the laſt deſcnbed, thus 
 differeth from ir in that, that this kind hath many 
ſmall cares, 7 ir, Fon great eare, 
and the beards heerof be ſhorter, then of the for- 
merkinde. 
4 Flat Wheateis like vnto the other kindes of 
| Wkuoia frm Bibabuihoecs pat beneded exon vey rengrnn Rape che, | 
wherein confiſterhthe difference 
5 Bright Wheare, is like thelaſte before deſcribed , anddiffereth fromir inchas, this kinde i 


| BELA 5 FE 
* The 


HISTORIE”.OF PLANTS.” 
2 Triticum ariftis circumualletune. T 3 Triticum multip/ict ſica. 
Bearded Wheate, To - 75: 1: Double cared Wheare, 


=IDY \' "17? | (1 [ Cs _ { HT" W/ / 
S* 8) Al : vt , -4 [al | J 
# - Pf ” " 


\V | | 
Sol <= 
\TAJQ. "EZ 


4 Triticum Typhinigs. 


Flat Whearte. 


 E Thedricd powder of red V\ 


60 THE FIRST BOOKE" OF" THE 
4 + The pac : 

Wheate almoſtinall E42 we of the world ther arc inhabited dated, and 

requireth a fruitfull and far ſoile, and rather ſunnic and drie, than waterie grounds and 


Fe coun ary op > > Aiptiyr ON PER ABINNY: 8 darke X 
. B, 


ON. | + Therime. no} 
They are moſtcommonly ſowen inthefall of _ leafe or Autumne: omerime inchefpring. 
uh Thenames. + 
_ Wheate is called ofthe Grecians m# of the Latines Triticum. Triticum doth generally ſignifi 
anykind of corne,which is threſhed forth of the cares, & made cleane by fanning, or ſuch ordi 
- meanes, The Germaines call it {Uetifen\ in low Dutch Terwg: in Italian Grawo: the | 
Trieo: the French men Bled, ou Fourment : in England we call the firſt white Wheate, and Flaxen 
Wheate. Triticum Lacidz , is called Bright Whearte : Red Wheareis culled in Kent Duckbill 
Wheare, and Normandie Wheare. | 
The nature. 


The kindes of Wheare according to their naturall qualities arc hotandmoiſt i the kt degree, 
and dric in the middle of the ſecond,” 

| Whearte faith Gele much viedoe men,and with preareſt profit. Thoſe Wheates donou- 
riſh maſt which be hard,and hane their whole ſubſtance ſocloſelycompaR,as they can ſcarſely be 
| biraſunder,forſuch donouriſh very much-tand the contrarie burlitle. 

Wheate, as itis a medicine outwardly applied, is hot in the firſt degree, yer can irnotmanifeſtly 
cirherdric or moiſten. It hath alſo a cerraine dlammines and ſtopping qualirie. | 
|  *% The vertaes. L 

A | Rave Wheare Gith Dioſcorides,being my ,breedeth woormes inthe belly: being chewed and 

applicd doth cure the biting ofmadde de j: "aw 
B Theflower of Wheare being boiled wh hony and water, or with oyleatd watcr, takerh away 
- all inammationsorhorſwellings.” 

C The bran of Wheare boiled in ſtrong vineger,clenſeth awa Gurtfe and dry ſcales, and difſolueth 

the beginningofall hocſvellings, if itbe laid vnto them, And boiled with _ decoction of Rue, ic 
flakerh the {wellings tywomens breſts. 
D Thegraines of white Whear,as Plinywriteth in his 22.booke, 8 7.chap being dried browne,bur 
not burnt,8& the powder therof mixed with white wine,jis good for watering eies, ifir be laid therto. 

led with wh (0 th the ſhrinking of finews. 

'F The mealeof Whearte, mingled withthe juice of Henbane, and plaiſterwiſc applied , appeaſeth 
inflammartions, as Ignis ſacer,or S. Anthonies fire, and ſuch like: laying the fluxe of humors from 
the ioints, which the Graecians call xhewniſmata. Paſte made of fine meale,ſuch as Booke binders 
vic,helpeth ſuch as do pit blood, taken warme one ſpoonfull at once, The bran of Wheate boiled 
in ſharpe vineger, andrubbed vpon thenythat be ſcuruic and mangie, eaſcth the partic very much. 
G Theleauen made of VWheate hath vertue to heate & draw v5 Fs RN, concodiceh and 

openeth all ſwellings, bunches, tumors and felons, being mixed with falr. 
H The fine flower mixed with the yolke of an egge, honie —_— ſaffron, doth draw and heale 
biles and ſuch like ſores in children,andin old people,very well & gra Take crums of Wheaten 
bread oye pound and an halfe, barley meale 2 1i. Fennigrecke and _ cede ofech halfe an ounce, 
the leaues of Mallowes, Violets, Dwale, Sengreene and Cotyledon, axa one handfull: boile them 
in water andoile vntil they be tender:then ſtampe them very ſmall in a ſtone morter,and adde there- 
to the yolkes of three egs,oile of roſes,and oilc of violets, an3 ii. Incorporate themaltogither, bur 
| iftheinflammarion grow to Eriſipelas, then adde thereto theiuice of Nightſhade, Plantaine and 
Henbane, a» 5 li.caferh Eriſipelas or S.Anthonies fire and all inflammarions very ſpecdely. 
I Slicesof fine White bread, laide to infuſe or ſteepe in roſe water, and ſo applied vnto ſore cies, 
which havemany hot humors falling intothem , doth caſily defend the humour and ceafe the pain. 
K Theoileof Wheate preſſed foorth berweene two plares of hot iron , healerh the chappes Fed 
chinkes ofthe Mere and fundament which come of coldeqmaking ſmooth the hands ,face,or 
 anyorher part ofthe 
L- ſame vied as a Balſame, doth excellently heale wounds, and being put "hey ſalues or vt- 
"guensjr auch them cow worke more effeQually,eſpecially in old vicers, f 

O 


+HISTORIEB}OF PLANTS. 
Of Rie. Chap.441. 
Secale. air g 


Ric.  *% Thedeſeription. 
| T He leafe of Rie when firſt commeth vp, 
T is ſomewhat reddiſh, afterward greene, as 
| be the other graines, It groweth vp with 
many ſtalks, flenderer than thoſe of Wheate,and 
longer, with knees or ioints by certaine diſtances 
like vato VWheate : the cares arc orderly framed 
VP in rankes, and compaſled about with ſhore 
beards, not ſharpe bur blunt, which when it lows 
reth ſtanderh ypright,andwhen it is filled vp with 
ſeedc it leanerth ang hangeth downward. Theſced - 
15 longþblackiſh, ſlender and naked, which cafilic 
falleth out of the husks of it felte, "The roores be 
many,flender and tull of ſtrings. *. 


. * Thepl:ce. | 
Rie groweth very plentifully in the moſt places 
of Germanic and Polonia, as appeereth by the 
= quantitie brought into England in times of 
earth, and ſcarſicie of corne, as happenedin the 
yeere 1596; andat other times, when there wasa ' 
generall want of bread come , by reaſon of the 
abundance of rain rhat fell che yeere before,whers- 
by grear penutrieinſued, as wellof cattel!, and all 
other victuals, asof all maner of graine, Ic grow- 
eth likewiſe very well in moſt places of England, 
eſpccially toward the North. 4 
| % Thetime, 

Ir is for the moſt part ſowen in Autumne, & ſomrimes in the ſpring,which prouerh to be a graine 
more ſnhjc& to putrifaCtion, thanthat that was ſowen inthe fall of the leafe, by reaſon the winter 
doth overtake it before ir can attaine to his perfe@ maturitie and tipeneſſe. ED 

| DAS | "oo The nears,” 9-1 | | 

Ri iscalled in high Dutch, Rocken, in loweDurch Rogge + in Spaniſh Cerreno : in Tralian - 
Segala:'it\ French Sezele, which founderh after the old Latine name+$i{770. Plinie calleth it' Seva/e 
and Rogge in his 18, booke and 16:chapter. - 0 Sod, nc 

Wer bag a, No TRACT. : | PE NIIOE, 
 Rieg$irisa medicine, is hotter then VWheate,and more forcible in waſting and conſuming away 
the hodywhich is nouriſhed by ir. TORTS I fps dg pa og 
% The wvertwes. | *Þ 2 : 
Bread,or the leuen of Rie , as the Belgian Phiſitions do affirme vpon their praCtiſe, doth more A 


___ digeſt , drawe, ripen, and breake all apoſtumes , botches, and biles , than the leuen of 
wheate. | 


. 


BOLIES! 
04 
loine 
Mito w 


a THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


Zea ſaxe Spelta. 


Syelr corne. * Theplace. 
It groweth in fat and fertill moiſt ground, 
* The time, 


Iris altered and changed into Wheaxte it ſelfe,, 
as degenerating from bad to better,contrary to all 
other that do alter or change z eſpecially as Thes- 
phraſtusſaithif it be ſowen in one ſoile three yeeres 
togither,then atthe third yeere it is changed, 

| * The names. | 
The Grecians haue called it {«z, and: the La- 
tins Spelta: in the Germaine toong Dpelt3 and 
Sinkel; in low Dutch Spelte t in French pep 
tre : of moſt Italians Pirra Farr: of the Hertru- 
ſcians Biads : ofthe landers, A/ga: in Engliſh 
Speltcorne, Dzoſcor:des maketh mention of two 
kindes of Spelt, one which he ſurnameth 4m», or 
ſingle: another /rixwer, which bringeth foorth two 
cornes joined togither in a couple of husks, as be. 
fore in the deſcription is mentioned , That Spelc 
which Dreſcorides calleth Djcocees,is the very ſame 
that Theophraſius and Galen do name Zee. The 
moſt ancient Latins haue called Zeaor Spelta b 
the name of Far, as D__ Halicarna(]zue 
ſufficiently teſtifie, The old Romanes (ſaith he)did 
call ſacred marriages by the word $ajjawa, bicauſe 
the bride and bridegroome did cate of that Fr 
Fr #4 | ' which the Grecians do call iz. The fame thing 
46 ati - ' © CAſclepradesaffirmeth in Galen, in his ninth booke 
according to the places affefed, writing thus, Farris quod Zea appellant, that is toſay, Fer which is 
called Zea,c4c. And this Far is alſo named of the Latins Ador,Adorewn,and Semen adoreum. 
_ %eThetemperature andwertues. | 
Spelt as Dioſeorizes reporteth,nouriſheth more than Batley.. Galen writeth in his bookes of the 
Faculties of ſimple medicines, that Spelr is in all his temperature in a meane berweene Wheate 
and Barly, and may in vertue be referred tothe kindes of Barly or Wheate , being indifferent to - 
. themboth. | L.- | 
A The floweror meale of Spelt corne, boiled in water with the powder of red ſaunders, alittle oile 
of Roſes and Lillies vnto the forme of a pultus,and applied horztaketh away the ſwelling of the legs 
gotten by cold and long ſtanding. | 5 


Of Starch Corne.  Chape43- 


| wrkdfojets WR 
Mg His other kinde of Spelrg or Zesis calledof the Germaine Herbariſts Amyleum Frumentws, 
\ 4 or Srarchecorne:and is akind of graine ſowen to that.end, ora three moneths graine ; andis 
..**. , very like vnto wheat in ſtalke and ſecede butthe care thereof is ſet rounde about, and made vp. 
with two-ranks, with cerraine beards, almoſt after the mancr of Barly,and the ſeeds is cloſed vp 13 

n *Y ; &* The 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS 


* Theplace. © 


Amilcorne or ſtarche corne, is ſowen in Ger- 
many,Polonia,Denmarke,& other thoſe caſterne 
regions , afivellto feede theircartel] and pullen 
with, as alſo to make ſtarch, for the which pur- 
pole it doth very fitly ſerue, Ry 

 % Thetime. by 
Itis ſowen in Autumne or the fall of theleafe, 
and oftentimes in the ſpring, and for that cauſe 
hath been called Trimefre or three months 
graine, it bringeth his ſeede to ripenes in the be- 
ginning of Auguſt, and is ſowen in the low coun- 
ries in the ſpring of the yeere. | 


* The names. 

* Bicauſethe Germaines haue great vie of it to 
make ſtarche with, they do call it Amelcom, we 
thinke good toname it in Latine Laylewn fu 
mentwn : in Engliſh itmay be called Amelcorne 
after the Grands e word, and may likewiſe be 
called Starch corne. Tragus and Fuchſius tooke 
it to be Triticwn trimeitre, or three moneths 
Whearte. Colwnells ſpeakerh of a graine called 
Far Halicaftyun which is ſowen in the ſpring : 
andfortharcauſc is furnamed T'rime#re, or three 
moneths Far, whereof is made the beſt ſtarche. 

- "If anybe deſirous to learne the making of it, ler 
them read Dodonexs laſt Edition, where they ſhal be fully raugkt , my ſelfe not willing to ſpende 
time abour ſo vainea thing, and not pertinent to the hiſtorie. 


| | *% The nature and vertues. | | Fiat $f 
There hath nor any peculiar vertues been attributed to this kinde of Amylcorne more than hath 
been ſaid, that is to feedecattel],pullen,and to make ſtarch.,the nature is referred vnto the baſe kinds 
of Wheate OT Barly » * t 2 As | 


Of Barhy. Chap. 44. 


" The deſcription. 


I Arly hath an helme or ſtrawe , whichis ſhorter and more brittle then that of VVheate, 
and with moe ioints : the leaues are broder , and rougher: the: cate is armed with long, 
rough , and pricking beards or ailes , and ſet about with ſundry ranckes , ſomerimes rwo, 

otherwhiles three, or fower atthe moſt. The graine is included in a long chafhe huske:: the rootes 

beflender and grow. thicke togither, Barly, as Pixie writeth, is of all graines the ſoftelit, and leaſt 
lubic&ro caſnakiereelderh fruite very quickly and profitablie. Ry TAUGHT x21 

2 Theſecond kind of Barly is like vnto the former in ſtalkes,rootes,and blades : they differinthe 

care, For this hath many ranckes of cornes ſet very orderly,which make a ſquare eare,the other nor, 

The north parts of England hath in vie two kindes of barly.the one is fowen in Autumne,the other 

in Aprill and May, | He en 5: Ws {3 5 

| 1 Hordewn 


3 ” 
90m UA A ORR Reuwane.! ANON Pp 9 dps DET. ta va pong pro memwimyripnanyrs ini. pon rr 


i 
\ 
Y 
: 
- 
- 
el 
? 
TE / 
; 
+ 
: 
by 
h 
I © 
. 
; 
;: 
I + 
4 
MH 
/ ind 
# 
t 


NS 4 eds. HCL re OI 


64 | — THE FIRST. BOOKE' OF/ THE 


2 Hoydeum Polytichum vermon, 
| BexreBatly. + | 


f 4 
4 Won” 
— 


JC 


| ___ *%Theplace. | 
y They aff ſowen as Colwme lis teacheth, in looſe nd drie ground , and are well knowen all Europe 
through. | | | | 
| | | 4 Thenames. | 
1 Thefirſt iscalled of the Grecians «e43: in nigh Dutch Herſten ; in low Dutch Herft : in Itali- 
an Orz9- in Spaniſh Cenads : in French Orge: in ih Barly, | 
2 Theſecondiscalledofthe Grecians mos», and alſo ;f«5ryiv: Columells calleth it Galat icron,and 
Hippocrates azi;;0f ourEngliſh northerne people Big, and Big Barly. Crimmnon faith Galen in his 
commentaries of the ſecond book of Hippocrates his Prognoſtikes, is the groſler part of Barly meal, 
being grofly ground. Mault is well knowne in England, inſomuch that .' word needethno inter- 
pRnnen z notwithſtanding bicauſe theſe works may vy nes into the hands of ſtrangers that neuer 
ard of ſuch a worde, orſucha thing, by reaſon it is nor euery where made ; I thought good to 
laie downe a word of the making thereof, Firſt,it is ſteeped in water vntill it doſwell, then it is dried 
with the heateoffire,andfo vied. It is called in high durch Maltz : in lowe Dutch Mout t in Latin 
of lattertime Maltwn: which name is borrowed of the Germaines. © Aetius a Greeke Phiſition,na- 
meth Barlythus prepared 8%», or Bixe : the which author affirmerh that a plaiſter of the meale of 
Mault is profitablic laide vpon the ſwellings of the dropfie. Zythwmn, a5 Diodorms Siculus affirnerh,is 
not onely made in Egypr,bur alſo in Galatia. The aire is ſocold ſaith he writing of Galaria, that the 
| countrey bringeth foorth neither wine nor oile, and therefore men are compelled to make a com- 
pounde drinke of Barly , which they call Zyrhum; Dioſcorides namerh one kinde of Barly drinke Zy- 
thwn, another Curmi. Simeon Zethy alater Grecian, calleth this kinde of drinke by an Arabicke 
name ez: in Engliſh itis called Beete and Ale made of Barly Mault. is 
. * Thet ature. | | 
-- Barly as Galen writeth in his booke of the faculties of nouriſhments, isnor of the fame tempera- 
ture that Vheate is: for YWheate doth manifeſtly heate; but contrariwiſe what medicine, i a 
: | | ocucr 


4 


/- HISTORTEDOE PLANTS.!. 7  &s 


' ſoener is made of Batly, i is found to haue a certaine force of cooling and in the firſt degree, 
according to Galer in his booke of the faculties of aw Re lc hath allo alictle; Or dakg 
qualitiepanc doth dric fomwhat more than Beane _—_ 


 _- 
\ # ' 


—_— 


* The wertues. | 


Barlp ach Diſeride ;,dou lenleyprovoke vrine, codes Sewn eniiptc A 


ameeboted heniadwawemihbes. taketh away inflammarions:z with helech,n roſie, and B, | 
dung, it foftnethiand ripencth hard ſwellings. 
on ith and, poppicſecdsintaketb away the paine in hefiiftoic Þ witnodia win- C 
dines ofcheguts, being applicd wahlineſcedefzenugreeke "L- withtar, waxc , ww and the 
| wich ang boy, TAI att and ripen hard frellings in the roce, calledthe Kings 
eull; 


Boiled with nineqnrelsghe batkeof the pome granite ye prarcs,and heleaes ofbrambles, D 
| it ſtoppeththe laske: - 
Frcher infeirnerla ſag Prifſana, PolentayMaca, mauld;ale,and becre. The making whereof if anie E 
bedefirousr9 learne;lct chen) reade £ Abelixs Aduerſaria, in the chapter of Batly. -But Þ-chinke our 
| Londonbeere brewers gvould ſcorne toJearne to make beere of either French Dutch,much lefle 
_ of methatcanſay nothing therein: of mine owne experience more than by the writings of others. 
ButI may deliver vnto youa confeRtion made thereof,as Colwmellgdid concerning fivect, 
; dentothe halfe,which is this: boile ſtrong ale rill it come to the thicknesof hoaic, or the forme of 
| an vnguentorfalue,which applied tothe paines of the ſinews and joints,(as lien fee = w 
abate aches and ov may for want of berter remedies be vie&for old and $.f it} 
- after thismaner, FF 
' Takeſtrong ale > pound ,oNe OXe zegall and boile them to one poundwith a ſoft fire nll F 
ſtirring ir adding thereto of vineger one pound,of Ol/;henum one ounce, flowers of camomil and me- , | 
' lilote ofech one ounce, rewe in fine powder halfe an ounce, a lierle honie, anda ſenall quantitic of 
| thepowderof comin ſeede,boile them altogither ro the forme of an vnguent or ſalue, and fo applic 
| jt, There be ſundry ſorts of confeQtions made of Barly , as Polenta, —_ of water and vn- 
| huskedor hulled Barlyand ſuch like. Polenzs is the meate made of parc 7oſaemale which the Gre- 
- Cians doproperly call dprr. Maze is made of parched Barly tempered with water, after ates 
| and Xewp ; Oymchauig __ his dirs PR . \ Sumccar them rodrinke waterwherein 
parched Barly ha ceped, calling ir clame name A/a24 : Heſychrmes doth interpret wile = 
tobe Barly fo mixed with waterand ile? vl Aa 
|  Barly meale boiledin water with garden nightſhade, the leaues of garden Poppie,the powder of G 
Fenugreke, and lineſeed, and alittle hogs greaſe,is good againſt all hotand A fivellings, and 


| preuaileth 4 Wa the dropkic| being applied vpon. 


Of Nated Barh. Chap.4s. 


*+ The deſer iption. 


Ordewn nudwmis alſo called Z, and Tritico-Speltwss, bicauſcir is like to Zea , other- 
Pea os andis like that whichjs called French Barly , whereof is made thatnoble 
| drinkefor ſicke folks called Pr;ſaws. Theplant is altogither like vnto the common Barly + fa- 
| Ro IE , theciles or bears rougher and longer, and the ſeede or graine 


E 1 "RA  % The 


THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


* vv 


= 
\ 
| .2 


» aaa, is 
% 4 3 43; "4 


| - Thewenes... | 
"This Barly boiledin water cooleth vn. 
| naturall and hot burning choler, Invehe. 
- | ment fevers you may adde- thereto the 
ſcedes of white e and Letruſe, nor 


. of thebreſt, 07mg to _ afore- 
faid ifons 0 ne, liquerice and 
CE Ee rey 


| Being boiledinthewhayof milke, with 
- -| theleauesof Sorrell,Marigolds, andScabi-. 
©». | ous, it thirſt, and cooleth the 
| |  heare of the inflamedliver, being'drunke 
- firſtinthemorningandlaſtro & 1*0 


Of Burit Barly. Chap.4.6. 


{RITPaRIR. OF PLANTS. 87 


: Hom... 

ti or ; Searcy blaſts Barly, which is e and 

| good for yo du an enimic vnto corne; forthatin ſtead of an carewith corne;, theteis 
» {14 Jekedhitvirichpoilerh btead;orwharſoeuet is mac theregf* 
z This kinde I Barly,called of the Latins Hips Jeni ncledof Plimie Hitchns it | 
Engliſh Wall Barly, Way Barly,or after o#'Eriph writers, WW roweth ypon, mud 
wals,and ſtonie aha by the w s GETS yerthe Gn 
rather like grafſe than Barly. . 
8 vIoi Ow Donor! +*er13 


- hp. The vextmes, Wes 
- THis Bard witdeBa eiaAiFLag lied-vnto plac; rants w < 
and come San rabes tons bord cm called R; y _ n tak ts Hem 


Of S, Saint Apr Corne.. ” hep 4:7; 


. 
IgA O21 


A Ya ? &\ 3 \ XN LE. 
1 Briz4 Aoin@cvesic. j 2 Feftacs Irabics. 
_ SainrPerers Corne, | . +» Hauer Graf; ._. 
= ox 04 - f x "ol $4 © @ F' "Fag "7 ©" | 


". $* 's 


y \ BIN s 
NA NOR WA NOM 
1 T ; 


V7 \ THIN 4 1/4 
A OT DOB FILE 


x W NG 
Rv - —_ % 
— - 


The __ er: 
Hits PIETRO Wal Mc ft NN but Gach lefſer;of a brownefeddiſh 
by th : agraine vnpleafantto eate,and not vied in phiſicke. | 
This fea tekinde of Barly called Feitues of Narbon, hath ſtalks beſer with Jeaues, 
row Lg $ 6ne diſtane] from another euen t to the top ; whereupon do growe certaine round 
Sow after thefhionof a peate: an the crowne whereof ſprouteth foorth many long haires 
tuft or eaſe! faſbion,asis tobe ſeene in 1 Centaure, maior but much longer. 

Mutthielusfaith, ghathe by his owne is fathers eboticnce bit found this tobetrie, 
Thar $ Zoliwh, which $6urcon Darell, is certainly knowen tobe a ſeede degeneratef.: om 
whea &fbeing found for themoſt part among wheate , or whete wheat hath beene : ſo is Feftucs a 
ſeedeor graine SITES Barly, an isfoutid among 94 ,or where B arly hath bevy. y 

|| * Ti 
| | 


AARON «>. ay” 4 4; 
MV IS ; 
4 ; 


6 


- 


L v FJ I: 99> 


b 4 - 
ST 
: v 
= Þ 
© 2 
E : 
Mz” 
0 # 
- 
4 
.— 
DE- - 
B22 
FEM be 
 - 
$8 4 
Ep % 
Sn S 
Bt + 
- 


69 


On WINERY 
ME qo 

They arcofqualite ſomewhat <a, 
ern tees dar imes ofnecdemoiſinedwidhroſe ws; 


w_ * The ription. | 

Vena Ay common Otes, iscalled Fe ca4Veſcends, bicauſcitis viedin many countries to 
make ſundry ſores of bread,as in Lancaſhire, where it is their chiefeſt bread corne for Ian- 
nocks, Hauer cakes, Tharffe cakes, and 

for the moſt part they call the graine Hauer, 

2. CAuena Nudais ike vnto | 

ly as they be threſhed without 

whereof i in Northfolke and 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 69 
br | | *% Thenature. 
' Otes aredric and ſomwhat cold of temperature, as Galen faith. 
bas Th og : $$ The vertues. £ 
| CommonOtes putinto a linnen bag with a litle bay falt quilted handſomly forthe ſame purpoſe, a 


©, andmadehotinatfrying pah,and apphed very hor, caſethche paine inthe fide called the ſtitch, or 


 collicke in the bellie. 


IfOres be boiled in water,and the hands or feere of ſuch as haue 6s 5. anpetign;that is,cer- B 


| alind chaps;chinkes or rifts.in the palmes ofthe hands or feete (a nenpan the 
 pocks) be holden ouer the fume or ſmoke thereof, in ſome bowle or other veſlellwherein the Otes 
are put,and the patient couered with blankers to ſweate, being firſt annointed wich thatointmenr 


| or vntion vſually applied contra Morbum Gallicum : itdoth perfeatlycure the ſame in ſixe times ſo 
| annointing and ſweating. | | | x 


Oremeale is good for to make a faire and well coloured maideto looke likea cake of tallow,clþe- © 


cially if ſhe take next hir ſtomacke a gooddraught of ſtrong vineger after ir, 
Of wilde Otes. Chap.4.9. 


© 1 Zromos Sterilis. 2 Zrewos alter. 


.., Wilde Otes. 


W# | 
\ 
, 


"x * The deſerption. Gn: 
of B Rows fterilis, called likewiſe © Avens fatus, whichthe Italians do call by a very aptname, 


Venus vane,or Auens caſſe; inEnglith barren Ores,or wilde Otes: hath the like qualitie thar | 


,or 

I ourcommon Otes ' -ue : they are ſo common thatthey neede nodeſcription. _ | 

| 2 Thereisalſoanotherkinde of Bromos orwilde Otes avhich Dodonemscalleth Fefuca alters, not 

| Giffering frontthe former wilde Otes, bur that his cares are neither ſo grear, nor ſolong as the firſt, 
It may be called in Engliſh Small wilde Otes agrecing with Branfel/acs,thatitis a kinde of Ores, 


| There is nothing extant woorthie the noting, cither ofrhcir or vertues,bur reckoned 


B 3: P7224) of 


- 


, x; 

: 4 X ONT IM wat." ns 

- _—— » \ CRT 3 LY NE NM TREE 
_ - - n - —— My OA --oof ods 4 ou ES, wy of CRE PEN von TS W.0 "OR 6. P. x * 5 f 
_ —— EDN : Z "$ POLL KD g MG i” $i | TIRES OT AO > wg 0 ey © & G 
EE EE LO LEA EN ee dt. age IE oe Den 5m NS 
wn ent. Og DIO 7 ek G4, Wet RN Re } d : \ ' h 

by 4 


: £ het Log Eds ton £224, had wins” iafburr©7 = 
en heat pd, had 


Ye Hr 7 Aa ren OCs 4 reds 


Ava L_ 


| 
| 
| 


| 
THE \FIRST BOOKE "OF 'THE 
Of Bearded Otes. | Chap.50. 


1 «<Megilops Bromoides Bearded Otes, 


| _ *% The deſcription. 

N \ | Egilops Bromoides Belgarwn,is a plant in- 
DJ differently partaking of the nature of Ae- 
Wd | tops a1iG Bromos. Itis in ſhew like tothe 
DON CE Ez =: naked\Otes, The ſecede is ſharpe,hairie, ſomewhat 
Vl EE TEERC long, and of a reddiſh colour, incloſedin chaffic 
husks like the common Ores, and may be engliſh- 
cd Creſtedor Bearded Otes, Ihauec foundiroften 
among Barly andRie in ſundrie grounds. This is 
likewife vnprofitable,and hurtfull ro core,where- 
of is no mention made by the ancients woorthic 

Ce | 


. 
\ 
\ 
% 
\ . 
% 
dd 


x  _*% Thedeſcription. 

2 BurntRic hath no one good propertie in phi- 
ſicke,appropriate either to man, birds, or beaſts,8: 
is a hurtful maladie to all corne where it groweth, 
hauing an carein ow liketo corne, bur in ſteed 
of graine irdoth yecld a blacke powder or duſt, 
which cauſeth bread to looke blacke, and to haue 
ancuilltaſte. And that corne where itis, is called 

ſmogtiecorne: andthethingir ſelfe Burnt corne, 
or blaſted corne, | | 
urnt Oces #- auene,or dn IEY Ya 
likewiſe an vnprofitable plant, degenerating 
bY > otes, as the other from lyRie, and wheare. It 
AVIS | v7 BS. 7s 
3 Yſtilago Auenaces. Burnt Otes,  . 


- Vitilago ſecalina. Burnt Rie. 


= 


HISTORIE OPMPLANTS!7 + 71 


were in'vaine to make a lon harucſt of ſuchenill 02753 ag poſed withny 


$5.» | | FL.19 


* 64 47 


4 White 


Trl 199g PrFFOr rt 
| $1290 ed Dardallec'cs 


tm hiv Ivecdes Darnell isthe firſt. Ie bringtth Bardileaedaud alle like thoſe 
te orbarly; yer tougher; with a long care made vpof many little ones, euery parti- 
Sues whereof containeth rwo or three | 2-9 lefler than thoſe of wheate,ſca ly any 
chaffic hike to coner them with, by reaſon wherof they are eaſily ſhaken cut and ſcatrered + Aw" 
2 RedDarnellisikewiſe an vaprofirtable corne or 
the ſtrawor ranks ofa're AORUg pon, 
3% Tie place. |. 
i els ahi heateand dathy;ptchec tandbad ſeede as Galen ſaith,cfj 
an? Li and dankiſhſo wgwh _ op _ 
RT be time. 


Theyſpring an wh ith come gn Auguſt the ſeedcis cipl re 
, |; * The names. 
I Darnell is calledin Greekee#inithe Arabian toon Zizawia and Steylem: in French Tarey: in 
Loghts: in lowDutch Rooms brEngliſ Darneli,of ſome Iurayand Raye, andof ſome of 

—_— Triticum Tenwulentuns | 

Red Darnellis called in Grethen2:or Phenix. of elfcriabon coloutio Latin Lolivn rubrum: 
and Loltiom Mur inwn ;"in\ 
Triticune marinwm in Mupyſle cozen. ' 

" Dawnellishotin the thirddog rs 

m m 

Galen air, vinkdoges, 


a ſmall and render eare,ſpike faſhion. 


[| : 


nd. Red Damelldiedwithour tharpnes 


E 4 * The 


= 
: e 
T3 as : » Þ + ef FI 
"R Pal Wt 
SS + 


, having leaves like barly. The joints of | 


Duck epwivearen, Y—_ of ſome Hordewn murinum, and 


- 
—— 


\ - 
RI 7 TOOL "o_- m_— 
F. —_ (Os LAY, 
: 4 Meta * FT. 


{ 
: —— D b MN TEfFTs \ SME ; 
” j ETA Fd . En ao Jr, btn tes SOT PIANOS Hott ps 7:9 

OE; : th No hd Hed We tn a a es OG FE; SLOW. 2 SO Dann ECO IRR ILSS 5 " OO I 

v $570 W ION OO OT" IR PRs ro Mage Ro rh Ws RR Rb ST > 0 Re 3 ODOT HORS” þ Ye ITS. 1" ou 3 Ig Es SOT 

« "3h # "Wis wy RON ohies Wig i (AT S8 2 WAS a It WET Ty As. b wh y p 5 gf , 
- f F & fakes wer ft neg "OO IONEEY h Y Ve + - Or 
NN OT Ne T0 ; 


——_— of We Ns 74 OPT ae; 
alt F SOM oe 3. .2 gar” 2730 Sroky TY $27.0 Ws RE pr Bar Bag! 
woes WON Non &F Obs OA \ P , 9 

n v A o] "OR P "_ pl, - t Y T* > 


+ LL, 
4.08 1 


6 THE FILIY B'OOKE OF THE! 


? 


: wo TY a aryerryl $2 Hingi nao! £ 54: 1: 54944 
A Theſee edeofDarne pigeons ng, derof lineſeed; bo: afrotble of 
plaiſter,conſumeth wens,hard1 grondhl ayes xcreſoen IC ina y part of the body. 
B Thenewbreadwherein D is, y Jun kel: s: in like manerdoth beereor 
ale whereinthe ſeede isfallen,orput ine themautr. AS x 
C ' Darelltaken vithredwatefaiech che flux of the de the oucrtich fowiogaf womens. 
» | hs | 
frei, that Darnellmeale/ doh ſtaic ane backe cating ſores, gangrenes 
ang voll inkhedibrorcſa Mn mlſtc m4 r> 0 


a 


Red Darn EE ANES,. aruoke late 
ouermuch flowingofthe flowersor menſes, 
| | *%*The danger." 
\ Dubetſturudidheels hodwghact hekd dim, ifie 
a on Score rin oned/ 7 A Þ 
Et careant lolliis oculos vitiantibus agti. / 47 
po 1 wins tat as ac Lak op be 


'RS 


plumeus Ml Mllergeratertc —— 
Landon Plinie writeth, are fat - ns 
hancaplarohoblotntetinind bes :but 
fneitherthe ſoile, norclimate didalter the ſame, 
the leaues of Rice ha gore in p Sercen, 

leaues ſoft, and 
di juego Ser ang og labrete 
_ iniuricotour vnſeaſonable yeere 59h. F Bur Theo- 
\c, phrafts concludeth , that it harh a flower of a 
(cue urple colour Bur faith Author, Riſc hath 
aves like vnto T or Barly, a ſmall 
hrs ren foints like corne. Artrhe 


Wed yo Dal gmetad lace 


that Riſe is two EZ 
eg nat Iris 

| reaped a yorpe ty ceve of the ſeuen ſtarres, and | 

"purge —_——————_— 


11HISTORIE OF PLANTS. + 


D106 TOM 21 1:16! i 2 16 74319 iq 70 2125 $ The x} 290 ric} *1its « WIG TTY 


Ir in the erricories of theBaRttians, nb 
alſo in mm 


Iegroweth int 
2 95444 2 13,4 
Iris fowen POET II 
ſhowers. | © 


11:16 wry 2.6 A 0; IL; wt 1 50g np At To bamen 
. The Oubelans call itintwyot'as' Thebrdtu fairhwtoixhe: Lanes keeps th Grocers 
Oryz4: in Frenchitis called Riz : inthe Germaine toong Rifz,and Rys 2 in in Bogli Ri «(1/7117 
* Ther 70 


maner of F 


Cx 


> 10 ORE V% SR a; Q0116,90 1008 111 $benig hs 21 prog 


craT PUBL £10 1193 Fi nel ruth 2 aw} [ll 7 gn df art cronn bi Hon eng, gr 
vid nit JETS Y 4: 291 mg _ - |: Th 6 * 2407 ap $3««. DAB? S ES? ys K+ | 


| : © « Y X "SY 
: Tt 4 Pro - +7 , TS. $ 7 $5 4 4a te # s INS 
ad $ IE #4 ri1 119 94 þ 5 1 £ 211%! TY , ” Tf] : 1H be: fir F ? Pp! Ito 7 + & * & : i 


. > : 252 5 , | 4 . ; 5 3 | , > , X 
pat pr of +" © + - + x = WH*\ £4 th . 5 +2 +. & | = 2:76 2h o ©1:77 
oa. 


ROTTS 
$ #4 - 


1224 C as 115d "# 


MIS ! 
'* Ry 7 
103 21.00 
- 


WIT 5 125 25 5887) 


NE TR 
PUNT” 
IN 


OY Rn INES” 
Wy. 1) 


a; OL ER lp oo” 


oe A Le IO 
"Ada t4; dat aw 


ENTREE 


4a oo ARLEN bd Sr IG abi, Fe Hon aghy', 7 Ma x9 1 os . wt 
r =, be 2 # RAT ht 85 >, TSEE.+ 1, Uhr SER ITY £ Wo 44: $1 Pa nb "> wm TX 1 »} ER: Bev Sy » oh 57 - 


74 THE/ FIRST BOOKECOF iTHE 
Milan ni like the former, ſauingtbarths heel this lanti 
ann nd ed omombarbiggergh: ink bladecolow. rn om beb 
1 1 O74 ONE 710 [ | 13; ?P oY 


| kobe onrnin Apllnd Maytndnothtre i - At URS LCA news ; 
The names. "IS 
Itis named of the Grecians »252%: of forme uaggie. &xobHippocr ates Pa \2s Hermolawefaith: :in 
: arr yr em rn, re Deo pr ty ; + nlowDurchDiest i 
"YN bd $4 £4 02 SET? "2 IHhy 1:23 bolleo j {13211 £1 
| conver tb The ye ry rave | A 
- Iriscoldivthefirſt degree as Glen wricerh,y and wethd,orina act ndeaſe 
cond,andis of thin ſubſtance, : ei bus Mem dig aloe ns 5 _ befor of coins _ ) 28 
thin 3b£3; a 3200! W bai hoop 2330 3: The weremesc)!: DAE, #llas i3dþ aid longajad find (39! 
| Themeale of Millmixedwich as li the binms atdallyenemous: caſts 
There is adrinke ma reofbearingthe name nm RE or Ambroſe 
genie on vſedintheerieof Milan in tertian agues. Ie. 
ceit whereof Henricus Rant ſcontugin ofthe! ol entof health ſerreth downe in this 
maner : Take faith he,of vnhus SO quantitie, boile itrillit be broken : then rake fiue 
ounces of the hot at mario ry cunts btw witie) ai a 
vnto the patientbein{well concted with .clothes,and th en will he ſweate 
commeridedby Joarme's Hetrwend in his booke of op 


Of Tok e corne. 
# | D NE 2 e/; Es | 
rl Bader Gn notwithſtandingof one ſtocke orkit 
Us ſundric coloured graines, wherein the difference iseafie to be diſcerned: and for the better 
explanation of the ſame, Thauc ſer foorth to your viey-certaine eares of different colours,in 
their full and perfe&ripenes, and ſuch as they ſhewerhem tobe, Fires oidaln of filme 
doth open it ſelfe inthe time of gathering. i 
0 FAſabeareih alo ri TH. e (7 EO 
rmeo ngereat ſtemor 
'C caneR mach broader nd a darke br, towards peg 
the top of grow idle or barren tufts likethe | 
Neo oee: Thoſe cares' ebauy n 


_ 


| ne like that of the Reed ful Ce: ſerwith many ints, | 
fiuc oxſixe foote hi gh,big beneath andnow: and then of a pate conn og arte and licle ſmall | 
abouethe broad,long.,ſetwith vaincs like thoſe © prectoys onthetop of the | 
be a ſpan lon gs Foo Ge uh rop op of the, comr Fa Reeke into many plumes | 
hanging downwar  emptic and barren withour ſeede, yetblogming asRiedoth. The flower is ci- | 
the ice, yellow orpurple;rhat is to ſay, cuen as the fruite wiltbe.”T + is contained jn veric | 
big eares,which erowoutof the ioints ofthe ſtalke, three or fowerftomonſialke, orderly placed | 
one aboue another,couered with cotes or filmes like hy der te if ir were a certain ſheath: 
outof which doſtand long a dt 


otra egoleber _ va ny, | byte i 
mar ro frng oa ing Fen 


— 


v9 $945 bon SR > eg” PE "ah; _ CO NA ERIE _ 
. 3® 15; 0 bl 
Re. 
9 ys 
C 


b * T \ 7 1 , 

fr ON ITE OS On 3; 
OO PITT SPL OTASS Tl ah ea , A SLRS ont, LOGIN > W3r 4, ” , k f ak 

»* p.. £ ER Y TR44 a4 TRY 2 "7%. w x * F "4 4 IO * 
RT LORE PE TRE HHS WI ASI ere fe IA eu, ; 


Fe - o 
py War "_ hn os ; tp, ws En 
OE ot cn $4 Ca 5: 
_ 9 ” - B a 


4 0s F 
Re OO Ee Oe CNS 


T5 


2 Prumentium Turcicun. [urkic Corne. 
album, 


Frumentum Indic | 
The care of white Turkie Wheace, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1 Frumentum Afuaticum.Core of Aſia. 


4 


: bl 


Wy 


orme of theeares of Turkie Wheare. 


=--\ 


4. 


Thefi 


heatein the huske;as alſo naked or bare, 


Indic 


i 


3 Frument 
Turkie W 


aA REY 


ns ATTOTUTRSS. 
NE LUC CATTESSOTRODS Lf Ce I 
PE aree”, 
DIL LAOT ALOTILCY / 
NN 90-navevVoV0uB;7/ / 


_  _— 
RN wa 
 _ a—_—_—__ i... 
” = 


_ — —_— —— S 
- I ” J : 


an hm 4a--— aut q 
Niece TOR LLDOAAS MAT TIL TRAIL "> ? 
{ | POOLS TIT LILILIII TPM -F&1 
OAT be TITICCIITLLLLIIET VE 15+ 
Lat COUT | _ "SS Vi P 

_— :20v #19 (OO DUUE LIE BYLULUNJ@ 7/44 


-+ 


- © 
a 


= ” 
> 


FW # 


— 


_— 
a ——- 


WO 


2 «CC CCCCUPEPYLEETUG LS &Y 
FR ITOLOLILILILNITTLLEZ 
{noob dt Pu Dae 
. *«.& / DO ci _— 


_——— - 
w- — 


—OLILLEI 


wer 


6 Frumentwn Inditun aur ewn. 


[a 
” 
= 
Ion 
© 
-m 
=_ 
"NN 
©. 
KQ 
= 
YO 
- 
16 #) 
bt 
bt 
[ 


5 Frumentum Indicum lutewn. 


Gold coloured Turkie Wheate. 


Yellow Turkie Wheate. 


(ES 


$BY 
- *£."S 


ay 


4 "ot <; Me LW POT > 
7 Wauuitiygy 6.» 


«weseWW 


W324 
"LA $ 5 


= "yr / 


>=w SLUT US 


PLOT Let , 
C4 ' Oe OPTICAL Y/ 


os 
(UL CCCRLLY 


— 


< 
hag '£ f 
Rs ——— po oy ou 


4 MEAS. +> iis, _ 
e LH . 
«a, AL TT ' 4 — 

_ = >, 


LCs 4 
et Uey/ 


Leer A orddy _ gf 


.// 


LRLADI. 


$ | Frumentum ceruleun O&albun. 


7 Frumentum Irdicun rubrum. 


Blewand white Turkic Vheate mixed 


is 
iP 
' 

: 


o 


Red Turkie VYheate, 


« "A at CO _ _ ” 
ES 


” 
. an. 


d, —_ o_ ” : ahhh <4 * 
D - s pl. . _— —  — 
Ong — - : VV ; 
"© , bs « ol 4 a % 
- Wa —— - 4 


4: . mT D 

| LEE IF 
Rant / 

LAU TOEESP 


LL S' 
© 
wy QT a 


= 


0 
yh, LETT: 


W- 


vs 


WOE Fig 
C_ Boe do 
_ ff) if 


- £77 # 4 
CD En # 


DS KeLLng, ow” 

| LGB CYACLL ] 1 | p 1 
Lariat TOMMIILAMSY 
| LY | is 
4 F 6 
wy 


-” 
4. 


% = 
> 


Dr TI0, 
*.. 
> >, 
"Wa 


(97 66 


ry & 
#2 @CACESSLLCU0SY 


4 , 
_ o) " — 
- , —_——  — _ — 
—_— th # ”) 


EoafW7 : 


4 MICS TO MARC OF PLANTS. 77 

The place. | 

Theſt kinds of Grinewere Sefltongha Spaine, and thenin ther fEurope; 

out of AGawhich ic invhe' Dommicn as all as allour of Azztich prota 

from Vir aorN wh . aye" 0 TY ew 
higher t ——— 


note bentoiwereirgomen wr Fe 
of theſe northern 5; gy (a7 eee to ripenes CG ſommer falleth our to phy oy 
and hot,as wy ſelfe haue by peoctoin thine owge gag. | 


* Thetime. 
[ris ſowenincheſe countries in March and ol paancbſniei prin CHEE 


Turky yheatis called of ſome ST IN.. Turcicwn , and Milien Indicum. Strabo, Eratoftenes, 

' Plinieand others, have contended ename heereof, which I Linde not to te. 

| how vaine and ftiuolousitis: b leauing ic vntill ſuch time as ſome 

api abi are Fre. defcribed,or known of ger on | 
Engliſh itis called Turkycorne and Turky wheate: theinhabiranrs of America and the Ilandes 

DT ISTs ies,do call it Maiziumand Miizum nd Mais, 


he temper ature and Veriuer. 
Turky wheate doth _ fat lefſe thaneither Wheate,Rie, Barly or 'Otes. The bread which i is 
made thereofis meanly white,withourbrancit is hard and drie as bisket is,and hath initnoclammis 
nes atall: for which cauſe itis of hard Nanda n, and yeeldeth tothe lictle ornonourſhment, 


it lowly deſcendeth and binderh the belly, as that doth th whichi is made of Mill or Panick. Wehaue 
as yet no cerraine proofe or experience concerning the vertues of this kinde of Corne,altho 
barbarous Indians whichknow no better,are con{trained to make a vertue of neceſſitie,and 
a good foodz whereas we may eafily iudge that it nouriſherh but rg andis of hard and euill be 
ſtion,a more conucnient foode tor ſwinethan for men, 


Of Tarke eMillet. Chap.55. 


"The rune 


Vrkie Milletisa in England.Ithath 
many high ſtalks, thicke and jointed, ſome- 
what browniſh, beſet with many long and 
broad leaues like Turky wheate: atthe rop wherof 
rowetha great & large tuft or eare, like the great 
ad wp barn ng put 
an in a 
timesred, 74 wp > 11/1735 woe 7 re So C0» 
lour, Itis faſtened with a multirude of ſtrong flen - 
der rootes like vnto threeds ; the whole planthath 
the formeofaReede: the ſtalkes andeares when. 
the ſcede is ripe,arered. 


* The place. 
Irjoierh in a fat and moiſt groun Strgpontiin 
PahySpaiencker hoon | 
i$is One « t itis ripe in 
Autumne, 


': %Thenomes. 
 lriscalledofthe Inſubers, Melegua, nite: 
© 1K4* in Latine Afchics: «in Hem 
_ otherplaces of It 
fabarrams: in Engl Tok Miller 


The 


78 THE FIRST BOOKE/ OF/ THE 


+ The ahve extern 

Theſced of Tarkie Mill is likewntoPani rin taſteand Cn cnjmdowicdyaigke fone 

times make bread Necrofburitisb.itdc andoflinden | ard opens peeve 
farcen hens ant] pigeons with. ; i Aid» ES} 


_ 


+ wy. + +? 
A 4 40 
% 


\ 99 Panic. Goap.s 56 


on 
Peg] * The kinder D 


I Hs ds 3. "I 
| IndanPanickor remeale, 


'* The deſeription. 
He Panickof ; nr wevrns vplike Millet , | 
earesbe round, an hanging downward,in which eee enforce yellowiſh 7 
likeCanarie ſeede or Alpiis. 


2 CET nin as aman,thickerthan a finger, full of 
| thoſe that 7 neere the roote 


or care tikethe water Cats | 
. res: the roms —_— inreſpe& of 


3 2 acun 


1'{HISTORIE' OF PLANTS: 79 


” mo 
4 iy _— 
z " 

o o 


3 Germanie Panick hath many hairie rootes, growing thicke togither like vnto VWheate, as is all 
thereſt of the plant as well leaues or blades,as ſtrawe or ſtalke. The care groweth at the top ſingle, 
wy wilike ynto Indian Panick,but muchlefler , The graines are conteinedin chaffic ſcales, red de- 
clining to tawnie. | x 2: Ss 
4 wildePanick groweth vp with long recdenſtalks, full ofioints , ſer with long Jeaues like 
thoſe of Sor gham, or Indian Panick : the tuft or featherlike top is like vnto the common reede. or the 
carc of the graſle called 1/ch.amonor Manna grafle : the roote is fimall and threddic. = | 


Thekinds of Panickare Pi Her pal yn the beginning of Auguſt : they 
$ are ſowen in the ſpring,and are ripe in inn} : pro- 
| ſperbeſtinhor and drie regions,and ef an fr the meſdoar with much watering,as doth Milland 
| Tukie Wheare h&youlily come to tipenes aud meybetapegoodalongrime. ; | 
| | - % T he names. | 
Panick is called in Greeke inuws : Djoclesthe phiſitionnameth it Mel Frugum: the Spaniards Pa- 
#20; the Latines P anicumnof Parniculs : in Engliſh, Indian Otemeale. | 
e420 * The temperature. 
Pannickes nouriſh lictle,and are driers as Galen ſaith. 
* Thevertues., | 6 phe Fog 
Pannick ſtoppeth the laske as Miller doth,being boiled (as Phwic reporterh)in Goates milke and A 
Urunke twiſe in a day. | | | 
. Breadmadeof Pannick nouriſherh lirtle , and is cold and dry, verie brittle, bauing init neither B 
clammineſſe,nor farneſſe; and therefore it drieth a moiſt belly. of 


*% O_o OW oy WA Ars of Is cnt ONE es, _— 


v0 Ho 


CE a rr 


, - 2» 
jon 47-00" 1 Tdtanoocatis ter. CE EE EE I NE 


' THE FIRST BOOKR/QB THE 
"Of Canarie feede, or Petie Panick...” 


£ Phalaris. 


/} 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


* The deſcription. 


: Anarie ſced,or Canaric graſſe after ſome, hath many ſmall hairie rootes,from which arifs + | 
{mall ſtrawie ſtalks jointed like corne,wherupon do grow leaves like thoſe of Barly,which | 


| the whole plant doth very well reſemble. The ſmall chaffic care groweth at the top of | 


theſtalkes wherein is contained ſmall ſeeds like thoſe of panike, of a yellowiſh colour and ſhining, 
2 Shakers,or quaking gralle, owethto the height othalfe a foote, and ſometime higher when 
it groweth in fertill medowes, The ſtalke is very ſinall and\bentie, ſer with many grafſie leaues like 


the common medov graſle, bearing at the top a buſh or|ruft of flat ſcalie pouches, like thoſe of 


ſhepheards purſc, but thicker, ofa browne colour ſet vyponthe moſt ſmall and weakeſt hairie foote 
ſtalkes that may be found,whereupon thoſe ſmall pouches : by meanes of which ſinall hai- 
ric ſtrings, the knaps which are the flowers do continually tremble and ſhake, in ſuch ſort thatit is 
not poſhble with the moſt ſtedfaſt hand to hold'irfrom ſhaking , whereof ir rooke his name Ph«- 
{ri of that cruel] rrembling tyrant of the ſame name. «off 
| -*þ Theplace. || 
Canarie ſeed groweth naturally in Spaine,and alſo in the fortunate or Canarie Ilands, and doth 
grow in England,or any orher of thefe cold regions if it be ſowen therein, 
Quaking Phalari groweth in fertill paſtures and in drie S, 
| -M , w%Thetime. | 
| This Canaric ſeed is ſowen in May,andis ripe in Auguſt, 
12, -| | "oh The names. || 


f 
*; 
Y 


name . 


Canarie fcede,or Canarie corne iscalled of the Grecians gee; : the Latines retaining the ſame | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ' Vx 


name Kar" þ inthe Ilands of Canaric _Mp;#1: in Engliſh Canarie ſced,Canariecorne,and Ca- 
| nanec 
| phalarie ala is called in Cheſhire about Namprwich, Quakers and Makes, ring his 
name-Phaleyiof the tyrant Phalarisas aforelaid. 
&+ The nature andvertues. 

|  Tfindenotan thing ſer downe as touching the remperature of Phalars, iitandts | it is 

thought tobe of the natureofMiller. 
| . Theivice andſcedas GalenFaith,are thoughe to be profitablie drunke againſt the paines of the 
bladder: Apothecaries for want of Miller do vic the ſame with good ſuccelle in fomentations: tor 
in dric fomentations irſerueth in ſteed thereof, andis his f cdanewm, or ge Ne vic 
EngJandalſorto feed the Canatiebirds.* | c— 


Of F Faxetale | Cay.s8. 


* The deſeription. 


Oxetaile hath many grafſic leaues or blades, 

rough.and hairie.like vnto thoſe of Barly,but 

leſſer and ſhorter, The ſtalke is likewiſe ſoft 

" and hairie: whereupon doth growe a ſmall ſpike or 

care;foft, and ve owls ie,briſtled with very ſmall 

haires in ſhape the waons vntoa Foxctaile , whereof it 

 tooke his name, which dicthat theapptoch of win- 

rer, and recouereth itſelfe thenexr youeby falling 
of his ſeed. 


"This = na arden, | 
bur not wilde in England,andis1 | 
SIREN 

tome ..: 
Ir ſpringeth vp in May ofthe ſeed BER was fem. 
| teredthe mag; ah and bearcth Ow with 
* The names... FS. | 
Therehwetiriot beene more dof he avcies 


fe IT "abagmboera, 2 


» 


+ The nature and vertues. . fic > 
I find not any thingextanc woorthie the memo- 
Cs pred 8") - Vn 8 26 


Of Þobs NETS - Gup4p. 


%* The deſcription. 


Obes Teares hathmany knortie ſtalkes proceeding from/a tuft of 
[ high, ſer with great broad leaues like vato hoſeof Reede, eſt 


? 
j _— 


which leauescome nh 
many Grali hero Face frentofomme) on theend whereof grow a graie ſhining ſecede or 


praine hard tobreake, , andlike in ſhapetothe ſeedes of Gromell, burgreater, andof the ſame co- 
ur, whereof hold ita kinde: every of which graines is bored through the middeſt like a bead, and 
ourof the hole commer a ſiall idle or barren chaffic care like vnto at of Darnell, _ 


ES | Zachma 


: — 


m_ 


82 


THE'FIRST 


Lachrime Tb. lobs Teares. 


JI —_—— 4 


F 
Gi 


| 


BOOKE| OF THE 


|  %Thephaee. | 
Ir is brought from lralie and the countries 


adioin o theſe countries where irdoth grow 
. wiv 


burſeldome commeth to ripeneſle ; yer 
my ſelfe hadripe ſeede thereof in my garden the 


- ſommer being very hor. 


% The time. 


1 os, ole ſowen earely inthe ſpring, or elſe the win. , 


ter will ouerrake it before it come toripencſle. 
| * The names. 


aue thoughritro be wy" apr tb 
of Gromell,which the ſecede ror 
notably reſemble, and doth not much differ from 


Dioſeorides his Gromell, and therefore it might 
verie aptly be called in Latine _{rundo Lithoſper- 
mos ,thatis in Engliſh, Gromell reede, as Geſae- 
rw ſaith : tis generally called Lachrima 1b, and 
Lachrima obj: of ſome it is called Djoſpiros : in 
Engliſh it jscalled Jobs Teares or 1obs Drops, for 
that cuery graine reſemblerth the Drop or Teare 


that falleth from the eie, 


: -beades,brac 


+ The nature and vertuts. 

There is no mention made of this herbe for the 
vic of Phiſicke.Onely in Fraunce and thoſe places 
where it is 195 pur L growing , they doe make; 

ets,and chaines therof,as we do with 


| Pomanderand ſuch like. 


Of Buckwheate. Chap.60. 
| % Theaeſeription. 


B Vcke Wheate may very well be placed 
among the kindes of graine orcorne, for 
that oftentunes in time of cecelit bread is 
made thereof, mixed among othergraine. Ir 
hath round far ſtalks ſomwhart creſted,ſmooth 
and reddiſh, which is deujded in many armes 
or branches, whereupon do grow ſinooth and 
ſoft leaues,in ſhapelike thoſe of Iuie or Baſill; 
whereof Taber mentanms called it Ocymun 
Cereal : the flowers be ſmall,white and cluſte- 
ſtered togither in one or moe rufts or vmbels, 
{lightly daſhr ouer heere and there with a flo- 
riſh o ight carnation colour. The feedes of 
'* graines are of a dead or darke blackiſh colour, 

triangled or three ſquare like the ſecede of 

blacke Bindeweede, called of the ancient Her- 

bariſts| Malacociſos. The roote is ſiwall and 

threddic. 


* Theplace, 


Ir RF: eth veric well in any ground beit 
nc brie or barren, where iris commonly 
ſowen'to ſerue as it werein ſteede of a dung- 
ing” It quickly commeth vp andis very foone | 

ripe, 


1 HISTORIE? OF PLANTS!!T 8; 


| ripe, it is very common in and aboutthe Na in Cheſhire , where they ſowe irafivell for 
| foodefor their cattell, pullen and ſuchlike, as tothe vſe aforeſaid.. f groweth likewiſei Tanca- 
| ſhire and ſome amt of our ſouth mane: abourÞ nin emp. as ay in pony and Gs. 


" Shogun 7 8 {= 
| This baſe kind of graine is foeni in April and he beginning of Maie , wey _ « inthe be- 
ginning of Augult. - a wh | 291 M1 } 
+7 dapkin O29?! 


Buckwheat is called of the hi h Fog Deybenkoz : of the baſe As Buckenwewr, 
that is to ſay, Hircs Triticum,or Goates wheate. Of ſome Faes Triticum, Beech wheate. In Greeke 
Tenomleyr: in Latine Fago-Tritrcww : taken fromthe faſhion of rhe ſeedeor fruit of the Beech rec, It 


is called alſo Fegopyrum and Tregopyron :inEngliſh French wheate, 1 Bucke wheate: 
in Fre nch Dragee aux chencaux.. | | 


% The nature. 


nicke, 
% The wvertues. 


Bread.made of the als ofBucke wheatis of calic digeſtion, itſpeedily paſſech thro h the bel- A 
ly,bur yeeldeth little nouriſhment. ong 


Of Cow wheate. (hap.61. 


Melangyrow albums. | HE 
White Cow wheate. | *% Thedeſeription 


} TY - 
MIN Elompyrum groweth ,with a ſtraight 
M ſtalke, qua p8rendy 4 ſtalks comming 
from 6 Bots bo of a foote Jong. The leaues 


top of the branches grow buſhie or ſpikie cares full 

of — and ſmall leaves mixed togither, and 

—_ " ged, the whole care relembiing a Foxc 

1s care hto flower below, and fo 

— d | by lictle and little vnto the top : the ſmall 

leaues before the opening of the flowers, and like- 

wiſe the buds of the flowers, are of a darke purple 

colour ; and after their openin ng,of a yellow colour 

mixed with purple, andatthe talling of the flowers 

thoſe ſmall purpliſh leaues become of a greene co- 

lour, Then come 'vp broade husks , wherein-are 

| inclofed two ſeedes ſormwhat like wheate, but ſmal- 

ler & browner, The roote is of a wooddy ſubſtance. 

f this kinde there is another called Melampy- 
71% lateum , which groweth neere to the ground, 

withleaucs not much vnlike Harts horne, among 


like caros,the common Foxe —_— ofa yel- 
low colour. 20 
oo The [ I 


| The firſt groweth among corne and in paſture 
| grounds that befruicfull : ic groweth plenrifully i m oy paſtures about London. x 
| Ihefccondisaftranger in England, 


F 2 | + The 


Bucke wheate nouitherh leſle chan wheare, rie, barlie, ot otes; yet motethan —_ Mil or Pa- 


are long andnarrow, andof a darkecolour. Onthe 


whichriſcth vp a ſmall ſtawe with an care ar the top - 


SE”: © 


: Tragepyron.Bucke wheate, 


THE FIRST BOOKE| OF THE 
Lachrime Hob. Jobs Teares. *% Theplace. 
| It is brought from Iralie and the countries 
ioining,into theſe countries where irdoth grow 
- very well, burſeldome commeth to ripeneſle ; yer 
my ſclfe had ripe ſeede thereof in my garden the | 
- fommer being very hor. 
|. w*% Thetime. 
': Iris ſowenearcly inthe ſpring, orelſe the win- 
ter will cit before it come toripencſle. 
Bs. * The names. 


Divers havethoughritco be Lakfiins ſpermi [peci- 

es,or a kind of Gromell, which the ſecede pon 

notably reſemble, and doth not much differ from 
Dieſeorides his Gromell, and therefore it might 

verie aptly be called in Latine _{rando Lithoſper- 

mos ,thatis\in Engliſh, Gromell reede, as Geſze- 

rw (aith : it is generally called Lachrima 1b, and 

- Lachrima Tobi: of ſome it is called Djoſpires: in 

|)| - Engliſh it is called bs Teares or Jobs Drops, for 

|} -that every graine reſembleth the Drop or Teare 

| & _ V--.. thatfallethfromtheeie, 


-—*$ The nature and vertuts. 

There is no mention made of this herbe for the 
vic of Pi ecy in Fraunce and thoſe places 
where it is |plentifully growing , they doe make; 
beades,braclets,and chaines therof,as we do with 
Pomander and ſuch like. 


FAEC@ZNG | | 
——— = Of Buckwheate. Chap. 60. 


Vcke Wheate may very well be placed 
among the kindes of graine or corne, for 
thar oftentimes in time of neceffitic bread is 
made thereof, mixed among othergraine. It 
hath round far ſtalks ſomwhat creſted,{mooth 
and reddiſh, which is deuided in many armes 
or branches, whereupon do grow ſinooth and 
ſoft leaves,in ſhapelike thoſe of Iuic or Baſil; 
whereof Taber mentanme called it Ocymun 
Cereale : the flowers be ſmall,white and cluſte- 
ſtered togither in one or moe tufts or vmbels, 
ſlightly \daſbr ouer heere and there with a flo- 
fiſh of! ghr carnation colour. The feedes or 
graines/are of a dead or darke blackiſh colour, 
triangled or three ſquare like the ſeede of 
blacke Bindeweede, called of the ancient Her- 
bariſts |ſalacociſſos. The roote is ſiwall and 
threddic. | 


| * The place, 


| d 

Ir proff h vente well in any ground beir 
neuer ſb drie ot barren, where itis commonly 
ſowento ſerue as it werein ſtcede of a dung- 
ing* Itquickly commerh vp andis very ſoone 

| | s rnpec, 


yp 


{HISTORIE) OF PLANTS.!! | $3 


fripe , it is very common in and aboutthe Nampewiche in Cheſhire , where they fowe itaſvell for 
 |foode for their cattell,, pullen andſuchlike, as torhe vſe aforeſaid, . It groweth kkewiſe#9 Tanca- 
[ſhire and ſome parts of our ſouth countrey, abourLiandon in Middleſex, as alſo in Kent and Eſſex. 
|. YO Er eg ") Nas; AyvyCS ST OSD TAS 


S 


GR 
|| This baſekindeof graineis fowenin Aprilland the beginning of Maie, and is ripe in the be- 
[frm rod room prety ms. ag fk nd wipe 


Op | $o 28 


; | | * The raves. S336 \ Lo it [1:10 10 297; 
Buckwheat is called of the h igh Almaines {eybenkopm t of the baſe Almaines Buckenweid: 


. . - _— ; : ts | S } 
| |rhatis toſay,Hirci Triticwm,or Goates wheate . Of ſome Fags T ritiewn, Beech wheate. In Greeke 


| |ree27/63r: in Latine Fago-Tritricum: taken framuhe faſhionof the ſeeder fruit of the Beech tree. Ic 


tl 


lis calledalſo Fegopyrum and Tragopyron :in Engliſh French whearte, Bullimong.,and Bucke wheate : 


i 


lin French Dragee aux cheneanx.. 


' 


22D En, 
2M TED WEEREEATES: 


| % The nature. X | | 

| | Bucke wheate nouriſheth lefſe than wheare, ric, barlic, or otes3 yet morethan either Mill or Pa- 
| nicke, | © F 
|| | * The vertnes. | | | 

| | Breadjmadeofthemeale of Bucke wheatis of caſiedigeſtion, irſpecdily paſſeth through the bel- A 
| Iy,buryeeldeth lirtlenouriſhment, _ [7 Ol | | 


|| | Of Cow wheate. (hap. 61. 


Melampyrum albuw. 


Vhite Cow wheate. *% The deſcr iption. | 


Wy x . 
ſalke, having other {inall ſtalks comming 
' fromthe ſame, of a foote long. The leaues 
are long and narrozv, andof a darke colour. On the 
top of the branches grow buſhie or ſpikie cares full 
of flowers, and ſmall leaucs mixed togicher, and 
much tagged , the whole care reſembling a Foxc 
taile, This care beginneth to flower below, and fo 
ypward by little and little vnto the rop : the fimall 
leaues before the opening of the flowers, and like- 
wiſe the buds of the flowers, are of a darke purple 
colour ; and after their opening, of a yellow colour 
mixed with purple, andatthe talling of the flowers 
thoſe ſmall purpliſh leaues become of a greene co- 
lour. Then come vp broade husks , rein are 
incloſed two ſeedes ſormwhat like wheate, bur ſmal- 
ler & browner, The roote is of a wooddy ſubſtance. 
Of this kinde there is another called Melampy- 
rw lateum , which groweth neerc to the ground, 
G. | with leaues not much vnlike Harts horne, among 
: whichriſeth vp a ſmall ſtawe with an care ar the top - 
F like Abperaros,the common Foxe taile,but of a yel- 


low colour. | 
» The place. t . 
The firſt groweth among corne, and in paſture | TY | 


grounds that befruirfull: it growethplenrifully inthe paſtures about London, 
| The ſeconds aftranger in England, Eph 


| 
| 


Va \ M Elampyrum groweth vpri | c,with a ftraight - 
, Y "S 


d d] 2 


/ « 
| 


. 


F 2 _ FS FI 


J 


3% THE FIRST BOOKE OFTHE 


oo: reg pac 2520 > + Therimec | / "I 
They flowerin Tune andIuly. Boil: <ilacges bu Whitby 
| + Gig | %Thenames., | 
Melampyrwm is called of ſome Triticum vaccinimwn : inEngliſh Cow whe 
Meclampyrum late : 
1c: The danger. | 


drunkennes and headach. 


. * . FOE - 
FIT, 
. R - 
ws Y __ % F 
S ; V - - $ 4 
_ f p en 
þ v * #0 Lg ” 7 
w SF 
4 \ JI 
D, d / 
< f/ h 
WF \% 
2 


\ > D [4 
"dc. ; W RJ N 


* * 3 "# a—_ 
EE FI E- 


\..0qQe 
J= 


\ ; 
Io £2 NG 
EN 

' 


| 
| 


| 
6 LL 


 \ ** Thedeſeription.. NY 
' He firſt kinde of wilde Cow wheate Clues in his Pannonickhiſtorycalleth Parietaria ſi 
T we ris,or wilde Pellitorie : which name according tohis owne words if it donot fitly an- 
ſwer the plant,he knoweth not whar to call ir, for that the Latins haue not giuen any vame = 
thereunto; yet bicauſe ſome haue ſo called it,he retaineth the ſame name. Notwithſtanding here- 
ferrerh it vnto the kinds of Aelampyrien or Cow wheat,or into Cratrogonwm the wilde Cow wheat, 
which it doth very well anſwer indiuers points.It hath an hairie fower ſquare ſtalk,very tender,weak 
& eaſe to break,nat able roſtand vpright withourthe helpe of his neighbors that dwel about him, 
a foote high or more,vherupon do grow'long thin leaues, ſharpe pointed and ſnipt abaur the edges 
like the teeth of a fawe, ofa darke purpliſh colour, ſomtimes greeniſh, ſer by couples, one oppolite 
againſt rhe other : among the which come foorth two flowers at one ioint, long & hollow ſomwhat 
gaping like the lowers of a dead nertle,at the firſt of a pale yellow, and after of a bright golden c0- 
lout;z which do flowre by degrees firſt a few and thenmore; by means wherof it is long in lowring* | 
which being paſt there ſucceede ſmall cups or ſeed veſſels, wherein is conteined browne ſeednot 
vnlike to wheate. The whole plantis haitie, not differing from the plant Stichwoorr. Rad 
| | 2 


: HISTORIE' OF. PLANTS. 16 
2 Redleafed wilde Cowwheate is very like vnto the former, ſauing that the leaues be narrower, 
and the tuft of leaues more iagged. The ſtalks and leaues are of a reddiſh horfefleſh colour, The 
gowersin forme arc like the other, but in colour differing ; for thatthe hollow part of the flower L 
withthe heeleor ſpurre is of a purple colour,the reſt of the flower yellow, Thelcede and veſlels are 2 


like the precedent. 
3 Crateogonon Euphroſme. hs / 
Eiebright Cow wheate. % The deſcription. 


3 Thiskindeof wilde Cow wheate Taber Mon- 
tanxs harh ſet foorth vnder the title of Odo-1717es : 
others haue taken itto be a kinde of Ewphra/iz or 
Eiebrighr, bicauſe it doth in ſome ſort reſentble ir, 
eſpecially in his flowers. Theſtalks of this plant are 
ſmall, tender, andweake, notable to ſtand alone, 
rovgh and ſquare. Theleaues are indented abour 
the edges, ſharpe pointed, andin moſt points rc- 
ſembling the former Cow wheate :ſo that of nece(- 
ſite ir muſt be of the ſame kinde, and not a kinde of 
Eicbright, as hath beene ſet downeby ſome. | 
L * Theplace, 
Theſe wilde kindes of Cow wheate do growe 
commonly in fertill paſtures, and buſhie copſes, or 
. low woods,andamong buſhes vpon barren heaths ' 
and ſuch like Jane: 
The two firſt dogrowe vpon Hampſted heath 
neere London , among the Iuniper buthes , and 
Bilberrie buſhes in all the parts of the ſaid heath, 
and in euery part of Englande where I hauctra- 


uclled, _  % Thetme. 
|; They flower from the beginning of May to the 
| | endof Auguſt, | 

S ES *% The names. 


| 1 Thefuſtis called of Z Obelrs Crattogonon: of 
Taber Montanus Miliun ſyluaticum,ot Wood Miller, and 4//ine ſylusticmmn, or Wood Chickweed. 

\ 2 Theſecondhaththe fone titles: in Engliſh Wilde Cow wheate, | | 

3 Thelaſtiscalledby Taber Montanu, Odontites : of Dodonens, Euphraſia altera and Euphroſine : 
wherein I thinke he miſtooke it. Hippocrates called the wilde Cow wheatce Polycarpwn and Poly- 


eritum, | 


: * 
hy ; > —_— p oY By p writ) 
wy dats. 256 omg bas +5 yn IE Aa 
4 mack MOONEY Iron pe NE IE >» — CRIT res 
- vo ron = ce ae ey eo PRI I ee ee oa #1 , 202 y Wit ET: jet a LE nad Ws 24 Of 
- : 7 Chae: 0 DG pigs aA hd ee Et >, "BRED *F" 8; 1 RAN 3 x. ER bay '& ” pf oo Fey OI Te g's 
- | Ar as ” coy CORY OO Ae poor RAE AST pt os T3 © Ne RP Oo 0:2. Beto, IG, 7 OE RT 393 
3 ha - * Boxed : 1 \ 4 * LE RG 2 eat - - 21 TIC Too eo peter ey *. 1 PW; 4 Pt FOR $-<] - 6 OI , Ns - : Os as tt a $ TOR 457 =. I; n 
DIAS RT Ah Mp OE I ONS © REIPETS & 15thet VE Sr energy: 2 Net Oe - ; : ; 
43 Re EARL "Wh; : wo TT Net” EO ANY EDI Ea De is LOESE I —_ - Fs Pay 19 Nb. I FS E FEY; PS. WET | 1 bone by y p RY 
0 _— gy a. <6 « hn" C Ks Y . u , , : 
S _—- Be pE obo ab. on tc : - ts 1h bog " . \ : 


*% The nature and vertues, 
| . There is not much ſer downeeither of the nature or vertues of theſe plants : onely it is reported 
that the ſeedes do cauſe giddines and drunkennes as Darnell doth, 


_ Theſeede of Crateogonum made in fine flower, and giuenin broth or otherwile, mightily Prouo- A. 
keth venerie. | | 


"1 


> i= 
: 
(| 


yome write that itwill likewiſe cauſe women to bring foorth male children. | r” 'B 
Of White eAſphodill. Chap.63. _ > 
* The kindes, 


= Auing finiſhed the kindes of Corne,it followeth to ſhew vntoyouthe ſundry forts of 
"J dils,whereof ſome haue bulbous rootes, other ruberousor knobbie rootes ; ſome of yellow 
| colour, and ſome of mixt colours, notwithſtanding Dieſcorides maketh mention burof one 
Aſphodill: bur P linie ſctteth downe two, which D;onyſws confirmeth ſaying, that thereis rhe male 
and female Aſphodill.. Thelatter age hath obſcrucd many more beſides the bulbed one, of which 
Ga/en makerh mention, 


F43 L Aſphodelus 


» 


| * The deſcription. 


I He white Aſphodil hath many long and narrow leaues.like thoſe of leckes.ſharpepointed. 
T The ſtalke is round, ſmooth, naked, and withour leaues, two cubits high, garmiſhed from 
the middle vpward with a number of flowers,ſtar faſhion,made of fine leaues a pecce; the 
colout white,with ſome darke purple ſtrakes drawen down the back fide. Within the flowers be cer- 
raine ſmallchiues, The flower being palt, there ſing vP little round heads, wherin are contained 
hard, blacke, and three ſquare feeds as are thoſe of Buckwheate, or Staphiſacre. The roote is com- 
paCt of manyknobbierootes, growing out of one head like thoſe of the Peonie, full of iuice, with a 
{mall birternes and binding taſte, =» | s 
2 Branched Aſphodill agreeth well with the former deſcription,ſauing that this hath many bran- 
ches or armes growing out of the ſtalke, whercon the flowers do grow, and the otherhath notany 
branch art all, wherein confiſteth the difference, | | | 
3 Aſphodillwicththe reddiſh flower groweth vp ; rootes,ſtalke,leafe, and maner of growing like 
the precedent, ſauing thatthe flowers of this be of a darke red colour, and the others white, which 
ſerteth foorth the difference, if there beany ſuch difference, or any ſuch plant at all; for I have con- 
ferred with many.moſt excellent menin the knowledge of plants, bur none of them can giue me 
ccrtaine knowledge of any ſuch, bur tell me they haue heard it reported that ſuch a one there is, 
and ſo haue Talfo, bur certainly I cannot ſer any thing of this plant, vnrill Iheare morecer- 
taintyzfor as yet I$iue no credit to my author,which for reuerence of his perſon {forbeare to name. 
4 Theyecllow Afphodill hath manyrootes eo ng out of one head, made of ſimdrietough, fat, 
and oleous yellow ſprigs, or groſle {trings, from the which rife vp many graflie leaues, thicke and 
frnmaning toſquarenes: among the which commeth vpa ſtrong thicke ſtalke, ſet with the like 
aues euento the flowers,but leffer : ypon the which do grow ſtarlike yellow flowers,otherwiſe like 
the white Aſphodil!. | a GRE 
| 3 Aſphodelus 


£ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 87 
; Aſphodelus fre rubente. Red Aiphodill, 4 ws rat br dooney 6 07 


| /*Theplice. 

Theſe kindes of Aſphodil come vp of themſclues in che prouince of France, leo, Spain ad 

in other countries thereabour: Inn eG 
*% The time 

They flower in May and Tune,andthatby parcels or GRIER © and fo flow- 
ring vpward, © * The names. 

Aſphodill is called in Latine us, Albucum, Albueus and Haitula Regia : in Greeke argbloor: 
in Engliſh Aſphodill,not D lt; for Daffodil Nara, Hs , another plant differing from Aſpho- 
ar ow writeth that the ſtalke with the flowers is Azther ices, andthe roote, that is to ſay, 

ulbs .4 lus. 

Of this Aſphodill Hefd maketh mention in his works, wherehe faith, that fooles knowe not 
how much good there is in the Mallowandin the Aſphodill, bicauſe the rootesof Aſphodill are 
good to be caten. Yet Galea doth not belecue that hemenrofthis Aſphodil,butof that 5 
whercofwe will make mention heerafter. And he himſelfe teſtifiech. that the bulbs thereof at 
tobe eaten withour very long ſeething 3and thereforeiris norlikethat Heſod hath commended any 
ſuch: forhe ſeemerh ro vaderand by te Mallow andche Aphodil Jac inde of ode 3 nelly 
Prepared.and ſoone made ready. =» The nature.” 

Thelc kinds of Aſphodils be hot and drie almoſt in thethird degree. 

'Aﬀterth of ides and ove of Aſphodill proncke and A 

ter the opinion of Dzjoſcorides and © Letize, the rootes eaten, vrine 
the rermes effectually x Dierdrnd: Sm, erooera Abita pr 

One dram 5 thy 4. ——— helperh he pine in hefides, up-B 
wres,conuulfions,and the old cough: |; 

The rootes boiledindregs of wine curefoule eating vicers, all inflammations of thedugs, or C 
Rones,and eaſcth the felon being pur therero as a pultus, 

The ice ofthe root boiled noldFreexe inenogither wich alice nyrche and fron akorh D 
ancxcellentCollyric profitableforthecies. - :' '- 5/7 + 0 ot moles wait _ 
"4 G 


nor 


EMT oo aan oy oo Gn 


: * 
Eat ie 2 oat id De tr Wo gs, ky 


| 


| 
1 


THE. FIRST BO OrE "OFTHE 
Gulenaiththeroores burnrto aſhes and mixed with the grealc ofa ducke,helperh Alpecis, brin. 
that was fallen by meanes of rs le. M 
- nifireſs dram thereofraken with wine ___ the drawing togither of linewes, cramps, 
an 


G The like quantiric taken in broth prouoketh was, and belpcth thoſe that are- bitten with ny 


venemous beaſt. 
H Theivice of the roote denſerh and taketh away | white morphew, if the face be annointed 


therewith: : bur firſt the placemuſt be chated and well rubbed with a courſe linnen cloth. 


Of the Kinos S ee Chap.64. 
I " Ln Ei f En 4 
| NCAInire phodill. 


| 
{i 


cription. 
- HelewerofheKin Fre wn arr ; and chamſeredorforroned; of a 
_ == . | The flowers which grow 4, ofa gre 
ike to the flowers of the other,which being 
| or ſcede veſſels, wherein the ſeede is con- 
rained. Theroorerigie maner are very many, long and ſlender, ſmallerthan thokeof the other 
yellow fort. Vpon the ſides WT Famron certain {trings, "To which the "Rr itſelfe is _ 
increaſed and multiplied. * 1 
_ CID all. ] 
in ſtalke and flowers; wi enceat 
'| ſomewhatchamfered, like co:thoſe of the Flower: 
ſpan Jong; The ſtalke is rais ta foore hi 
' leaves: imthemiddlewhereof come 
_ containedinlong ſharpe pointed cods, Thobege 
many ſmall 6 Sl tart $180 114% WOrnlh 2; | 
I © The nll yew Apo growerh not of it 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS 89 
Ee CHE IENE - #- ge, | 
R Lancaſhire Aſphodill groweth in moiſt and mariſh'places neere vnto thetowne of Lanca- 
ſer in'the mooriſh grounds there, asalfoneere vnto Maudfley and Martom, two villages not far 
from thence; where it was found by a worſhipfull and learned gentleman.a diligent ſearcher of fim- 
ples, & fervent lonerof plants, maſter Thomas Hesket, who brought the planrs thereof vnto me for 
che increaſe of my garden. | Fy | R 
Ireceiued ſome plants thereof likewiſe from maſter Thomas Edverds Apothecarie in Exceſter, 
learned and $kilfull inhis pn, as alſo in the knowledge of plants , vnto whom I reſt bounden 
as well for this plant, as alſo other rare and ftrange plants and ſeedes, eſpecially for the plant of 
* Juex, which his ſeruant brought from the Indies, & is eplant of whoſe roots the needy naked Indi- 
; an ſoules do make their bread, as ſhall beexprefſed more at large, where I ſhall haue occaſion to / 
make further mention thereof. He found this Aſphodill at the foore of a hill in the welt part of Eng- 
land,called Bagſhot hill,necre vato a village of the ſame name, 264 


| * Thetime, ; SY | 
They flower in May and Tune :moſt of the leaues thereofremaine greeneinthe winter;ifit bent - 
extreme cold, *% The names. | mY IT IH | 


The latter herbariſts call this yellow Aſphodill X;phiwn : in Latine Lpbodelas luteus of Diony- 
fo p 7 —_ it is called Hsula Regia. We haue engliſhed it,the Speare for a King, or {mall yellowe 
lt | - | 
2 "The Lancaſhire Afphodil is called in Latine _{Þhodelus Lanceaftrie,and may likewiſe be called 
Aſphodelus paluFris,or P ſeudoaſphodelus lutews,or the Baſtard yellow Aſphodill. 
x1 *._T he nature and vertues. FRE | 
It is not yer found out what vſe there is of cither of them in nouriſhment or medicines, | 


_ -Of Onion eA ſphodill. | Chap.65. wot 
\ _ | \ % The deſcription. 1 


RY. PSA He bulbed Afphodill hath a round bulbus 
Ys or Onion roote , with forme fibres hanging 
thereat: fromthe which come vp many gral- 
 fieleaues,very wel reſembling the Lecke, amongſt 
the which leaues there riſerh vp a naked or ſmooth 
ſtem, garniſhed toward the top with = ſtarlike 
flowers, white of colour, conliſting of fixe little 
leaues ſharpe pointed , with certaine chives or 
threds inthe middle. After he flower is paſt,there 
ſucceederh. finall knops or heads three ſquare, 
- wherein lieth the ſecede. | | 
*% ou Theplace. bo 
It growerh in the gardens of herbariſtsin Lon- 
don,andnotelſewhere thatI ktiow of: forit is not 
very common. / WER 24/1 [ 


APptodeti 


It flowreth in Iune andluly,and fomwhar after. 
4 * The names. | b: 

The ſtalke and flowers Wingyce to thoſe of the 

Aſphodill before mentioned, doe ſhewe it to be 

- CAſpphodeli 's cies, or #kinde of Afphodill : for' 

which caule alſo it ſcemerh to be that Aipho- 

dill, of which Ga/cs hatlymade mention in his ſe- 

conde booke of the Faculties of nouriſhments in 

theſe words. The HA AGSebRNING 

-rooteof Squill or ſea Onio 


ner like to f Squill ion, as well 


in 


1 
1 
| 
| 
3 
5 
i 
b, 


90 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
in ſhape as in bitterneſſe. Notwithſtanding faith Ge/en, my ſelfe haue knowen certaine counttie 
men, who in time of famine could not with many boilings and ſteepings makeir fit to be eaten. It 
is called of Dodonews iAſphodelus famine, and lus Bulboſus : of Galen Hyacint | 
| lusand Aſphodelus Hyacinthings, and that ri 
_ flowers like Aſphodelus : and therefore as it dot! 
name: in Engliſh we may call it, Bulbed Aſp ; | 
| BY BY * The ature. | ' | 
| The round rooted Aſphodill according to Galen, hath the ſame temperature and vertue , that 
Aron, Ariſarum,and Dracontium haue, namely, an abſterſiue and clenfing qualitie. 1 
| |  __* The wertwues. 6 | 
A Theyoong ſprouts or ſprings thereofis a medicine againſt the yellow Iaunders, for that 
the roote is of powerto make thin andopen. | | 
B Therootes heerceof, as Galen writeth in his of the Faculties of ſimple medicines, are like in 
- vertues to wake Robinor Aron, and Plinies cowkqwpintle,and likewiſe to ons as aforeſaid, 
Galenfaith that theaſhes ofthis Bulbe mixed with oile orhens greaſe,cureththe pilling or falling 
of the haire in ſpots as _Lopecis doth. 


Of Yellow Lillies. (hap.66: 


Icauſe we ſhall haue occaſion heereafter to ſpeake of certaine Cloued orBulbed Lillies, we wil | 

in this chapter intreat onely of another kind not Bulbed,which likewiſe is of two forts differing 

principally in their rootes; for in flowers they are Lillies,bur in rootes Aſphodils, participating 

as it were of both,though necrer approching vatoAſphodils than Lillies. « 

1 Lilium non bulboſion, 
Theyellow Lillie, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. EDM 
\ 


ſiſterh of many knobs or tuberous clogs, proceeding from one head, like thoſe of the white AL. 
phodillor Peonie, - | | 30 | : 

' 2 TheDay Lilly hathſtalks and leaues like the former. The flowers be like the white Lillic ir 
ſhape,of an orenge rawnie colour : of which flowers much might be ſaid, which I omit. Bur in briete 
chis plant bringeth foorth in the morning his bud, which atnoone is full blowen or ſpredabroce, 
and the ſame day in the cuening it is as rotten and ſtinking , as if it had been troden in a dumghill 
moneth togither in foule and rainy weather : which is the cauſe that the ſeede doth nor follow, as 
inthe other ofhis kinde, not bringing foorth any ar allthart I could cuer obſerue, according to the 
old prouerbe,Soone ripe,foone rorren. His rootesare like the former. | ako 


| | * Theplace. | | 
Theſe Lillies do growe in my garden,and alſo in the gardens of herbariſts and louers of fine and 
rare plants ;but not wilde in England,as in other countries, 
| ; *% The time. 
Theſe Lillies do flower ſomewhat before the other Lillics, . 
*% The names. | | 
Diuers do call this kinde of Lillie Zz/;z«hadelus,Liliago, and allo Lil;sfiram, but moſt commonly i 
Lilium non bulboſion : in Engliſh Liricontancic,and gar Lillie. The old herbariſts name it 77--:-- 
recalls : for they haue two kindes of Hemeracallis, the one a ſhrubor wooddie plant, as witneſlc: 
Theophrafms in his ſixtbooke of the hiſtoric of plants. P/;nieſerteth downe the fame ſhrub amony 
thoſe plants,the leaues whereof onely do ſerue for garlands. | BY: g 
| Theother Hemerocalkis which they ſet downe, is a flower which periſheth atnight, andbuddet!: 
atthe ſunne riſing,according to Athenews,and therefore is called the Day Lillie,or Lillie fora day. 
| *% Thenature. - _. 2 
The natureis rather referred to the Aſphodils than toLillies, © FA 
% The vertues. &\ | | 
Dieſcorides faith, that the roote ſtamped with honie, and a-mother peſſarie made theteof with A 
wooll,and put vp, bringeth foorth watcr and blood, 2 | | 20 
The leaues ſtamped and appliced,do alay hot ſwellings in the dugs afret. womens travell in childe B 
bearing,and likewiſe taketh away the inflammation of the cies, ,, oo | 
| The rootesand the leaues be laid with good ſucceſſe ypon btuenjngs and ſcaldings, , i C 


Of Bulbed Flower deluce. Chap b7. 


* The kindes. > E\-£ 
Ike as we haue ſet downe ſundry ſorts of Flower de-luces , with flaggic leaues and tuberous or 
knobbie moe PE notablie in ſundrie reſpeRts, which we haue diſtinguiſhed in their 
proper chapters: itreſterh that in like maner we ſet foorth vnto your view , certaineBulboſe or 
Onion rooted Flower de-luces , which in this place doe offer themſclues vnto our conſideration, 
whereof there be alſo ſundry ſorts, ſorted into one chapter as followerh. —— + 


- . 

£ . 
- y q _ _ y fm 5 LF, V Si Hh FP "7 "2x64 

_ ng ra huge oe IHE 4 {ut 2. ERS Net wa SOIT +18 NE Eats oF. IE NE 4 I? 3 A Cat PE PILAR 7 

©; RT Foy A — — | = ! . La % C—_ & uw) "IT * ” of _ : oo $8 CEA) # AY i 8 Ly Tay z 3 F hr” 3 MOT. ” ” 
OS RB Se Eo i Ee A TTES. - + © in 23 po Remege en PII FL, MC a RE ade ak 
A —— ENDS EDO RD 

"OE." » : . . ” ” * + 


4 


aimygronmtyy ob a en pore es + be the 
© £ v4 L DROP 00. Co ae FN 


"of * The deſcription. (7-1 Eg 
1 Nion Flower de-luce hath long narrow blades or leaues, creſted, chamfered, or ſtraked 
| on the backe fide, as itwere rs ſomewhat pong, opening it ſelfe towardthe _ 
| ,yer remaining as it were halfe round,w itreſembleth a hollow ttoughor gutter, - 
Indwbotjoneof the paar gs. rs theſe ho, 14%, 0s 
ſtalke of cubic high, at the top wherof groweth a faire blewy flower nor differing fromthecommon 
Hower de-uce 3 the which being paſt, there Gor in place; long thicke cods or ſeede- vellels, 


whercin 


92 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


wherein is contained yellowiſh ſecede of the bignefſle of a tare or firch: the roote is rounde like the 
Onion,couered ouer with/certaine browne skins or filmes, 

2 Changeable Flower de-luce hath leaues like the former, burtthinner, narrower, and ſharper | 
pointed. Theſtalke and rqotes are alfolike vntothe former , bur lefſer. The flower groweth at the | 
rop,hauing likewiſe the forme of the Fower de-luce;, that is to ſay, confiſting of fixe greater leaues, 
and three leſſer: the greater leaues fold backward|and hang downeward, the leſſer ſtand vpright, 
And in the middle of the|leaues thereriſeth vp a yellow welt , white about the brims, and tha. 
dowed all ouer with a wath of thin blew tending|to a watcher colour : roward the ſtalke they are | 
ſtripped over with alight purple colour, and likewife amongſt the hollow places of thoſe that ſtand 
vpright, which cannot be expreſt in the figure, there is the ſame faire purple colour : the ſinell and 
ſauour very ſweete and pleaſant, The roote is Onion faſhion or bulbus,like che other. 


3 Ofwhich kinde or fort there is anotherin my Me which I receiued of my brother me 


Garret Apothecaric,far more beaurifull than the laſt deſcribed. The which is daſhr ouer in ſteed of 
the blew or watchet colour, with a molt pleaſant gold yellow colour, of ſmell exceeding freete, 
with bulbed rootes like thoſe of the other ſort. 1. #52 | 
4 lIrisreported, that there is inthe garden of the Prince ele&orthe Landgraue of Heſlens gar- 
den,one ot this fort or kinde,with white flowers,the which as yet I haue not ſeene. 


1 Iris bulbefa, | ; 2 Iris bulboſa flore vario. 
Onion Flower de-luce. Changcable Flower de-luce. 


\ | \ #\ | 9 

=. \ N 1; \ \þ h N, "i 
"j | \ Y Y (& 
_—— [ 1 LU = — —_ ; 


Rk 
«>. 
= 


to, / "0p; 
| JS 
EN 


\ { | 


£5 
Y, bl VA 
/ / 
l Fl 
' 


 % The deſcription. 42 
ath leanes, rootes, ſtalks and flowers like vnto the variable 
| inns thatiowo fry the take of thiskinde do apptert 
he others are ofa greeniſh colour, andthe flow- 
other of variable colours, © 
4 Thus 


'[{HISTORIE "OF IFLANTS. 


I This paleyellow aſhcolomed bulbus Flowerde-luce (ifthere be any fach); 
mer wo ipeion, Layl if heon'de any ſuch; ; rl maine gopinion there is none ach 


bg | PLC F404 5 3142 VEVITE aith 154832: COEFS +15 
3 Iri : blbofa ——_ | 4 rota 
=n x4 -luce. 


Yellow bulbed Flower de-luce. 2 Aſhgoloutd 


Int re 7 _ as 


* The place. 
The firſt of theſe bulbed Flower de-luces Fs wilde, orofit ſelfe in he corne fields of the 
moſt parts of England,as about Bathe and Wels,and thoſe places adiacent;from whence they were 
firſt brought into London, where they be naturalized and increaſe in great plentic in our Lond1n 
gardens, 

The other ſorts do grow na in Spaine & Italic wilde, from whence we haute had plauc  -£ 
our London gardens whereof they do greatly abound, | 
* The time. 

They flower in Iune and Iuly,and ſeldome after. 
* Tht names. 
The Bulbed Flower de-luce is called of Z Obeliws Iris m— and alſo Hyacinth: fore iridis : of 
ſome Hyacintbus poerarwmzand peraduenture itis the fame that i mentionethin the rwenty 
one cop faying,that 7ywnamed moe old writers Hzjeris,may alſo be called and nor vnpro- 
perly Hierobulbus or Hieribulbus, as though you ſhould oy 14 Bulboſa, or Bulbed Ireos ,alcfle you 
would haue izeC6aC, called a greater or larger Bulbe : for u is cerraine that great and huge things 


were called of the Ancients i«ge,0t Sacre: in — ; 
The nature of theſe Bulbed Flower rote ,are referred tothe kinds of Aſphodils. 
* Thewertnes. 


Take faith 4pyleins, of theherbe Hierobulbas ſixe 3. Goates ſuetas much, oile of Alcanerone A 


pound, 


, PA "AE O . NAY ONT b 
lr ect | PRONE pony, La ” 42 
DN 2” Tos She + tw" % ES W %, a 5 s £4 Fall gat, X CARL F = . 


Beg 4 mo PIT 1 pb 


SO 


L032 WY, 


react? es 


COS OM EO RU TRI ng 2 
A Oe  E E d At B 


"6 


<3 Fats 


rs def 


16a 26 WO nr Hs Tr fv rms aa eb n 


£) 
hy 
&i 
S: 


» 


94 THE FIRST"BOOKE(t OF'THE | 
pound, erp! being firſt tampedina ſtonemortar,, ittakerh away thepaine of the, 


B © Morcouer,if awomandoe vitowaſhher face with the decoftionofthe roote, mixedwiththe | 
male of Lupines,jtfoorthwith clean freckels and morpbew,& ſuch like deformities, 


Chap.68. 
1 S;anrichiuon. | | 4 : 2 Iris Twberoſa. 
SlanN Es Veluet flower deduce: 


ſ 
| "K1 
Wh 
#/ Gf 
-” 
' # 


: % 
\ 
"ASS 
fg 
l ; 
1 % 


& « 


+ 4 - = 


| | * Thedeſoription. | 1] 
x C** Paniſh Nut hath ſmal graffie leaues like thoſe of theſtars of Bethlem or Ornithogalgamong 
; g which riſeth vp a ſmall ſtalke of halfe a foote high, garniſhed with the like leaues,bur ſhot- 
© ter, The flowers grow at the top, ofa skie colour, in ſhape reſembling the flowerde-luce or = 
- common 7ris : which being paſt, there ſucccede ſmall cods with ſeeds, like of Turneps. The 
roote is round, Bulbs or Oo aſhidn,couresd ithaskin or filme, in ſhape like a Net. The bulbe = 
is ſweere intaſte,and may beeaten before any other Bulbed flowers. There is ſetfoorth another of 
this kinde ſomwhart lefler,yhich may chance by theſoile or climate,and yerthe ſelfe ſame plant. 8 
2 Veluer flower de-luce hath many long ſquare leaues, ſpungious or full of pith, trailing vpon the = 
ground,in ſhape like to the leaues of ruſhes : amon which riſeth vp a ſtalke of a foote high, bearing = 
atthe top aflower like the flower de-luce. The lower leaues that turne downward, are of a pertect 
blackecolour,ſoft and ſmooth as ifblacke veluer,, the blacknes is welted about with greeniſh yel- 
lJow,or as we terme it,a gooſe turde greene; of which colour the vyppermoſt leaues do confiſt : which 
being paſt, there followeth a  orcreſted|ſeede veſſell of the bignes of a mans thombe, 
wherein isconteined round white ſecede, as big as the Fetch or Tare, The roote confiſteth of many 


| % The | 


| 


Z Made 64+ we. PLAN TS 7 95 


Theſe baſtard kinds of Flower —— Eijk bedenhoboainong ſomefewe 
_ Herbariſts in London, whorhaue them rdens where they increaſe cxcee = 

ally thelaſt deſcribed which is ſaid to grow wilde out Conſtantinople, Morea and Gree 
_ whence it hath been tranſported i into Iraly, whereithath beene Laket for Hermodatiyhs, ws 
by ſome expreſt or ſer foorrh in writing-underthe ricle ene Fs ap _ it hank nor 


any ſemblance at all with Hermodattylis. 
| % Thetims: 


Theſe wilde or baſtard Flower de-luces,do flower from Maic ro the endof June. 
% The names. | F 
1 Thebulbed baſtard Flower de-huice which we haue Engliſhed Spaniſh Nut, is called in Spaine 
Noxella: the leſſer ſort Payue Nozells;im their owne roong Macnca: we take it to be that kinde of 
nouriſhing Bulbe which is named in Greeke awehgut of Pliny Srfimrichium.  * tt7 
2 Plinyand T heophra#tus conrend whether this veluer Flower de-hice be the as; Hermaidaddylis: 
The which controuerfic I intende not to  withall, ſeeing the matter ſo plaine, which may be 
decidedby the leaſt and ſimpleſt Sympliſt iMeſe our daies, conſideringir doth» nor agree with the 
grue Hermodadiyli in any one point. | 
'* Thenature and erties. F-. ans * 

Of theſe kinds of Flower de-luce rhere hath been lirtle ornoghin at all leftin writing concerning 

their natures or vertues :onely the Spaniſh Nutis eatetiat thetab! Sof rind delicious, naie vi- 


cious perſons in ſallads,or EGG Ih LEE luſt and lecherie. . | 20 | 
Rs Fig, gs PO 
'T Gladiolus 'Þ 1+ Sang 2 Cludiol Italiews. | 
Nom 8k 09; | Italian corne Flag. 


- 5 A > Os . 
oF 4 OT, OY Coat E So as witts,"k 
IR Si ACE ded ace AT GT 


Fa th, "Vas PR 94 -þ Ie Gi ns "Si 8 Oo. EY on Mi it 
HE CE no opens Saline; On, 


Oey 2 


96 THE" FIRST BOOKE” OF! THE 

73) % Thedeſeript E 

Rendh Conde Flag hack ſinall fiffe leaves, ribbed orchamfered with long nenties offinewes, | 

anni the ſame,in ſhape like thoſe of the ſmall Flower de4uce, or the blade of a 

Doi fart ouerworne greenecolour: — vp aſtiffe | 

| ,yhereupon do grow i i "me ordermany [ purp flowers, gapi 

acchile of Snapdragonornocmcifenng ; be Fane goveyclle in Latin Dz dboafog | 
there come in place round knobby ſeede vellels , full of eſcede, verylight, of a browne red. 

diſh colour. The roote confiſteth of two Bulbes, one fer ypon the other, the vppermoſt whereof in © 
the beginning oftheſpru is leſſer and miorefull of inice : the lower more greater, but morc looſe 

and lithie, which a little while after periſheth. ; 9 | : 

2 'Iralian Corne lag hath long narrow leaues', with many: ribs or nerves running through the 
ſame: the ſtalke is ſtiffe and brittle, whereupon do grow flowers orderly placed vpon one fide of the 
ſtalke,whereas the precedent hath his flowers placed on boththe fides of the ſtalke , in ſhape and 
colour like the former,as arealſo the rootes,burſcldome ſeene one aboue anorher, as inthe former, 


3 Gladiolus flore Pallide.. % | 


| Pale ComeFlag. $50 __ &. 

L " =} p , There oo rs _—_ Corne Flag, which a- 
| withthe bed incuery point, ſauing = 

- :...tharthe flowers ofthis are of a 05 VG at 

- 2h, .. , werebetweene white and that which we call ma+- 
VE” dens bluſh, 1 

| * Theplace. 

"Theſe kinds'of Corne Flags growe in medowes, 
and in careable grounds among corne in many pla. 

_ ces of Italy, as alſo inthe parts. of .Fraunce borde- 
ring therunto. Neitherarethefields of Auſtria and © 

orauia without them,as Corday writeth. Ve haue 

cat plentie of themin our London gardens, eſpe- 

cially for the garniſhing and decking them vp,with 


* 
# # 


cir ſeemely flowers. __ 
| * The tome. 
| They flower from May to the end of Tuly, 

 *% The names. | 
Corne Flag is called in Greeke 9-1: in Latine 


Ladiolus, and of fone Enjis, of others 2dr7<r0, and 
ladiolm ſegetalis; Theophraſtus in his diſcourſe of 
a/canwn, maketh it the ſame with Xiphion. 7 ale- 
1s Cordus calleth Corne Flag Yidoriali famins: 
ers Vidforiali rotunds : In the Germaine roong 
eigwurtz t to make a difference betweene Gl 
olus and Yidtorialis, fecing thatthe right Yiforis 
ls is akinde of Garlicke Ar" ypon the higheſt 
iſh mountaines, which is likewiſe 


e Sedge, Cone Gladin: in French Glas. 


The roore of Come Flag as Galenſaith,js of farce todrawe, waſte or conſume away and dric, as 
alſo of a ſubrill and digeſting qualirie. | Bs 


A Therooteſtamped with the powder of frankenſence and wineapplied, drawerh foorth ſplinters | 
and thomes that ſticke faſt in rhe fleſh, ang, | pen ns 
Being ſtamped with themeale of Darnell and honied water, doth waſte and make ſubtill harde 
lunps, nodes and fiyellings being emplaiſtred. | 


*% The vertues. | 


Some 


AISTORIE OF PLANTS.|? | -*-97 
afficmechatthe rrooteproucketh bodilie luſt,and the Jowercaulcth barrenneſle. 
The per rooce drank in water iprofiable agailt tar kind of burſtinnchlden called D 


Enterocele. 
"The roote of Corne flag ſampedwithb greaſe and wheaten.meale, hath been found bylate E 
pR—_ in Phiſicke and Chirurgeric a certaine and Pg _Renine 
dſuch likefwelling rs "ry we it {ene /h 
cods with the ecddredand been powder 8: drunk Þ Goarn mile, Aerie, 
peſendieaketh away the paine pb ufellicuk, : 


Wy Hyatinthes, and bore Monde  Chap:7 70. pl £61946 


% The hinges, | by 


Here be likewiſe Bulbus or Onion rooted planits thar do orderly fucc&e, rite to- 
beeaten, as Onions, Garlick, Leckes; and Ciues; notwithſtanding Tamfirſt ro eritteate of | 

thoſe Bulbed rootes "whoſe faire and beaurifull flowers hauc receined grace andorfiament in 

ardens, and Garlands: the firſt are the ac there is founde at this day d divers lorts 
ring verynota bly in many TER be declaredin their ſeuerall deſcriptions,” © 


1" Hiutanthas plats Fckop. =) "0 | 2) Hyacinth fee Lili,” 
cnatlo Lach k Lille acinth,> 7 (et 2 


I » x, 
IHE # 


* The 
He firſt kind of Tacinth hath very fat ph leaues,hollowlike alittle ada very 
" bricle,ofrhelengrh of finger among which ſhoote vp fat thicke browniſh ſtalkes , ſotr 
and verie tender,and ful of iuice, wherpenddiow bony fey flowers conſiſting of 


COT GeTINegY" Thelecdiscontainedin round bullers, _ 
" G FOrgnons 


” THE FIRST BOOKEOOF: THE 
| ante perk Vi | plans Thowomsbubus er Onive iſbn, 


- 


2 The ſecond kind of H acinth Ana many hdd SraP<>.:ehrig nike groliLlis mneothoſe of 
_ garden Lillie, burſhon The ftalkes doriſeour rheriddeſtereofbare;naked,$ vetie ſmooth, 
an handfull high; atrhe to __ whereof do grow ſmallblew flowers ſtar faſhion, verie likevacothe || 
recedenrt. The roote is and fullof i «v7 paCt of many ſcalie clones of a yellow colour, | 

Likewiſe we hauc anotherfort in into en dens ofthis\tarry Hyacinths,like vnto the Hya. 
cinths of Fachſau _ tion, hauing for the moſt  partthree leaucs, The flowers are of a purple 
blew colour. = | 


; in woods andr 


ks mare obey berbs, nog 


flowers : Narciſſus carultus Becks: of ſome Flos Martins ſtellatue. 
The Lillic Hyacinth is called Hyacinrhus Germaniculiliflorus or Germanic Hyacinth akon from 
the countrie where it n y groweth wilde: of 9thers Hyacinthus bifolins as of Theophraitus. 


4 Hyacinthus autwnnalis mater. 
Great Winter Hyacinth. 


[ "7 v% I— [ | 
The farſt of theſe Sg icealled Hyacin | x Stef Pack ; of the Nar-ike 


» 


1 *HISTORIE/OF PLANTS. :99 
4203 49% PUREE 1224 The deſeription. ies > dliluce TT bidet 
3 Aurumne lacint is the leaſt of all Iacinrs: it-hath ſinall narrow graffie leaues ſpread abroad 
ypon the ground; inthe middeſt wherofſpringerh vp ſmall naked ſtalke an-handful high, ſerfrom 
the middle to the top with many ſmall ſtarlike blew floters, hauing certaine ſmall looſe chiuesin 
the middle. The ſeede is blacke contained in ſmall-hiisks: the roote is Bulbus or Onion rooted, 
The great winter Iacint is like vnto the precedent in leaues,/ſtalkes and lowers, not differing 
in any one point,bur in greatneſle. | 


* 
- 
. 4 


= 
> _- 


aſl, 11>.  % Theplace. + i e * 
Theſe Aurumne Iacints grow notof de wilde in England, notwithſtanding I haue 
them in my garden, alchough they be'very rare with'vs in London..” \ $eaaezts: 

| te Thetime. 

They flower inthe end of September,and ſometimes after. 

T6 EN *% The names. | 

x Thefiiſtis called Hyzcinthus Autammnalis,or Autumne lacine,and winter Iacint. 
2 Theſecond Hyacinthus Autuwnnalismaior the great Autumne Iacint,or winter Iacin. 
_— Anelicus. . : 6 Hyacinthus albus Anglicws. 


5 | | | 
Engliſh Hare-Bels. White Engliſh Hare-Bels, 


* The deſcription. oy | 
5 Theblew Harebels orEngliſh Iacintis very common throughout all England. Ir hathlong 
narrow leaues leaning towards the pn among the which ſpring vp naked or bare ſtalks, loden 


with many-hollow blew flowers, ofa ſtrong ſweere ſmell, ſomewhat the head: after which 
come the cods or round knobs,conteining a great quantitic of ſmall blacke ſhining ſeed. The roote 
1s Bulbus,ful of aflimy glewiſh iuice,which will ſerue to ſer fearhers vpon arrowes in ſteed of glew, 


or to paſte bookes with : whereof is made the beſt ſtarche next vntothar of Wake robin A 
| OE if <a no G 2 6 Ia 


200 THE'FIRST BOOKE'(OF- THE 


[1 


6 Thewhite Engliſh Iacint is altogither like ynto theprecedent,fauing that the leaues hereof ae 
C4 2EL Sri. 
flowers of afaire Car- 


ſomwhat broader;the flowers more open,and very white ofcolour. ;- -;//: 
walde4n many places of Englandganother fort, which 
vhi th adifference form tacoier.:! [1 
bao 9 tl} of! 21.1 1 %'The' place, gli" | [oft | 
- » The blew Hareþels dogrowe wilde in woods, copies , andin the borders of fields cuery where 
through England. | | 
The other two are n 


| 


? 


8 Hacinthworjentalis Polanthes. 
Double Orientall Iacint. 


| | - | _ * Thedeſcription. | 

7 - Theorientall Iacint hath great leaues,thicke,far,and full of ivice deepely hollowed in the mid- 
dle like a trough : from the middle of thoſe leaues tileth ypa ſtalke two hands high , bare without 
leaues,very ſmooth, ſoft and full of juice, loden rowardthe top with many faire blew flowers, hol- 
low like a bell, greater than the Engliſh Iacint. The roote is great, Bulbus or Onion faſhion, couc- 
red with many ſcalie reddiſh filmes or pillings,ſuch as thoſe that couer Onions. | 
© $ ThedoublelacintorJacintwith many flowers|( for ſo doch the word Polyanthos import) hath 

. very many large and broad leaues, ſhort and very thicke, far or full of ſlimie iuice: from the migdle 
whereof rite vp ſtrong thicke grolle ſtalks, bare andnaked, ſer from the middle to the top with _ 


'HISTOREFE: OF PLANTS, Iog 


ny blewor skie hatet flowers, growing for the moſt part ypon onefide of the ſtalke, The roote is 
great, thicke and full of ſlimie inice, 

There is come vnto vs from beyond the ſeag divers other forts, whoſe bgures are not extant with 
vs,of which there is one like vnto the firſt of theſe oxientall lacints, fauing that the flowers thereof 


are purple coloured, 


Likewiſe there is another called Ozzenrali albus, differing alſo from the others in colour of the 
flowers,for that theſeare very white,and the others blew, 


Theres another called Hyacinthas Brumalis, or winter Tacint , it isliketheorhers in ſhape, bur 
differeth in the time of flowring.. © 2 Theplace. | 

Theſe kinds of Iacints haue been ms from beyond the ſeas, ſome outof one countrey and 
ſome out of others,eſpecially from the Ea Fas they tooke their names Oriemtalis. 

*% The time. 

They flower from the endof Ianuary vnto the end of Aprill. 

*% The names, 

Thereis a Lilly which Od inthe tenth booke of his Metamorphoſis called Hyacixrhes, of the 
boy Hþ acinth,o whoſe blood he faineth thatthis flower ſprang , when he periſhed as he was play- 
ing with : Apollo,for whoſe ſake he ſaith that Apollo did print certaine letters and notes of his mour- 
ning writting thus, -. 

Ecce cruer, qui fu Fo Jams T7; 7enauerat Herbas, 
1, Defamit eſſe exuor, Tyrioque nitentior otro 
 ;, Flosoritur, formamque capt ,quam Lilza, (i non 
';  Parpurens colar his, argenteus eſſet in ills. 
; N on ſatis hoc Phabo e3t,(i enim fuit auctor honors) 
Tpſe ſuos gemitus foltts inſeribit co a: «a 
Fhos haber i in $f Rt wir hogs owes duftaect, 
+, SIS... + 
Behold the blood ofhim 
— Whichdidethe al fea bloodro be,and vp there ſprang a trim 
And goodly flower, more orient then the purple clothin graine: 
Infhape'a lillie, wereiir not thar lilies do remaine 
Ofiluer colour,where as thoſe ofpurple hewe are ſeene: 
Although that Phebas had the cauſe of this great honor beene, 
Yerthought he not that ſame inough,and therefore did he wght 
His ſighs vponthe leaves thereof; and fo incolourbright | 
The ach « writ thereon,which letters are of griefe. .-. 
Theocritus alſo hath made mention of this Hyacinth in ZBjons Epiraphin the ry.Eidyll, 
Now ridges =>: letters thine tell ow and do —_ 
And rake ypon tliy leabes <'«, hei{mourning notes 
Likewiſe Yirgillhath written heereof in the chird] Eclog * his Bucolicks, 
Er me Phoebus amat,Phozbo!/us ſemper.apud me 
| Munera ſunt, lauri & ſuaue rubens Hyacinthus. 
And me Phabus oues;Phebus hath his gifts alwaies with mee = 
Trees Layrell, flowers Hyacinth ſsſweeteandred to fee. 
'In ike maner allo A emeſſnvin his ſecondEclog ofhis Bucolicks: 
, Teſmememiſeromihi lilia ni 
Pallenteſque Roſe, necdulce rubens Paths 
fre verie,Þ ark fs 951.1 k 
| Roſz, & lee rabens Hyatintha.. RIUEOAL 
Me WP thee: white Lillies ſecme all blackepoore man to me 
© AndRoſespale;viiſvecte the ruddieHyacinth will bez - -+ 
| Bur iffo be thaucom'ſt;O then the ſhallbewhice-' | | 
 AndRoſes red, and fiveere the ruddy Hyacinth in ſight, bo Ange; 
The Hyacinthes are e ſaid ro be red, Onidcalleth , ſome would hauethem called by 
thename of Riiſtie Iton, for thar when the beſt iron is made hot and wrought til it be cold, there re- 


maineth a certaine blewnes Py they call ironcolour NE” themſelues vpon ca 4 
| -p _—_— 


roo. - THE'FIRST BO/OKE' OF. THE 

6 The white Engliſh Lacint is al ither like. ynto theprecedent, that toe lenuey heveol | 

ſomwhat broader, the flowers more openand yery whe OR i]-9rews coo R on 
Tm no en wglandganother. ele which hat fone of, afaire car- 


J + #2 p o _— : 
it 65 * 1:03 Oy 


. The blewHarcbels dogrovewildein woods, 6 andiothebenikes a where 
chrough England. | 
The other two arenor ſo common, yet dothey growin thewoodsb Colcheſterin flex, inche 
fieldes and woods by Sourhfleere neere vnto Graues-endin Kent, as alfoin a peece of-grounde by 
Canturburie called the Clapper, inthe fields by Bathe, about the woods by [Om Lan- 
caſhireand other places.  t% Thetime, - | 
They flower from the 14 Se of Maic vntothe end of Tune, 


#1 | Soney Wes, , | 
The firſt ofour En nglicus iris thought togrow more 
plenrifully im Eng mths pra,or the vnwritten Jacine, 
The other eee pelicm camber the L | int wi 


3 Hhikdoakabs oriental Larddecm, 
” The blew Ockeaalt lacine. 


w_ == 


| 


The orientall Lacint hath great leques,thicke,far,and full of juice, Hrs hollowedi in the mid. | 
dle like a trough : from/the middle of thoſe leaues|rileth vpa ſtalketwo hands i , bare without _ 
leaues, af Amr heya ey mo. rdthe 4 


HISTOREE OF PLANTS+: - Io 


ny blew or skie colonred flowers, growing for the molt part ypon oneſide of the talke;The roote is 
thicke and full of ſlime tuice. 
© Thereis come vnto vs from beyond the ſeag divers other ſorts, whoſe gures arenotexranewich 
vs,of which there is one like vnto the firſt of theſe orientall lacints, fa {auing that the flowers thereof 
arc purple coloured, 
Likewiſe there is another called Ozjenralivalbus, differing uſo from the orhers in colour of the 
flowers,for that theſe 6 EY white,andthe others blew, 
There is another calle acinrhas Brumalis, orwinter Tacint , it is IKethromes i in ſhape, bur 
differeth in the time of Coil 015" + Thephace. © — 
Theſe kinds of Iacints _—_ been broughe from beyond the ſeas, ſome outof one countrey and 
ſome out of others,eſpecially trom the Eaſt countries, whereof they tooke theirnames Orientalis. 
*% The time. | 
They flower from the endof Ianuary vnto the end of Aprill. 
% T he names, 
_ Thereis a Lillywhich Od in the tenth booke of his Metamorphoſis called Hyacinthus, of the 
boy Hyacinth, of whoſe blood he fainerh thatthis flower ſprang, when he periſhed as he was play- 
ing with ook or whoſe ſake he ſaith that Apollo did print certaine lerters and notes o* his mour- 


ang wen os fu 2 ; HE T/; [gnawer at Herbas, 
ge Ds xa rad Tyrioque nitentior oftro 
que caprt ,quarm Lilia, [inon 


. 
Toe 


FLAY 
TO, jo dota it his,arg gentens eſſet in ills. f 
+1. Ng ſatis hoe Pheho e#,(i4 enim ante nes) 
Tpſe ſaos gemitns folrts mſcribit, 
Fls habe i in —_ er Es duftaeit, 
a | bo. atis 


BE Wn 


ffiluer INE as _ * a hewe are ſcene: 
ugh that Pheburhad the cauſe of this great bonor 


exthoughhenortha me nonghandhrclor dl wn : Sad. 
the leaves thereok;and ſo incolourbright. . , I 37 


th «: wrirthereon,which letters are of griefe. = Gt. 
rkdoabl alſo hath made mention of this H chem in Bions wc the ry P; dll, - | 


Now Hyacinth,thoſe <xy thine tell and do not 
And a leabes <7 d, hei(c 


was) | 
Likewiſe Yirgi writtenheereof in the third] Eclog of his ſnpoticks, 
Er me Phoebus anar,Phozboſus ſemper .aped me 
| . . , Munera ſunt, lauri & ſuaue robes ns Hyacinthus. | 
bes ATION ones Sheba elves witli ante | ney Hg 2 


 TreesT. pito, 
133 Te | n 7 | ro j 
; 34s , wh Ty ni pa pen : ; | [1 
a. we L 3.0580 : ceque %- ' " 4. 
| Mewidhourthey irc Lies eee alldlackpooremunto we. F. | 
AndRoſespale; ecte the 4 i C will bee" Fo $261 19S Is xY | 
matt 983 Ie a9 | 11110 $4 4 hoy? / 
Roſes red {weere the | br 
ne ag nl [ 


Pepin Gtobere, wi Oudca hoe madweoughteilie becoll, aberare- 
pn gonna eblownes,which Me Rn IR OR 


= 
{1 


| 
x62 TH HE FIRST BOOKE*OF' THE 


ritie, in the fixtofhis AE idos Sm EI andpre- 
ſencly calletthe ſam blew. ; i Se [[ 4 


1k cs W402 wi 
Tran m—_— | 
And Claudius allo doth li | Fopi s, who writeth that the Vier of | 
ſweete iron colourin-hi of nn, | 
; neo hm even arrdaic vero. 
ei wicles ferruginepingit. 
Va herta | 


Butler vs returne to the| opernaines from which we aue digreſſed: moſt of the later Herba- 
riſts do call this plant Hyacinthus Poet icus,or Poets Hyacinth. Pa»ſe#z4s in his ſecond booke of his 
Corinthiacks, hath mader 0180 tion of Hyacinthus, ( C Hermonians Comoſardalos , ſerting 
downe the ceremonies doneby them on their feſtivall daies, inthe honor of the goddeſle Chrhonia, 
The prieſts faith he,and uy cre being, do leade the troupe of the pompe ; the 
women and men foll ade foorth the goddefle with a ſtately ſhewe: 
They go in white veſtures wr me parareſe their h ade of a flower which the inhabirants call 
Comeſandatos, which i the bl or skie coloured Hyacin OTE RY ſoer of mour- 


ning as aforefaid. | |} 
S  % Thetatare. 
The Hyacinths mentioned in this chapter, doli nfe andbinde yagi the thirdede. 


grec,But the rootes are dric in the fiſt degree, andicoldei ſecond. | 


wi 


A Theroot of Hyacinch | 5 | a Reqpatbelpmockrins ay help. 
eth againſt the venemous biting de ipi Aa 

B Theſeedeis ofthe ſame yern 
being drunke 1n wine it preug 

C c rootes after the opini 
been oucrtaken with Lopect 


j 


He fare hired 
moſt of the 
the midſt of & 

with many ſmal. A 

ofa number of faire linink Jp WErs;. rof a\wfi h of haires, 

his name Comeſas,or faire haired. edi ned infimall bullets, of a 

mans 3-5 5 cints. | ncrmai U ion faſhion pt) Timie i 

ſome hairie threds, faſtened ynte ny | 

2 White haired lac} a4 

flowers heerot are of a( 

teth foorth the difference 

Of chis kiade-Iie 


habe tray ar,charthis i 
—— + miewi out all compariſon 


inice with 


HISTORIE 


1 Hyacinthas comoſas. | 
Faire haired Jacint, 


| > Titotr \ 


i273 3; 


048 


OF PLANTS/! | 


. 
2 \ 
4 - 
vu - : 7 « 
s pI 
. $ 3 * 
= 


19} (i 499777 


TO ES \ 
(91957 34 
| ds 39 £ | | 
ojsfiot 12 oil 216 2070 \ 18/ 
lt hor! 30 feaugt: 1M WA - 
0:0 93 eantle!y; 


W#15 12,9490 93u19 off 


t» Hind; \ |; / 
- Fp 6 >0 At. \ : f 


j 


RY ps 
294i t 


K EI , | 
NET | 
EFr2voh 24k | 


7 


I£3 4 


: 
_ | 
Tr . 


FP A na i 
210199 wt >2 

oo ow. O71 1153 

her : 
Ti 


- 


» 


- 
© ——— noone ———mm——w 
NE IEA ICS 


M « FAT " a; 


Es 
Wi 1 ae tart W015 oage_y wo 
. ul Fo 44 - INF BY of "TUM + 
FI Og EE La 


© IMMUNE PE OY 1192.44) 9 TOO JOEL at 422k 4 - > 
NG PING ts Jing oN a . 
a 3 a 7 REES j 


we | *- 78 RST BOOKE, OF THE 


In the middle like a lictle trough , full of ſlimie iuic cints : among, which-come 

Ing this way z a5 not able to ſtand vp. 
right,by reaſon it is ſuxcharg ing ofmany little bottle. 
like blew flowers,clo ay t by (packs rogither | ; of aſtrong ſmell, yer nor 
vnpleaſant,ſomwhat refe ] gthe ſauour of the renge./Thy Is Bulbus,erabour 


with infinite yoong clo " | 
cr aflveks inde. The AE-rence conſiſteth in 


rootes,whereby ir greatly encr 
4 ThegreatGrape fc refs vericlike vnto BR 


that this plantis al atcr,bur the leaucs are not 


| -” 
: 


5 Hyacinthus bot m_ lens am | | inthus Abt lacters, 
Skie coloured flower. 6-1 MY flower. 


Tn 


of the other G 
res aefcheode Gap ons, 


with the owes, Grab ekrthe | 
herg ores are like the former. || : "v 
| er differeth not from the skie lord Labinhy dirivtdie Colove of 
wers: forthiIacireof: pleaſant white colourtending to yellowneſle, "i100 pamper pa | 
part with white, whiter than/whice it ſelfe,otherwiſe there is no difference. 


Theſeplan ardensfe + Thea don 
{8 pl crkepeing | dere _ 
They flower from Februa xy to theendof May. 59 a 


14 


_ 


HISTORIE O 


* T heimames. 
The Grape flower'is called Hyacinthus eu—_—_— FER. aims Dadnetof ſorne | | 


eulent us, Hyacmmthas (ylueſtris Cordi, Hyacinth e xiguns Trags. 
bard Ce deere Ei Frame 
% The nature and vertues. 


There is not any thingſet down of the ancient 
bur they are referred vnto the other Iacines. 


orlater writers, of the nature and verrues of theſe, þ 


” 


Of MC wow Mucked grape flower. . . Chap. bs 


1 Maſcari flauum. 
Yellow musked Grape flower. 


/ 


* The d 


EET FP as 
Y i 1009-yr and winding Ne ior 
49-34 ie middle li atrough, as are 
ding or ſpringing vp ate of a colour; b 
ecaloyr mY 
greatnes ying the 

ON En iv: 

breete of ſmell lik 

efedeia (9 oe 


__ option 
attheir fir 


Muſe cariC 


Aih art 


"Wh ower, 


a Mp 


ad vpon the 
lues crookedly this way and th 
hoſe of faire haifed Lacint , atthe firſt bud- 
ebcing growen to perfeQion, become of adarke 
ed,thicke &fat es,jinfirme andweake in re- 
asdothe leaues : ſer from the middle tothe 
yone made like a ſmall pitcher or little boxe, with 
Ihe favour of mucke, crock] it tooke the name 
wade without order, ofa far 


. 
TIO 10's 


thi ke firing like thoſe of Dogs 


and far like the t,nordiffering 
rr cult colow Hefhes, 


icke,far,and full of 
t way, hollowed 


7 _—_— 
ws POTS SEW» ork ti AMS Bar rhe AS. 
. 
"Np" hah of 


roote is Bulbus or Onion | 


| 


1606 _ THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
The flowers are likewiſe ſweere, but of a pale bleake colour, wherein confiſterh the difference 


| | we Theplace. | 
Theſeplants came from d Boſphorus EA and abour Conſtantino roms which by the 
meancs of friends haue| been brought into theſe parts of Europe, whereofour London gardens are 


| | 
wa * The time. 


| Aprill,and ſomrimes after, 
"> | __ *Thenames. 

They arecalled gen uſcari, in the Thuſcane or Turkie toong Afaſchoroms , Muſcurimi, 
Tipcadi,and UG jaw: ' pleaſant ſweere fmell; of Mathiolus, Bulbus Fomitorins. Theie plants 
maybe referred vnto the Hyacinthe& whereof vndoubredly they be kinds. 

| %* The nature andwvertnes. | | | 

Therehathnot as ye thing been touched concerning thenatureor vertues of theſe plants, 
onely they are kept and maintajped in gardens for the pleaſant ſmell of their flowers , bur not for 
their beaurie, for that many ſtinking field lowers do in beautie far ſurpaſſe them. Bur it ſhould ſeem 
that Mathiolws called P omitorizes, in that they do procure vomiting, which of other auctors 


| | 


f Woolly Bulbys, Chap. 73. 


7 


| * The deſcription. ® 
py"? Here hath fallen out ro be heere inſerteda 
Bulbus plant conſiſting of many Bulbes, 
'” which hath paſſed currant amongſt all our 
late writers. The which I amto ſer forth to the view 
of our nation , asothers hauedone in ſundric lan- 
guages to theirs, as a kinde of the Hyacinths: 
which in rootes and leaues it doth veric well re- 
ſerable, called of the Grecians iedvy&: in Latine 
Laniferus , bicauſe of his abundance of woolly 
flockes, wherewith the whole plant is in cuerie part 
full fraughted,as well rootes,leaues,as ſtalkes.The 
leaues are broade, thicke,fat, full of juice, and ofa 
ſpiderlike webbe when they be broken. _— 
theſe leaues riſerth vp a ſtalk two cubirs high,much 
like vnto the ſtalke of Squilla , or ſea Onion. And 
from the middle to the top itis beſet round-abour 


c this | 
| Gay: 


, 

[i 

| 

[ 

FF! 

| 

| 

1 

[| 
: 

| 
| 
| i 


 HISTORIE (OF PLANTS. op 
: notwithſtanding I ſhall be content it in ſome baſe or other of my'gardento || 
by ail veg nh Ns. 0E | 


WEL GR 
choughrirc rieof the Hyacinthes wich theſe two Bul- 
bus plants,receiued by tradition from others, thongh generally holden "=p yt 
rine.Their pictures I could willingly haug omitted in this hiſtorie, iftheeurious cie could elſe 
where have foundthem drawn & deſcribed in our En fi 


sf P 
# F 


ITC 


ndby 


18 THE FIRST BOOKE: OF |THE 

fainedpifture Ii ſe; notwithſtariding deſeriprionirheteofas it hath come 
TON - ( th my whor)ts Bulblu jon faſh | 
which ſptingvp z5,ſharpe poirit | | 

which leaues Tus ked or bare ſtalkes,at the top whereof g| pleaſant yellow flower ſai- 
ned with many ſmall redſpots,heere and there confuſedly c abroade. Andinthe middeſt of the 


flower,thruſteth foorth along red toong or ct me Laewnp To be the cod or ſced veſlel, 


crooked or wreathed wheteinis the feed. The crobe ſpoken of, con- | 
fidering thatwe afluredly pe perfivade our {clues that areno ſuch plats ous mecre refiRtions and 


deviſes a5 werearme themyge gee Govind « gopndppnAlaneg , 


| Of Daffodil. Chap.75- 


| * The kindes. 
Hs or Warciſſt according to Dioſccrides,is of two ſorts. The dowers ofborh are white, 
D* one hauing inthe middlea purple circle or coroner: the other with a yellow Cit- 
cle or coroner. Since whole time there | —— others deſcribed, asſhallbe fer 


foorth in their proper places. | 


1 Ns ſas meds pe 


--The 
4 Hefirſt of the Daffodils is tharwich 


Y an Sod mie 
and hollow,ofa footchigh, beari 


hood,or thin we fch as the lowers of On 
or ſmall coroner ofa 


ringorcicl, with a pleaſant pi 


HISEORAK.; -OF PLANTS, 


with le ring or circle in he riddle, BY fat; narrow 
jeaues, very y bending; dhe top : among which riſerhvp bare ſtake, | 
e top | fa fine flowe PE Re Glas rele, 


i ng 


3 ciſſus medio els pr 4600107, 4 Natciſſusmedio pur pes 
Neri Y cron = 


* inthe 


of flowring Daffodill hath many or 
Ko ont, ite flower e middle a ringe or yellow 
The roote's Bulbveor Onion faſhion: : irflowreth 


or Primroſe peerelefſe.zhar ismoſt common 
. It hath long fat and thicke leaues, full ofa 
ſlenie ins: eneng if Friſe op abare hi ſalke, hollow within andfullofinice. The flower 
white colour with a yellow crowne orccirclein the middle: and 


A ER RT ETohE ic; 47 
7 2 FO nfs te nt Sn 5 Rervſhs 


| 


OOKEVOEF/ THE 


Ht STORIE 


© CA ST TAY 


þ : I 
blako nerd roo eli i me Pp | 
gn orth. many qres amrotha cent | 
but more offenſtic.and ft -thelhead, Irhas addition Pohanthos, thatis, of many flowers, j 
$ Theltalia reve thethe former, the which o dilinguiſh inwandatharchey maybe | 
knowne on fromanather, is.impoſſible. Their flowers,leaues, "95 09 like » (ghar the _ | 
fowergof (3 are fireter andmoinnumber, | \ 1 
| le. | 
| 
| 
"E [1 
= 
& : 
: ; 
| 
$ 
\ } 
C iy 
"Wt T8, F1ki 
'e- 1 = 24 =: — ID 2nd nt 
«© 1 ph mh «21 bir os! :; 
| | 01: I F (999% mt Hci) 


31043 


ing oonbbean and detwinſ 


ops indi them vno fl wrin 
were yt _ charbirſ —— cy w_ 
— at matter, ſoileorclimare'1 fl 


ws their flowers. The ſtalks, Kan 
lcd of the Turks Ginl Catamer late, that is Nar | 
receiued from beyond rhe ſcas, as well from the car her 
of grearer beautie,which nies) optic na Yeeld Ces, pirig Wers, 


tencreaſe of rootes, wall in ſtalks as other parts of the plant, wato the other 
ores of 1K It Screche onely in the flowers which are very dovble and Fete thruſt togither, 
.AS 


;0OKE: .O-F- THE 


it in | | 
11 Nare a 


IT TheruſhD ftrodill hatt | | y 1 
like ruſhes, whercof ittooke his nncifalus orRuſie t ſpringeth vp i 
Ln ok do ike roeth their buds at the top of 
ſorntimes twoand oftejimo i ypon one ſtalke,made of fixe ſmall leaues. 
kewiſeyellow Dn ES 
hite couered with a blacke skin © [ 
ruſh Daffodill, like yato procedeninec 
| NL before it cometo VI 4 
! age, ra ies allot ſtalke 


"ug z# x70 t cfg wer, Dt ll ſhin Ther 
NIB d pale within, with ſome chreds hangir | 
The Autunne Daffodil! bringeth foorth Jong ſn + ya ns | 
| rite EC, D ring at thetop one flower and no more, reſem- 
ot GY" PPE: common Saffron, confiſtin of fixe leaves.of abrighs ſhinin 
ellow colour; in the midd Fe whetecf and fie ads or chives, | ok 
ks, licke and | Ik ede ge | 
wa a Xarviſm : 


HISTORY oF PLANTS. I13 
| 14 Narciſſus  Autwnenalio major. 
bt. OE 


- 
. A j# 5 
OD —_ y ” FRIES 18 
a SAeetz,, ——_ 0. 
4 Rn D 
. FN ie dais *: 2 ION. Oey CTY EP "A 


I ALEGLS 


————————. WWE. 
$9 2 RS CSS ons ESE WAGED mot CRIT IE Gn} IG SIS 8, 94H 


*Th p Cription. 
15  SmallwincerD; hath a bulbus roote, 
oote ofruſh Daffodill,bur lef- 


| riſeth vp a naked ſtalke with- 
 ourleaues, on the | whereof groweth a ſmall 
white flower with 


ſweerte in ſme thing ſtuffingthe head, as 
doethe other affo | | 
+ The pls ce, 
_The Daffodils ar purple coronets,do 
s of Fraunce, chic LD in 
wit ilandin medowes; | 
NE ovn ill growerh wilde inthe wa- 
ine among grafle and other 7 
herbes, =D faith that Larw eſpeciallic 4} 
found v T heocritus affirmeth the | | 
to groweinmedowes in his 20. Eidpl, | x 
ara wfhah, Me the goddeffe Europa Cate- | Ss | 
ring with hir N: nphs intochemedowes, did 2 
ther the ſiveer ſmelling Daffodils in Why 33, of i 


+ 1 


But when the irles Were core into 


_ —— 


nn nn Rene ee nr er nn nn ent nn rt 
——r— 


; with theſe, thirwench with theſe 
| | Sade algh:; | 


And fn with b Hyacinth content. | ] 


14 _ THE FIRST BOOKE: OF THE 
Bur it is not tour pu | of | 


Th icy flower for temoſt part inthe Gringhln ie from: the Et of Februatie | 2 the end 
of Aprill. $ 


The Perſian and winter Daffodils doflower in September and Ottober. Y 
| | wh The names. 
hough their names ſer foorth intheirſcuerall titles, which may ſerue for lie llpdllarions 


——— :notw j itſhallnorbe impertinenc ro adde a ſupplic of 6g alſothe 
cauſe w 


bmifowl 3rd 

The Perſian Daffodill alled che Slavonianor Turkiſh roong, Zaremceds Perſians, and Zu 
remcatta, as for the moſt part all other fortes of Daffodils are, Notwithſtandin > double 
flowred Daffodill, = me name late; which name they generally eden all double 


flowers. 


The common whi / Co, cecleghey call Serim Cade, thati is to yn I. | 
chalice, and Deze bohimi am ſpi 


ſhinnes long ſhankes,v 
The ruſh Daffodil] is ca 
Dioſcorides Bulbus vomitorins,or vomiting The.” 
Generally all the kindes are comprehended vnder this name ſas, called of tbe Grecians 
r-pxiorc; in Dutch rceſſen; in m7 Jennetten: inEn gliſh D aha ,& Prime. 
roſe pecreleſle, 
__ . Plutarchin his booke of Feaſ es, ſhewerh hae they are called Nerelfiv,as 0 thoughth did be. 
num the ſinewes, oa inferal cauſe drowſineſle or heaulinefle , and therefore So jm the 


rland of the great $,bicauſe they that are departed caddie with death, ſhould 
Cohunry anc crowned rae 5. flower, / # 


Ofthe firſt and ren Oxid hath made mengcndichedialbockeofbix, Met 


fs, where he deſcriberh he transformation of the faire boie Naw} intoa flower of his owne 
name, ſaying: | 


| | 
i for erat roceums pro corpore florem 


Ine mediun cingentibys albis. © | 
But as for ron ns Jag re NR whereof they found 


Aycllow flower,with white eaucs, new ſprong vpon thear 
Plinic and Plutarchaſhrme as partly hath boene hr a ms thattheir umpotickl quali 
was theveric cauſe ofthe name A arciſſus, that is a qualitie cauſin 8 lleepineſle , which in Grecke is 
calledrapria5: or of the fiſh Torpedo called in Gr e r4pzn, which bene, Ub bindebf them 
that couch him as being hurrfi to theſinewves, andbringing 2; Cl | SHR Wi Woe 
belongerh ro the Nageawb { ſmellcauſcth drowſineſſe. *. 
*% The nature. Tz = b-1 
Thetootes of ariſu archorand driein theſe nd epey 
\.. 1 |. e.'The | i 
A Glenſaith, thattl & rootes« f Narciſs! ue ſu Dwodadenfull nalices in 
ſound and glue togith er veric gtcat wounds,yea ar ſuch rifts, gafhes or cuts, as happ 
vainesMinewes,and te . They haue alſoa cextaine wipingcleanſing,and atrraGting 
B Therootesof Nare umped with honie and lied plaiſterwiſe,helpeth wg 
with fire,and ioineth c pither finewes that are Cut 1 finder, | | 1. 
C Being vicd in manerx aforeſai WEE ptheg reat wrenches of the ankles the | 
of the ionnts, uh +4. oh} 


"i edrawedh foorth chortics ah ſtubs Ty" 


any part ofthe bodic, - 


-; 


MISTORIE: or PLANTS: 


; | + The de/ ription. - | " 
double yellow Daffodill hath Fade -4. 7a 
nong which __ a naked hollow ſtalke', of two hands hi 
| faire and beaurifi double yellow flower , as is the 
| | his flower, butthere followerh noſeedar all, asit 


m7 1A ; lon ucommonk, oe 
owe popes, 
ne gemerand laſteth longer for the on fall or fade. 
* The place. 

The dot w DaffodillI received from Robemus of Paris, which meanes of 
friends fro Ali and other parts of Fraunce. he prod 
_ The yeflow ch teniedecke _ growethalmoſt The yellowSpa 
Datfodill doch 1s racer Londoa' x wo n 

The rims. .- oh 


116: 


. 


il; 99% wh h by " 
The firſti wy S910 nk : 
ad _ mm FAT 


' ble 
e common fort are called i 
Daffodilly,and Daffodowndil y. 
*% T be tempera. 


The LIES 6: is ſora vntothe bday Saks 5h 


Lis found en es ANION ſome FF 
A ke: Pte mock ues heel | Fs cher odilly,doth purge by qt «Pi 
morsandalſo wz 2nd is; {for them that are full of rawe humors, eſpecially 


| ded'therets a little atiſe ſeede and ginger, which will corre the churliſh hardneſle of the 


workin 
B Te Ate ofD-a8 ded ne le path, ifthe patienebebiched and rubbed with the 
| raidligurby the fire. It hath beene prooued an eſpecial andrruſtic friendofmine,a man learned, 


Se obs a of WF. NN On 


o EK or the Dalmatia ” Gp mT. 


/# Tolps Baie Tulps. | 


J We 


* 


| 


* The kimdes./\ 

and atraint flower, cadegntbud the bulbed 

| ome greater, ſome leſſer, with which all ſtudious and 

et deſire of thatexcellent diverſiric of wolt 
l ic how, Ofd this this cher be twochicfc and MT eos mo 


N - 


114 HISTORIE/ QF PLAN TS;! 7 117 
and Serotina, the one doth beare his flowers timely, theother later: to theſe two , we will adde a- 
third ſore. called Media, fowring berween both the others. Andfrom-theſe three forts, as from 
their heads,all other kinds do proceede,which are almoſt infinite in number. Notwithſtanding my 
louing freind Maſter James Garret, a curious fearcher of Simples,andlearned Apothecarie in 
don ; bath vnderraken to findeourif it were poſſible, che infinite forts by diligent ſowing of their 
ſeedes,and by planting rhole of his owne propagation, and by others receiued from his friends be- 
yond the ſcas,for the ipace of twenuic yeeres not being yet able ro atraine tothe endothis trauaile, 
forthat each new yo bringeth foorth new plants of ſundrie colours not before ſeene: all which 
ro deſcribe particularlie,were to roule S;/phwsſtone,ornumber the ſandes : fo that it ſhall ſuffice ro 
{peak-& deſcribe a few,referring thexelt ro ſom that meane towrite of Tw/paa particular volume, 
| | ' %eThe deſcription. ed arcs A 
" He Twpa of Bolonia hath far, rhicke, and groſſeleaues, hollow, forrowed or channeled, 
bending a little backward,8 as it were folded togither: whichat their firſt coming vp,ſeem 
tobe ; a reddiſh colour, and being throughly growen,turne into a whitiſh greene.In the 


| midſtof thoſe leaues riſe vp a nakedfar ſtalka foorehigh,or ſomthing more:on the top wherof ſtan- 


deth one or two yellow flowers, ſometime three,or more,conſiſting of ſixe ſmall leaues, after aſort 


| liketoa deepe wide open cup, narrow aboue, and wide inthe botrome. .Afﬀeer it hath beene ſome: 


fewe daies flowred , the points and brims of the flower turne backward, like a Dalmatian or Turkes 
cap,called Twlipan, Tolepan, Turban, and Turfan, whereof it tooke his name. The chiues or threads 
inthe middle of the Gowers,be ſomtime yellow,orher whiles blackiſh or purpliſh, but commonly of 
one ouerwornecolouror other, Nature ſeeming to plaie more with this flower, than any other that 


| Idoknow.This floweris of a reaſonable pleaſant ſinell, and the other ofhis kinde haue lictle, or no 


ſncllat all. The ſeed iis flat, ſmooth,ſhining, and ofa griſtly ſubſtance. Theroote is Bulboſe, and 
verie like toa common Onion of Saint Thomas. | 
2 - TheFrench Twp agreeth with the former , exceptin the blacke bottome which this hath in 


| the middle of the flower,and is not fo fiveete in ſmell, which ſerteth foorth the difference. 


3 Tulipa þprecox totalutea. 4 Tulipa Coccinea ſerotins. 
| Timely flowringTulipa, Late flowring Tulipa. 
” < PF 


g- | 
i 

3 i 
' 

i 


THE FIRST BOOKE/ OF THE 


> | 
t 
' 


| 


3 Theyellow Tulipa that flowreth timely,bath'thicke and grofle leaues ful of iuice, long; hollow 
or IO | atender ſtalke at the top whereof grow a faireand p red 
ye fower coniting offxe al leurs withour ell, The roo i» Bulbuox ie an Onion 

4 The fourth kinde ulipa that flowreth later, hath leaues, ſtalkes, and roote like vnto the pre- 
| Jar > m4 IS re pRrmy Skarlercolour, welted or bordered about the edges with red. The 
_ middle partis like vitoa ending to whiteneſle, ſpotted in the ſame whiteneſſe with red ſpec- 
kles of pots. The ſeed is conteined in {quare cods, flat, tough and finewie. «A Fj 


5 Twhpamedieſan ; elbioris. | | 6 Tulipa Candida fa aladhaird 
Apple bloome Fulipa | 2 Hb | Bla clown Talia gn 


{'s : 
t 
(Fx - 
Ad. 


+ 1 CO 11 dike AN Wy : 
+3 , - "1 4 01 i 2 
- , }/ "XY V L.6 ns 
5 - 1 4 þ " 'F b 
— SAVE I, \ Wo the 4 

IS AL | MW THE vt Q 
i j jp | p - y1 123/ i > 

. W V\ F1f7 0 Wa 


7 F 
: 
F 
if W754 
i 
i \ # 
R WATCH - 
« a {4 \ p 
$25 1 4 
(&- % : "A 
i5 \ , 
« 
% n \ , 
, i .-- | 
A - 
, | 
{ 
| 


\ i { 


| o 
i » 
: ' ' 
M41 
" \ 
4 N 
p , WY 
fi, , 
4 4 | , , LA 
$14 \ 
f | Fr; \ 
I 
; 
. 
\\ \% ] 
3 
%\ 
\\ 
\ 
£ \ 
4 


« ulip | CNT, nocet thelater lowring ſort, but one 
that buddeth forth] is moſt beautifull lowres betweene both. Ir agreeth with the laſt diſcribed 
Tulipa,in leaues,ſtalkes xootes,and ſeed,bur differentin flowers. The flower conſiſteth of ſixe ſmall 
leaues ioined- togither at the botrome. The middle of which leaues/, are of a pleaſant bloody 
colour, ;Theedges be bordered with white, and the bottome next vnto the ſtalke is likewiſe white. 
The whole embling in colour the bloſſomes of an apple tree. | | 

6 fixt hath leaues, rootes, ſtalkes, and ſeed like vnto the former, but much greater incueric 
point. The flowers heereof are white daſht about the brims or edges with a redor bluſh colour. The 
middlepart is ſtripped confuſedly with the ſame mixture wherein is the difference. 

7  Carolus Cluſaus ſerteth foorth in his Pannonicke hiſtorie a kinde of Tuljpe , that beareth 
faire redflowers , blackein the bottome with a peſtell in the middle, of an ouerworne greeniſh 
colour: of which ſort'there hapneth ſome to haue yellowe , agrecing wich the others 
before touched; but this bringeth foorth cncreaſc of roote, in the bolome of his loweſt leafc next 


ee y— oF PLANTS. 119 


aide, comnarie to all cheother liver 


ubpa. 
$ 30bcheia his teamed obfnatins Kath ſer - 


|  foarthmanyotherſorts, one hecalleth Tulips Calc 

 .donica,, orche, Turkie Tipe, ſaying it is the lealt of 

the ſmal kinds or dwarte ' ulipaes, whoſe abuts isof 
aſanguineredcolour, 


2gree- 

ing with ET EIEET Fake, 

9 .Hehathlikewiſeſer foorth another, his flower is 

- like ; mo Lille jngea rtion ; bur in colour of afine 


\-:, 2 "We "ny a6 behold another ſort altogitier 
greater thanany of the reſt,whoſe floweris in colour 
of the ſtone YE Amethiſt, not valike to the low- = 
ers of Pzonic. 

'12\,\Wetiaue Kliſaradngds; anothet afgrear beaurie,and 

verientuch rae; of all, with white lowers daſhton 
. the backſide, with a light waſh of watchet colour. 
12 Thereisanother alſoinour London gardens,of 

a ſhow white colour: the edges flcightly wafhr oucr 
_ withalittle of that we call bluſh colour 
- | 13 We hatie another like theformer, ſavings that 
' - hisfloweris ofaſtraw colour; - 

14 Theteis anothertobeſcene with a flower mix- 
: cd with ſtrakes of red and'yellowe, reſembling a 

flambe of fire, whereupon we haue called ic Flam- 
Belles | banr. 

There be likewiſe ſo many more differing ſonotably in colour of their flowers,alchough in leanes, 
ſtalke and rootes,for the moſt part one like another, that as I laide before, to ſpeake of them ſeuc- 
rally, would require a peculiar volu 

There be a fort r than the Iſt. which in forme arc likes theleaueswherof are thicke long, 
broade , now and then fomwhat folded in the edges, in the middeſt whereof doth rife vp a 
ſtalkea foore high or ſomthing higher , vpon which ſtandethonely one flower bolt vpright , con- 
liſting of fixe leaues,like after nes adeepe wide cup ofthis forme, w/4el.the bottome rurned vp- 
wards,with threds or chiues in the middle,of the cola of ſaffron. The colour of the loweris fom- 
times yellow,ofcenti s white,now and then as it were of alight purple, and many times red: and 
in this there is no ſmall varietie of colours: for the edges of the = oftenrimesthe nailes or 


lower partof the leaues are now and rai otherwiſe coloured than the leaues themſelues; & manic 
_ there doth run all along theſe ſtrakes ſome othet colours. Th ue no fmell at all which can 
perceived, The sof theſe are likewiſe bulbed or Onion faſhion. of the which ſeueral- 


7 o ite foorth would le the writer and weary the RR IEE fice whathath been 
ide,as touching he deſcriptionof Tulipaes. os 
% The 


Tulipa owerh wilde in Thracia, | wy Rs, Irake in Bizantia Now Cond atrks at Tri- 
polis, and Alepo in Syria, from whence I haue receiued plants for my garden, and likewiſe Maſter 
Garth a worſhipfull gentleman , and Maſter Jones Garret apothecaric alſo for their gardens , 
where they floriſhandincreaſe,as in their owne natiue countrey, © | 


*% The Hime.” 


Anger 71s nn his journey to yur ms. lawe 
ſtantmople, great: nceof them in flower euery where , euen 


mangle lanuatic,which that wanne and temperate ns" 
0 H 4 


— 


HE FIRST | 3:0 OKB- OF! THE 


% The NAMES, 


iſtes b a Turkiſh and ſtrapge name call ir Fant of che Dalmatian Cap called 
of the flowerwhen itis open ſeemerh to re =—_ 

iſh after the Turkiſh name'Tulipa , or it may called Djtematian Cap,or the 

et old writers gaue ir,jr is not certainly knowne. A manmighr ſuſpe@ irro 

ethat = ate re of force to make milkecruddie: for Theo 

may beeaten: and it is an herbe as Heſychins faith whenwith | 

Geſnerus hath raken Tulpato be Satyrium,which is ſurnamed| Erythron; 
oncharbicauſ one kinde hath a red flower, or altogithera certaine kinde of Satyrium, with which 


whetherit doth agree orno, and how far, weleaue to thoſe that will more diligently conſider of it 
by the deſcription of the = Crone in churkie rgong it iscalled Cef+ /ale, Candela likewiſe 
Turban and Tur fas OF th ig ts called;as aforeſaid of LVObelins, _ 
I temperature and Vertues... 
There hath not beak an Wo: ſet Stef of the ancient, of later writers as -rouchinghhe nature 


or vertues of the T: pb (= AE LETT EX 5: the beautie of their flowers, | 


dbed flocks Gillofloners 7 78. 


'* The kindes. 


H, phraſtm hath h ſeru Py one ikinde of Bulbed "IEP Gilloflower which is calleth his Vio- 
7 Ya which retaineth the name Violer of ſundric writers to this day; of ola apes, « @.\; 
is Violet. Butwe haue obſerucd three ſorts, whereof ſome og ortk many 


leaues others fewer ſorue flower very onvly nd others _ ſhall be declared. 


1HHISTO RIE OF PLA N'TS.:- T : I21 


{1 


* The deſcription. \ h I 
q He fr of theſe Bull \ioters rife, foort/of Wah four 


= ju: [ Y two ſmall ens, 

7 2, ng Creited, ot an ouerworne greene Colour: amor 
WALLOY2! and te RE ane Trkag hercot comme me? hora 
EÞ-| Skinnic hood,a ſmalwhite flower of the bignelle of a vio ee of fixe leaves, 
= 54 three bi Td Sree lefler,rroped at the poines with a light greene : the ſmaller 
tho kev? a _ great leaues, but tipped with/greene as the others be. The 
er hange 


downe his head by reaſon of the weake foote ſta eve pi growerh. The 
all,whitc,andbulboſe,. > 


—_— 


leaues art 


whole f 


| Ear of Bulbed aac narrow leaues like thoſe of he l leel ke,bur ix teffEtand finoo- 
ther,not valike to the leaues of the baſtard Daffodill. The ſtalkes be{lender andnaked , vivo hands 
high, whereupon doe grow faire white flowers, tipped with a yellowiſh greene colour, with many 


| ſmall chivesorthreeds in the middlcofthe flower. The ſecd is conrall i malown era 
Theroote is white and Bulbus4 |: | | 


3 NE: 
The pet! 


ran Mart. ? ' 2 | 
xd violet. '| | * The be defer jw. 
l 3 The great Bulbed violet is like vnto othels. 
condinſtalke and leaues, yer greater and higher, 
Ir _ eth forth on cuerie ſtalke, not one flower 
onely, bur fice or fixe , blowing or flowring one 
_ after another ,alcogither likethe other flowers in 
forme and bignes. 
* The place. 
| Theſe plants dogrow wildein Italie and the 
places adiacent , popdng ou London 
gardens haue taken polliion of them all ,many 
yeeres paſt. 


+ The thme. 

The firſt flowreth inthe be jnningib] Ianua- 
ric: che ſecond in September: and the laſt in 
Maie. _ | 

* The nones. 
The firſt is called of T heophraitus, V iola albz 
8& w4ola Bulboſa,or bulbed Violet: Z Obel;us hath 
called it Leuconarciſſolirion and that yery pro- 
perly, conſidering how'iz doth as.it we -4 
ricipate of three ſundry plants, thatis to 
roote of Narciſlus, wipes na of the fall 50 
and the white colour of the Stocke gilloflower : 
raking the firſt part Zeuco of his whitenes : Ngr- 
 Ciſſo of the likenes that the rootes haue-vito 
h- Narciſſus, and Zirimn of the leaues of Lillies, as 
aforeſaid: in Engliſh we way call ir the Bulboſe 
Violet py after he Durch name Somer ſottekens,that is,Sommer fooles, and 

The others may moxe properly becalled Zeucoium Bulbeſurs,or he Bulbed ſocke Gilloflower, bi- 
cauſe that the flowers of th eſe laſt two deſcribed, domore reſemble the flowers of ſtocke Gillo- - 
flowers then thefirſt. VVhichname Leucojum although i ithath another oy 9 FH ,yetis it gene- 
rallyraken for the ſtocke Gilloflower. 3 7 

* The nature and wertues. 

Touchin —_ theſe ſtocke Gilloflowers we haue nothing toſay, ſceingthar 


[ \ . HHP T3, 4 y'» - — —— - - l 
\ ; OL - - 
WR bn a unnts———_— — 
" =& s - es f - Py 2 AV —_ = TENETS, 
v % \ H _ _ OC —_ —_ _— - 
I» k P | a_— —— _—_ Es DP _ ma_— f_- —_ Z 
© \ : - ” 3 Y 


4N 


W 
"my "1 


nothing is ſet downe heerofby the old writers , nor any thing obſerned by the new: onely theyare 
ra in gardens for th Ts of the flowers, and Geerenes of 

their | | | 
0 Of 


FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


T' 

= " -” . 
"_ 

14A 


yy REA 


WG 


TS 


% The erhades | 

He checkered ASURY Ginny hen flower, hath ſmalnarrow grafſie leaues among which 

riſeth vp aſtalke of three hands hi —dight hauing ac the top one or two flowers, and ſomtimes 

three, which conſiſteth of ſixe leaves, i moſt ſtrangely : : wherein nature of 
enced Creator of all things hath kept a w woonderfull order,ſurpaſſing(as in allother chings) 
the curieſt painting that Artcan ſer down.One ſquare is of a greeniſh yellow color,the ung 
keeping the ſame order as wel on the backſide of the flower as on the inſide, although they are b 
kiſh in one ſquare, & of a violetcolourin another :in ſo much that every leafe ſeemerhto be the fea- 
cher of a Ginnie bent of it rooke his name. The roote is ſmal,white, and of the bigneſle of halfe 


cered Daffodill is like vnto the former inech reſpeR, ſaving that this 


| hath his flower daſhtouer with a light purplezandi is fornwhar 7 emer: than the other: whercin con- 
ſiſterh the difference, | | 
7 heplace. 


Theſerare and beautifull plants grow naturally wilde in the fields about Orleance a4 Lions mn 
Fraunce, from whence theyhaue been brought i ies the moſt parts of Europe. The curious and 
painfull Herbariſt ofPatis | Jobs Robin, hath Gan me many plants Geroof for1 ny agg where they 
proſper as in their ownenati :countrey. | 
Y + The time. | 

| They flower from the beginning of March vnto the end of Aprill. The ſeedeis prin! June ſe: 
* Tre. 


| | 
| | | 
HISTORTE OF PLANTS. yy 
*% The names. þ 
The Ginny hen flower is called of Dodonexs, Flos Meleagris &:of Z 'Obelin, Lilio-narcifſie warie- 
gatwe, for thatir hath the flower of a Lillie and the roote Norſe hath been called. Frireilla- 
74a, of the table or boord vpon which men p pag checkers the flower 
doth very much reſemble, ſome thinking thar it Lend roi, wher f there is no certain- 
tie, for AMartialis ſcemerhtocall Frittillus, Abacme, or the win w men plaic with dice, in 
his as irs 27 wi Epigrams written to Gals. 
Jam triftis, mucibuc puer relittis, | 
Clamoſo renocatur a magiitro : 
Et blandomale proditus Frittille 
CAYcana mods rept + popina 
CAEdulem rogat vdus a leator. 
Now fad the boye, hauing his nuts forſaken 
Of clamorous maſter called pon a maine, 
And waxr ſtarke nought by flattering tables traine, 
And lately from the priuie kitchen taken 
Being adrunke dice-plaier, | 
Dorhaske to be ſuruciour. 
In Engliſh we may call it Turkic hen,or Ginny hen flower, and alſo checkerd Daffodill. 
% The temperature and verines. = 
Of thefaculties of theſEpleaſanc flowers there is nothing ſer downein the ancient or lee Wri- 
rers,but are greatly eſteemed for the beautifieng of Our gat ,and the boſomes of a 


Of Saffron. (he: 80. 


I Crocus ſine flore. | 2 Crocus 


Saffron without flower, " Saffron inthe flower. 


F 
| | 


_@O jt 


We 


vb te AI 7s 


"_ - 1-0 py 19 $1 ore AIG Se oivo4 Bn; Lotiu eaAiER 


F theſerwo do bur ſer! DO! 


*% 


three or morethicke fat chi 


124 THE: FIRST BOOKE! OF THE | 
>. O04) 6 Thedeſeription,,./// 


\ Thane es - fled two i&tures of Saffrons as you ſee,yerare corovadiritnddy 
rough i ne inde ofplant, which could no-Geaily beconceiuedby our 


hisflower doth firſt riſe ourofthe ground nakedly September 


” piQture as by two, bi auf r goth mM 11 Ze , 
and his long ſmall graffic leaues ſhortly after the flower, neuer bearing flower &leafe ar once. The | 
which tocxpreſſe I thought it convenient to ſet downetwopiftures before you with this deſcripri- 
on,vzdel. The roote is ſmall, round and Bulbus, The flower conſiſteth of fixe ſmall blew leaues ten- 
ding to purple, hauing inthe middle many ſmall yellowſtrings or threds, among which are two, 
| ,of a ficric colour ſomwhatreddiſh, of a ſtrong {mell when they be 
dried, which doth ſtuffe and trouble the head, The firſt piture ſerteth foorth the plant when it 
bearcth nothing bur leaues,and the other 61 emanty the maner of his flowring, EL” | 
IT Lb. %* T, Wot 2241 <: &e7: | | | 
Common, or the beſt knowne Saffron groweth plenditully in Cambridgeſhire, Saffron Walden 
and other placesthereabour,as corne inthe fieldes, | oo! b 41+. 
| | * Thetime. | 

Saffronbeginneth to flower in September,and preſently after ſpring vp the leaues, and remaine 
greene all the winter long. | | | 

f F-*/þ % The names. Bal 

Saffron is called in Greeke »e9:%: in Latin Croras : in Mauritania Zaffaran : in Spaniſh i MHeafpon: 
ih Engliſh Saffron : inthe Arabicke toong Zahafaran. Somethat are diſpoſed ro diſſemble andieſt 
with their friends and to make them merric with pretie Poericall igmentes, hauc giuen itthe name 
of a Damſell,whereof O#;4maketh mention, which to recite were impertinent co our hiſtoric, 
#4 Ji  % The temperature. | | | 

Saffron is a little aſtringent or binding,but his hor qualitie doth ſo ouer rule in it,chat in the whol 
eſſence itis in the number of| thoſe herbes which are hor in the ſecond degree,and drie in the firſt: 
therfore italſo hath a certaine force to concoR,which is furthered by thefual aſtriionthar is 1n it, 
as Galen faith, Fit || | bs ! 


*T he VErtmes. | 


A wthed affirmeth that ir cauſerh headach , and is hurtfull tothe braine , whichir cannotdoe by 


taking it now and then, but|by toomuch vſing of it: for too much vſing of it cutrerh off {leepe, 
through want whereofthe head and fences are our of frame. Bur the moderate vſe of it is good for 
the head,and makerh the _ morequicke and liucly, ſhaketh off heauic and drowſie ſleepe, and 


maketh a man merrie., | 


B Alb Saffronſtrengtheneth the hart, concoRteth crude or rawe humors of the cheſt;openerh the 


C 


lungs,and remooueth obſtruftions or ſtoppings. | ; 

Ir is alſo ſuch a ſpeciall remedie for thoſe that haue conſumption of the lungs , and are, as we 
tearm it, atdeaths doore,& almoſt paſt breathing,thar it bringeth breath againe,&prolongeth life 
for certaine daies , if ten or twentie graines at the moſt be given, with new or ſweere wine, For we 

. haue found by ofte _ that being taken in that ſort, it , ys , and ina moment remoo- 
ificulric ing, which moſt cangerouſly and ſuddenly happeneth. | 
ing giuen in the ſame ſort,itis alſo good againſt a ſurfet. 


4 


rea 


E lrtis commended agaihſtthe ſtoppingsof the liuer and gall , and againſt the yellow Iaundife, 


F. Iris with good ſuce 
G Theciesbei | 


' H TheChiucsſteeped 


And heereupon Dioſtorides writerh that ir maketh a man well coloured, Iris put into'al drinks that 
are made tohelpe the diſcaſes of the intrailes, as the ſame Author affirmeth, & into thoſe eſpecially 


which bring down the flowers,the birth &rhe after burthen. It prouoketh vrine,ſtirreth fleſhy luſt, 
and is vſed in Cataplaſines $& pultefies for the matrix and fundament, &alfo in plaiſfers and ſeare- 
cloths which ſerue for old ſwellings and aches ,and likewiſe for hot fwellings that haue alſoin them 
Saint Anthonies fire. up | | | 1] 


put into compoſitions for infirmities of theeares, i, [0 
annointed with the ſame difſolucd in milke or fenell, or roſe water, are preſerued 
from being hurtby rhe ſi | 
fall into them. | 


1 
: 


Nov | 


RY. and are defended thereby from humours that would 


| F | I. 
to.illumine, or as we ſay, limme pictures and imager, 
| | | | 


* 
i 


® 


;HISTORIE OF PLANTS: 
| uſo 10 color ſundry meats and comſrtions, Ir is with good ſucceſſe: n to procure bodli 


luſt, The confeRions called Cy 


hdd att 


iuers other emplai- 
ſters andeleQuaries,cannot be well be lat > - ids oh Shaweo=lrl 2cancd = f/ 
The waight of. ten In ok $2, , 
- onedram,and a fewe ſage leaues with a zantitie 
and made into a maſle or lumpe adleprina gl apa be ror 86 gnd ercoftwelu 461.2 21/73ah 
he mem ling prev andexplet ic rom: ho —— 
of wilde Saffron. Chap. 0 | | 5 9-7 0 
* The kindes., TERS 
| F wilde Seffrons tercbe ſind cnn dining zo wel ſacolouraf PATOnR a6aliSinthe 
Of time of their eo rept vnto you. The reſt ſhall 
be deſcribed onely , bicauſe nature hath been ſo plentiful and Na eee Ha 
theſeplants aboue many others. - 
I Crocus vernmus. | EY | © Croenroermm miner. 


Early flowring wilde Saffron. ' Small wilde Saffron, 


He firſt kinde of wilde Saffron The dpi, lieemcefuronedorchaceddomn. 
naw ; Rong th the leaues riſe vp aber mix rior 


vnto the common Saffron,bur z for this wpat iprik of 
thatis to ;the ground of the flower is white, thr becky) 
ontheinſi with a bright ſhining murrey colour 3 not. In then rhe! 
foorth many yellowiſh chives withour any finellof Saffron;r all. iden 1] 


Couered w Ms Ea a i a a A af 


-S4xf © Aeris 44 Ges Jae nao eprecden) Lara 
ther leſſerzandthe flowers of this are of a purple or violet colour, 
3 cor pane fngtnt Qur London gardens another ſorr , like vnto the other wilde Saffrons in 
hath flowers of amoſtperfedt ſhining yellow colour, ſeeming a faroff 
coleof fi which maketh thedifference, | | 


5 Loversofplants 4 portren into their oardens , one fore Donal with purple or violer A Wl 
red flowers,inother reſpe&s like the others. | _ 

6 Of theſewe haue another that flowreth ini the fall of che leafe with flowers like vato the com. — 
mon Saffron, bur 2000 thoſe chiues which yecld thecolour, ſmell, or taſte,that the right mas 


nured Saffron hath 
f Aurumne wilde Saffrons with white flowers, which ſerrerh foorth the 
diſtin&ion, 


7 There isalfo another 
forrs there are in JA Labdeks beſides thoſe before ſpecified, which I dongle needle to 
entreat of,bicaule their Viet is not great. 
| &Theplace. 

All theſe wilde Saffron: we haue growingin our London gardens. Thoſe which do flower in Au- 
tumne do grow vpon cerraine craggy rocks in Portingale not far from the ſea ſide. The other haue 
been ſent ouer vnto vs, ſome out ot Iraly,and ſome out of Spaine, by the labor and diligence of that 
notable learned Herbariſt Carolus Cluſaus, out of whoſe obſeruations , and partly by ſeeing themin * 
our owne gardens we haue ſer downe their deſcriptions, | 

That pleaſant plant that bringerh foorth þ un flowers, was ſent vnto me from m Rohinas of Pa- 
ris,that painfull and moſt © urious ſearcher of Simples. 

 % Thetime. 

They flower for themol! partin Januarie and Februarie, that of the mountaine excepred, which 
flowrethin September. | | | *% Thenames. 

All theſe Saffrons are profitable, and therfore they be truely Faid tobe Cyocj nates wilde 
Saffrons: in Engliſh {prin} time Saffrons,and vernall Saffrons, 

' %The temperature and verines. 
- Oftthefaculties of wn we haue nothing to ſer downe, for that as yertthere is noknowne vic of 


| them in Phiſicke. | 
Wh Medow Saffron. Oy 82. 


*%* The kindes. | 
Here be ſundrie ſorts of medowe Saffrons differing 6 ds as wellin tie colows 
their flowers,as: alſo ſtature and countrey , from whence hs had their being as ſhall be 
declared. | * The deſcription. 
Edow Saffron ath three or fower leaucs riſing immediately foorth of the ercund, 
brode,ſmooth,f t,1 wr liketo the leaues of the white Lillie in forme and ſmooth 
| in the wer 9 zereof ſpring vp three or fower thicke cods of the bi of a ſmall wt 
nut, ſtanding r footeſtalks three ſquare, and opening themſelues when they be 
| ripe,full of ſeede br des 7 ode ofa blackiſh red fs and when this ſeedeis ripe, the leaues 
togither with the ſtalks do = and fall away in Og even The flowers do bud foorth ( before any 
leaues do appeere)ſtanding vpon ſhorr rinks ug hitiſh ſtems , like in forme and colour to the 
flowers of Saffron, hauing|in ; ta middle ſmall chives orthreds of a pale yellow color,altogither m- | 
fit for meate or medicine. The roote is round or bulbus,ſharper atrhe one end then at the orher,flat 
| ontheoneide,havinga deepe clift or furrow in the ſame flarſide when it flowreth, and not ar anic 
rimeelſe: it is coucredover with blackiſh coares or filmes : it ſendeth downe vnto the loweſt part 
certaine Re or ber oe The roote it ſelfe is full of white ſubſtance, yeelding aiuicelike milke 
whileſtit is vly digged our of the _— . ltisin taſte fweere, with alittle birrerneſle 


folowing, w eeaefuns o Ater out of the mouth 
2 The ftcond kinde of meade Saffron is like the precedent, differing onely in the colour of the 
flowers,forthar this plant doth bring foorth white flowers, which of ſome hath been raken for the 


; Colchicum 


crue Hermodadiylis,but i in pacing they haue committed the «2 error, 


4 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. TY 
| 2 Colchium Anglicwn album. ; 


1 Colchicum Anzlicum ay "10 
Purple Engliſh medow affcon. | ; White Engliſh medow Saffron. 


» ZS4 &/ SAEED 
Colchicum Pannonicum ſbrens. = 
Hungaric meade Saffron flowrin 


R >a P _ = = — % . 
- _ y by o %. 


3 Colchicum Pannonicum. | 
Hungarie meade Saffron, - 


a - 
Y "442 L775 # OO AAA 


= 
F ro_ # 
LP | Side 
f , 
f þ W 
/ 4 
/—<_—— 
"4 
8/7 AS 4 
- tr 


THE | FIRST BOOKE OF THE 


*% & The defeription. 


3 Theſerwo iGtures expreſſed are both bur one andthe falſe fame lant, and yetis Pikes 
Ticahſb ay hometh flowers madiibets doth ag corchnhe duitihecimina | ! Saffron 
che firſt figure ſerteth it £ when itis in leaues and buds, nd chomdherndin may on 

_ therefore one deſcription ſhall ſuffice for them both. In the ſpring ofthe yeere it bringerh foorth 
his lea ues,thicke,farſhining and ſmooth,no tvnlike the leaues of Lillies, do continue greene 
vnto thoeietieg, atwhuch time the lcaues do wither away, decked September 
there ſhooteth forth of the ground naked milke white flowers withour any greene leafe at all: bur 
ſo ſoone as the plant hath done bearing of flowers, the roote nies 6 as 4 he 


7 | bruar -7/{a gm wot: 


's ate 
Smallmountaine medpw Saffee 


 Thedeſeription. 


4 The ſinall medow Saffror 1 haththree or fower thicke fatleaues, and rower than | 

. reſt, The flower appeeretl oy the fall ofthe leafe, in in ſhape, colour: nerof gre | 
Sat of a blewiſh colour , andaltogither leſſer, The roore is thicke, ta 

is, a knobor confuſed nee rather then Onion faſhion 4 8 are 


ntaine JIG fower grallieng EY 7. Ul: WER 
| TH; _—_ tblewnglls, ad rngt ortti $M Bi 


” 


| ' HISTORIE QF;/PLANTS./. mg 
Wn 6 PR Tn Iliricum.. | 7 Colchicum Soles Alexandr inan. 
Ns | Greekeinedow Safffon Wim Aſſyrian medow Saffron, | 


oF o 


erih bription. © 
6 P33 Saffron of Illiria hath a pr ler e, andbulbus roote | full of ſubſtance: from 
which riſeth vp afar, thicke, andgrolc ak a= - 
 Giſtances, with long, thicke, and grofle Jeaues, ſharpe po inted,not vnlike to the leaues 

m Forums 0606 owiſli Gowete kike'rnb>che Bughlh wedcve Safron hue lnaller, 


7.1 The Aſſyrian medow Saffron hath a bulbus roote , made asit wereof wwopeeces; fromthe 


middle cleft whereofriſeth vp a Gi and tender ſtalke, ſer with faire broade feaues from the middle 
tothe top: ainong whichcommeth forth one ſingle flower like vnto the common Enos, 
or the white Anemone of Matthiolus deſcription. 


8 Colchicum parumn mont ann Lay. | 
hor mpay mountaineSaffron. 


$0 


& The defeviption. 


A 
* G bh . 
- ——_—_— \ Os 
- _—_— ——— _— . Mg S 
— . 
- dy 
% % ” 
—_— 
2 wu = Pe 
* "4 
, 7 
414 
- = 


about from the lower part tothe top vi eguall | 


q | TY "The mounaine wide fffon i abaſeand 

. loweplant, butin alrogither COM | 
| y | | þeglant begin much leſſer. The flow- 
|. ersare ſmaller and of a yellow colour, which 
ſerteth foorth the difference. Of all theſe kindes | 
of medowe Saffrons it hath not been certain» 


add py + yin which hath beene the truce Hermo- 
lt bf : notwithſtanding we haue-certaine 


f i ' { 4-3 " .” % - | 

£4 7 5 43 - | 
= [SS A6&» o 4 " = iq abet , , 

bs | | le, | [ 

þ | 

: I . [ 


9 Colchicum 


* 
een nr An AS Gat AY 3 
m 


130 THE FIRST BOOKE' OF THE 


9 Colchicmmmaſculinun Germanicu. 
Themalemedow ermanic Saffron, 


| uh Thedifrption. 
A Gapmephakem phi thick) leanes, heondls, ad filhof jaicw; and 
flowers like to thoſe of the medow Saffron, as well in colour, as proportion ; and differeth 


that,chatthis kinde is barraine, and eth foorth no ſeede ar ;comrarytoallthereſt ofthe 
rae TR annng | als 


10 Thefemallis likevnto the mallin each reſpe&, budferehincas, Go hgh baings 
foorth white flowers,and the other purple, 


* The place. 
Mcdow ſaffron or Colch 
name. Theritles of the ZE 


9 The male medow Saffr 


weth in Meſſinia and inthe Ile Colchis nhonef ckek 


gro 
doe ſer foorth their natiue countries , notwithſtanding our 


gardens are poſleſled with the moſt part ofthem. 
'The Two firſt do grow in England in great abundance, in far and fertillmedowes, Wi 
ford andBathe, asalfointhem $neere toa ſmall vi IT Aon rerpe ne 
es Gln Nara = SINE ary onal ar —_ 
rom Norrt to Ho ri in great 
450l.chg in gay mn fF miles fromthe fide c of Te. and mm 


places. 


4 + The time. 
| Theleaves of all the i cefmend falfron to begints flew dhymithreriy The fete 
isripein Tune. The leaues van fed do prin luy,and heirleaſane fer cams ork 
of ws Fo in Seprembe g 11 
| *+ The nomes. 


Diofdaides calleth medow caffon With ſome ipiuwr: nc 
meron, which is not . Diyers nems;in }acks Dow | 
it is called Jeitloſen: i inloweDutch 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 13 


monly called of the Apothecaries HermodatZyly: bur notwithſtanding that HermodazZyle which we | 
do vic in compound medicines differeth from this in many notable points, for thatthe rrue Hermeo- = 
daftyle hath abulbe or rounde roote, which being dried continuerh very white within and without, 
not wrinckled at all,but full and fmoorh, of a meanc hardnes. Yalerius Cordus writeth that there is 
found a certaine wilde Saffron like vnto the common kinde , bur with white flowers, and with a 
bulbe , when it is dried ſomwhat white onthe our ſide, and within very white, the powder of which 
being beaten is = wheate flower,with a ſweere and pleaſant raſte, This doth not grow ſaith he in 
Germanie,but is broughr from ſome other countrey :and it is very like to be the rootes of thewhite 
and ſtrange wilde. Saffron which are ſolde in ſhops by the name of Hermodattylus: and Hermodaityle 
to be nothingel(c, bur wilde Saffron with the white roote. Andfo ſhall there be two of one inde. 
that is to ſaic, the right Hermodatiyle with a roote white both within and without: and abaſtarde 
Hermodattle or deadly Colchicumn, or wilde Saffron, with a roote blackiſh orreddifh both withour 
and within, And that Azicen was of this opinion thoſe things declare which he hath written in his 

- 352. chapter; forhe ſaith that Heymodadtyle is the roote of a plant bearing roſes ( that is flowers) 
which are white or yellow (rather purple) and that the white is the better, the red and blacke be 
naught,and are pernicious and deadly poiſons, Soto conclude, ir may appeere by that that hath 
been ſaid,that the white medow faffron which we hane in the weſt parts of England, growingeſpe- + 
cially about Shepton Mallet, are the Hermedadtyles vied in ſhops. 7 was called Colchicumn of an Ile 
called Colchis where it was firſt found,as alſo the vic of it. Ir is called of ſome, F:lzue ante Patrem, 

| although there isa kindeof Lyſanachia or Loue ſtrife focalled , bicaule it firſt bringeth foorth his | 
long cods with ſeede,andrhen flower after,or at the ſame time at the end of the faid cod. But in this | 
meade Saffron itis far otherwiſe,bicauſe it bringeth foorth his leaues in Februarie, the ſeed in May, 
and the flowers in September, whichis a thing cleane contrary to all ocher plants whatſoeuer, for | 
that they do firſt | lower and after ſecde: bur this Saffron ſeederh firſt, and fower moneths after 
bringerh foorth flowers :and therefore the Latins thought this a firname for it Fil/us ante Patrem : 
and we accordingly maycall it, the Sonne before the Father. Of Plimyitis called Narciſſus 
rews,& Bulbus Agreitis,ot ſome P ſeudo-HermodatZylus : in Dutch Hermovactilenofte T | 


i | * The temperature. 
Medow ſaffron is hotand grie inthe ſecond degree. 
wanes.f woofer | % The vertues. | 


The rootesof imeadelaffronis of force to purge. Iris properly giuen. faith Pawlwsto thoſe that | 
haue the goute,cuen then when the humours are in flowing, 
The ſame ſtamped and mixed with the whites of egges , barly meale, and crums of bread, and | 
_ appliedplaiſterwiſe,caſeth the paine of the goute,fwellings and aches about the ioints. FP: 
The ſame ſtrengrheneth,nouriſherh,and maketh good inice, increaſerh ſperme or naturall ſeede, 
andis alſo good toclenſe vicers and rotten fores., = | LI EH: 
Fn TEN *% The correttion. _ | Mz | 
Thepowder of Ginger,lon 3 064 Wie ſcede,or Commin ſeed,and a lirtle Maſticke, corre- 
Qeth thechurliſh working of that Hermodad/le,or meade ſaffron, which is vſedin ſhops. Bur thoſe | 
which haue caten of the common medow Saffrori muſt dinkeche milke of a cow, or cls death pre- | 
ſently enſueth, 0 | f | | | 
The rootes of al the ſorts of meade ſaffrons, the white excepted,are very hurrfull to the ſtomacke, 
d being eatengthey kill by choking as muſtomes do, according vato Dyoſcorides, wherupon ſome- | 


| | Of Star of Bethlehem. Chap.$z. 


ID + The hinder Et | 
Here be ſundrie ſorts of wilde field-onions called Star of Bethlehem, differing in ſtarure,raſte, | 


and {mel,2s ſhall be declared. g2 
a Is "22 1 Ornithogalum. 


132 


f V2 v1, ob 


| | 
' 
| 


1 Onnabogala 
Star of 


thlehem. 


TIS) INY BY. - 
WY AY '1- ; 
py 4 My Wn 
p A WM 72 WS 
TON v 
| wy v 


3 Ornithogalum luteum. 


Yellow ſtar of Bethlehem. | 


Mr | IP 


THE FIRST BOOKE/ OF/ THE 


| 2 —_— 


HISTORIE) OF PEANTS/it | 155 


"i 


vr + The deſerprin 24h Wy wt 


I Vrcon gene of cabs had) pay bi thicke, f «Gal dfruice, andofa 

'©; wy ne colour,with a white ſtrake downe the middle of each 1& : among the which 

1 final naked ſtalkes,at the top whereof do grow ſinall owers,compaG of ſixe ſmal | 

' leaues , toppeden the backſide with lines of al yellowiſh greene. The inſide is of a milke white 

colour, whic neth ir ſelfe at the riſing of the ſunne, and ſhurtech againe atthe ſunne ſetting, 

whereof it hathbeene called of ſome Bulbs or jus. The flowers being paſt,the ſeed doth follow | 

' incloſed inthree cornered husks. The roote 1s ,white both wihin and without. | 

2 Theſecond forthath two orthree ſmall prafhe leaues,proceeding from acloven or ſcaly bulbs | 

roote. The ſtalkeriſerh vp in the midſt naked, but towardthe top there dothruſt foorth more leaucs | 

like vntothe other,bur ſmaller and ſhorrer:among which leaues do ws "0d veep inaloreiic and | 

render fooreſtalks,cchof them bearing one flower like vnto the prec 

3 The Star of Bethlebemis v like vnto the laſt deſcribed. The flowers of this are on | 

the back of ny. yellow ſtripped wit grofne,on the infide of a brighe ſhining yellow colour,in | 

other re 

The great bulbcd Star of Bethlehem hath many large andlong leaues , thicke and creſted, re> 
ſembling Galens bulbed _Lphodyll inroote, ſtalke and flowers, fauing that this plant doth brin 
foorth white flowers ſtripped w greene on the backſide, and akogither white on the innermo 

fide,and the Phot nor oj 


%& The place 


Stars of Beth [chem ou in ſundrie I which lic open to the aire, not onely in Germany ind | 


the Lowe count "444 ſo in England in ſundry places,and in our dens very common. The yel- | 
© lowkinde Z Obeh; din Somerſerſhire inthe come fields. The nn Fogngs | - 
we 20005 Re gardens, 


| | # Thevime. 
Thc kids ofbulbed plans do loner from A prillcotheend of May. 
oghid Mano alpoits! alight x | #Thenane. 


names rhereis ne no certaintie, evi nfo ſo breefe who ag mentio- 
| ;; Fntbel © as on ſhould by Te id 


Theſe are nes in heare and drines, | l 


| * The wertues. | | 
-Thevertves df hem are vaknowne, notwithſtandi a CE E852 A 
| in hot ember: ,andapplicd with bonie in maner of a, cata- 


Phiſic * on parcheceptbe , donor make any good iuice. 
be died, and rough their winds provoke 


+45 IT 2 
Le wt ! 


4 53 ; | 
Tr, Me een 
"SFÞ xt 2595 bs 


Y 


I 3 I6ge 


*—'Y 


134 THE FIRST BOOKE (OF/ THE 


* Widnes 


. 
4 " 7 %.. 


þ Gra wala 


eaues andhollowwirhin: the fil i ingle,romnd, bi 


groweth a round head couered with athin skin or filme, which 
Vee Wert inixdZ VP TORR BPR half and af 
zede'of the toore th 


round headcompat of many coates, which oftentimes bece yrearinmaner ofa Turnep, | 
many times long like an egge. Tobebriefe, eivaguered » nich very ne REI fe moſt part of © 
whitiſh colour, 

2 Thered Onion differeth not the former burn forencsandrodnes oth roo; ite 
- -; s fie no difference at WTO 


Bod anwerrde 3731 5 
"McOtitti alittKa £4 r a ak AN cherithed cus | 
rie wh inc = outer now and th then inbedgl ſowen alone, and manie id wik 
hereto wh Fetuce,Partieps OWNS: BalidliyTeth welt hari ſhouldbe oven with 
Coty Death Phage oſpererh theberrer andis holforne-"** n ne 2 Sp droge 
| + F'be give. | aaa Son 
Itis ſowen in March or Aprill,and ſomrimes in goa) 
F. Link Thenames. 
1 he Onion is called in Geka tine C = tines cite akſcr gendernhe 
env $ {furnames of the =p" ings 


Kt ITT" LPT erykieeh 
Palladius nameth Cn moug (> calle | Joes parue ne Fol "9; on RF 


Kg i 


"es 


{'HTSTORIE! os PLANTS. 3 TL 


There is anC on whichi is ſie = head 1k do _ ——_ alongnecke,as hath the 
vnſer lecke, is*croppedorcut for the por likea lecke : this 7 aftanamerhy%r: ofthis | 
 Plinyalſo writeth i in his BY docks and 6. chapter. Therebe with vs two principall ſorts, (thatis to | 
ſay of Onions)the one ſeruin ng for a ſauce, or to ſeaſon meare with , which ſomecall Gerhyor, and | 
another Pallacans: which in Engliſh we call hollowe Letkes : the Germaines Onion 3wibel: the 
Italians Cipolla: : the Spaniards Cebolls,Ceba,and Cebola. 

*% The temper ature. | 

All Onions beſharpe,and mooue teares by the ſmell. They be hor and arie as Galen ſaith, inthe 
fourth degree,but not ſo extreme hot as garlicke, The juice is of a thin waterie and aitie ſubſtance: 
thereſt is of thicke parts, 

* The wertues. 

The Onions do fret, attenuate or make thin , and cauſe drines : bein beiledrbey holoſ their A 
ſharpnes,eſpecially if thewarer be wiſe or thriſe chan ged,and yet forall that they donot loſe their 
_— = ualirie, 

cyalfs reake and conſume winde, proucke vrine,and be more ſoluble boiledthan rawe,and B 
_ K Se they nouriſh not at all, and but alirtle though they be boiled, FP 

They be naught forthoſe that are cholericke : bur good for ſuch as areteplete withrawe and C 
flegmatike humours : and for women that haue their termes ſtaied vpon acold cauſe, by reaſon 
they open the conduits that are ſtopped. 


Galen writeth that they © 9 e the Hemorrhoides to bleede if they be laid vntorhem £ither by D 
themſelues or ſtamped wi vineger. | 


The juice of Qnions ſniffed vp into the noſe,purgeth the head and draweth foorth rawe flegma- E 
tike humours. | 
Being ſtamped with ſalt,rewe and hinie and applied,is good againſtthebiring of a mad dogge. F. 
Being roſted i in the embers and applicd, ripenerh and breaketh colde apoſtumes, biles and | ach G 


| Theiuice'of nions mixed with the. decodtion of Penniriall and annointed the goutic H 
member with a feather,ora cloth wet therein and applied,caſcth the ſame very --: | 


The juice annginted vpona pilde or balde nrhe ſunn<,bringeth againe the baire very ſpec- I 


dil | 
Te juice Cds away the heate of ſcalding ny water or oile, as alſo burning with fire and _ K 
powder, asis ſetfoorth by a very Skilfull Chicurgion named.maſter V Vilbam "thek, ge: 


Onions fliced dippedir inthe iuice of forell, geen vatothe ficke ofarertian cate, L, 
doth wa a the fitin once or twice ) taking Jon! ag , 


| "* The harts: © [+ 
ingeaten,yea though itbe boiled cauſethheadach: Ga EO 1 


mandim ſighted,gullerh the ſences 05, mm TI ouermuch eps, vc 
| ally being Catcnrawe, | 


: N | am, 
a” | Ed . b " C LY. 
0, Se Onto "0 3 &/® 
B+, /& p. Wt 
" + rig, | : 
j He ere: fra Onion which Clu] | 
and broadleaues , as Dioſcorides 


bulbe or| | 
colour The flow 


THE FIRST BOOKE 'OF THE 


1 Pancration Clusy. | +12 Pancratium mar in. 
Squillrſea Onion. [7 6-4 © | |» SeaOnionofValentia, 


| 
A 


%s HISTORIE) OF PLANTS. * 37 


*% The ar 1 ;ption. | 
Red ovired ſea Daffodill or ſea Orion, hath a/greatbulbeor roote like vnto the precedent; the 
leaues long,fat, and ſharpe pointed, The ſtalke bare and naked, bearing at the top lundry faire red 
w_ in ſhape not much vnlike to the common Datfodill, 
| 5 Theyellow flowred fea Daffodill or ſea Onion, hath many thicke far leaues like vnto the com- 
24 Squill or ſea Onion: among whichriſeth vp a tender ſtraight ſtalke full of ivice, bearing at 
the top di flowers like the common yellow, Daffodill, The feede and roote is like the prece- 


ff dent. 
HT - The Mace. 

The 6M i fou di in Spaine and Iralie,nor far fromthe ſeaſide, 

The ſecond alſo neere vnto the ſea inltaly, Fpalns, and Valentia. I have had plants of chem 
brought me from ſundry parrs ofthe Mediterrane ſeaſide, as allo from Conſtantinople, where it is 
numbred among the kinds of Narciſſus, | 

The thirde growdh in the ſandes of the ſea, in\moſt places of the coaſt of Natbone, ne about 
Montpelier, 

The fourth groweth plentifully abour the coaſts of Tri policand Aloponeere vnto the ſea, and 
alſo in the ſalt marſhes thatare ſandicand lie ogen to the aire. 


The time. | 
They forfer from May to the end of Tuly,and their ſeedeis ripe inthe endof Auguſt, | 


*% Thenwnes. | 
The firſt i called ofthe Grecians +a : andof the Latines alſo Scill;: the Apothecaries name it 
Squilla divers Ceps muris: the Germaines | Meer Zwthelz the Spaniards Cebolla albarrana: the 
French men Oigton de mer :the Engliſh Squill and ſea Onion, _ 
The come! is called Hemerocallis Valentina : ofthe Tarkes Conſambach : in Greeke muxggner : and 
Pantratiue : in Engliſh the white ſea Daffodill or ſea Onion, andof ſome Nar- 
vtinopolitenms. 
| * The Lowperature. 
Jnion is hot in the ſecond degree,and Curteth very much as Galen ſaith; is beſt when it 
is taken wr or oſted,forſois the vehemencic ofi it taken away,” 


[1s £0 3» The Uerrwes. | 

The roote is tobe covered with paſte or claie |( as Dioſe "FU aback} and this put into an A | 
ouento be b —_ elſe buried in hot embers till ſich rime as it be Htoughty roſted: for not being 
fo baked or roſted it is very hurtfullto the inner patts. 

[tis likewiſe baked in an earthen potcloſe couered8eſetin an ouen Thari is to be taken eſpecially B 

 whichisin the migdeſt, which beingeutin ph be boiled, but the water ſtill to-be d*. | 

til ſuch zime/as ivis nicer binernorſharpe: enmuſt the peeces be hanged on a thredan nd ied 
inthe ae flice —_ no one peece touchan © 


the Squil are vſed to make oile,wine;or vineger 6f Squill.Of this vi of Squill C 
OXime orſharpe firupe. Thevſe oily rocut ee iSmil Of neg ofSh 
(Hrs __ | _ Onion is mixed with potions and other medicines which provoke vrine, D 


= ngsof the liver 8plecne, andisalſo pur intorreacles. Iris given torhoſe that | 


he the dropſiet ellos laundiſe, andto ſuch as are tormented with gripings of the beBy;and'3 
_ Vledinalicking medicineagainſt anold rotten coughzand forſhortnefſe of breath, | | 
ons art { Fits Onion being mixed with eightp: s of falr, ideen inhmoming fatinges E 
faſpecnfulloroe6Jodkh the belly, © 
qpartof Squillaboiledinle&e rpentine, vpidgcapufre liedrorhe chapeor I F 


j 

| 
c 

| 

| 

F 


138 THE FIRST BOOKE /OF THE 
Oo Hate C bop 8 6. 


'*% The deſcription. 


He leaves or the blades of the Lecke be 

T long,ſomwhat broad & very manyzhauing 2 
ek or creſt in the backſide, infinell and 

' taſtelike vnto the Onion. The ſtalkes "if the blades 
 benotoftencut, do in the hon OW yecre 
' grow round,bringin rth on the top flowers 
| dew ind beball, as do | Oni- 
' on: the ſeedes arc like. Thebulbe or r ola 


andſlender, of the'vnſet ; that 
the other Leekeis erand greater. | | 
t% Theplace, 


-  Irrequireth ameane carth,fat, well dunged and 
digged. Iris por common euery ou in other 
. countries as well as in England, - 
| * The tome. . | 
 Irmaybeſowen in Marhor April andive 
| remooued in Septemberor October, 
| * Thenames. | 
The Grezcians callit ze#v; the Feaen | 
Emperour X ers had in 
.roote, = ea was Sed ſcorne Porre- 
 phagus. But Palladjuein the maſculine nder cal- 
lethiit Porrws: the Germaines Laucht py 
ders Pozrette ; the Spaniards Pero : ; the Fr 
. Porreau: the Engliſhmen NE HREM | 


| % The temperature. 
The Leak ishot and dry,and Joth attenuate or make thin,as doth Foe OARG | 
3 The vertwes. | | 
A ig boilediris lefſe hurefull byreaſon that itloſetha great part of his 
= it yceldeth i batpno good aricy Burbeing taken with colde h | nat 
ed, | 


B | Being boiled codderm it uſing orbarly creams, it concofteth and heingerhivp mane lu 
motren dn eden ern NR 
- pipes ofthe lunges, 


C The iuice drunke with honie is profable againſt the bitingsof venemous beaſts, and evil 
the lcaucs ſtamped and laide 


D Theſameiuicewith' vineger,fra nſen nila ippl otro. 
Yet jy og ' theinoi _ 
E 


She ons pur intowi 
Le ence mens ders wr, 


= 4 —_— 0h fr Patong 


% The hayes, : 
| 4: bad rnded ear bros, laden ate tithes 
fenceth the cies,dullerh theſight, hurrerh ay Wes 07%) (EN 06 tam and is nok 
| Ns Wane +40 © "7 (hb Wanen1 nA 
of 


F | 
| 


- HISTORIE: OF PLANTS: 139 


Of Ciues, Chines,or wilde Leeks. (hap. 87. 


« Here he diver kindes of wilde Leckes,ſome wilde,and ſome of the gatden, as ſhall be decla- 
LP ſe called Ciues,hauc beentaken of ſome fora kinde of wilde Onion: bur all the aus 
chors that I haue been acquainted with,do accord that there is not any wilde Onion. - | 


T lochempraſew 44 2 Porrum T, onſile. | 
Ciues or Chiues. | French Leckesor Vine Leckes, 
| | j; «5,2 pe CO 


Wolz 0 


{ : 
+ 
$9 " ; = ; | 1 


Jie Joon} 116 : nh uh Thedeſeription. V' ZH 
1 F" luesbringeth foorth many leaues abouta handfull high, long;flender;round, like to lictle 
Com C _ g'which wp ſinallandtender ſtalks ſegding foorth certain ps with 
.-. > flowers like thoſe of ion, bur much leſſer. It hath many little bulbes or headed 
rootesfiſtned tc pither, out of which growe downe tothe cartha greatnumber of licrle ſtringes, 
and hath bath the ſinell and raſte ofthe Onion and Lecke, as it were participating of both. 
Lecke of French Leeke,groweth vp with blades like thoſe of Leckes. The ſalke is a cu- 
16r0p whereof ſtandeth a _routid head or button, couered at the firſt witha thin skin, 
being broken;the Rowers & ſecdes come foorth, like thoſe of the Onion. The bulbe or headed 
roote is round hard and found which is quicklymwulciplied by ſending foorth many bulbes, 
E047 | > # Theplace ind time. | 
Cives are ſetin gatdens, theyfloriſh long, 


149 THE FIRST won OF THE 


aie Iuncewn Porrwn, of Ruſh Lecke: in Engliſh Cjues, . Ciuer and Sweth: in French 
Brelles. © 

The Vine Locke is calletin Gebille lmavhotes, in the p ce where itnaturally groweth : it may 

be called in Latin Porrum Vitiun ot | Vith incun Porrum: in; ngliſh after the Se and Latine 
VineLecke,or French Lecke. wet! F | [ 

* The temperatur 


Cives are like in facultie Logs They na The Vine Lecke heateth more 
then doth the other Lecke, [1 
| '* The vertues. 


The Cives attenuate or make thine , open, porno , ingender horte and grolle va vapors, 
and are hurtfull cothe cies and braine. They cauſe troubleſe e dreames, and worke all the &s, 
that the Lecke doth. 

The Vine Leeke prouoketh vc Si binge we the flowers, It cureth the bitings 
" VENcmous ae We lh ned. | | 


Of ger, by "HL! te 


 *vThe 
b NIE, is 


a 


leaf jooverrbturh 

in inedecf rootes: it hath Do 
thoſe ofthe Lecke, among w feb vpa 
atthe end of the ſecondorthird yeere,whe 
doth grow a tuft of flowers o_e eres a w 


| pai which being pn nie | 
pecrethr round blacke ſeeds, Fc 
 %*T he place and times. | 
 Garlicki is ſeldotmme ſowen of ſcede, b "rouge 
in gardens of the ſmall cloues in N 


Dereniber, and fonnninncy iv Febaie | 


A Fd OB 


'mors; cutteth ſuch as arergug Fond 
tions , isan cnimie to a co di poiſons, andre 
lennaweth it Ther ijaca ruji 
B Ir tothe 


E 


(WIE! HISTORIE \OF PLANTS. | 147 
juice,as Galtp writeth. 4M | | | bo 
Ittaketh away the roughnes of the throte,ithelpeth an old h,it pronoketh yrine,itbreaketh C_ - 

and conſumeth winde,jitis a remedic forthe dropſie proceeding ot acolde cauſe, | 


It killeth \ es in the belly, anddriyerh them foorrh. The ny ke alſo wherein it hath been ſod- D 
den,is giuen to yoong children with good ſuccefſe againſt the wormes. i | 
Ithelpeth/a colde ftomacke,and is a preſeruariue againſt the contagious and peſtilent aire, E 
The decodtion' of Garlicke vſed for a bathe to fir ouer, bringeth the flowers and {econ- E 
dines or afterburthen;as Dzoſeorzdes ſaith, * - | 
It taketh away the marphew, terters or ringwoormes, {cabbed heads in children, dandrafe and G 
ſcurfe, rempered with hony and cheparts annointed therewith. - 
With figge leaves and cummin it is laide onagainſtthe bitings of the mouſe, called in Grecke x4 
pLEAN :1n Engliſh a Shrew, | | | | ' a - | 


'® | th. | | 
1 % The deſcription. 


yilde Garlike or crow Garlick hath ſmall tough leaues like ynto ruſhes, ſmooth and 


Of wildeGarlick, Chap. 89. © | 


I 4He 
hollow within : among which groweth yp a naked ſtalke,round,lipperie, hard and found: 
on t] 


1 the top whereof after the flowers be gone, nag little ſeedes,made vp in aroundeclu- 
ſter like ſmall kernels, hauing the ſmell and raſte of Garlick, Inſtecde of a rootethere is a bulbe or 


Ramſons ſendeth foorth rwo or three broade leaues ſharpe pointed , ſmooth andof alight 
greete colour, The ſtalke is a ſpan high, ſmooth wy ſlender, bearing arthe top a cluſter of whire 
flowers. In ſtced of a roote it hath a long ſlender bulbe,which ſendeth down a multitude of firings, 
and is coucred with skins or thin coates, = ; 


Crowe Garlick. 


00% 
(NY un 5 


_ 
-a# w, _—_ 
4" — — 


- AAP 
- A 


AAA; 


* SEO 


) 


* The 


THE FIRST BOOKE. 'OF THE 


142 | 
% The time. + 

They ſpring-vpn Aprill and "ys Their ſeede is ripein 
| $ Theplace. 


The Crow Garlicke WY in fertill paſtures. in all ye” England. I founde it in ox 
plentic inthe field called the Mantels, GON backſide of Iflingron by London. 
Ramſons doe grow in the woods and borders of fields vnder hedges among the buſhes. 1 
found it in the next field vnto Boobics barne,vnder _- hedge that 9: a, the lane and i 
that leadeth to Hamp þ v4" both proces 


 ſovpontheleft hand vndera hedge adioining to a 
*% They 


neerce London. | 
Both of them be wilde Ghntickd and are called in ivr Alia Gloetivia: in Greeke oxdepgs, & ue; 


bur the Crow Gazlick is calledof D zeſcorides Sik ,that is to faic ©Anguinum allium, of Snakes 
ck,or Stags Garlick. 


\ 
Garlick,and of ſome Cerwinwn allwn,Harts Garli 
Ramſons arenamed of the later practitioners Yr ſinum, or Beares Garlick : Allvew Lath 
ies and Buckrams, 


folium,and Moly Hippocraticurm : | Engliſh Ramſo 
| ** Thenature. 


The temperatures of theſe wild Garlicks are referred vnto thoſe of the garden, 


*% The wvertues, 
Gurl as Galen ſaith, is ſtronger and of more force then the garden 


A WildeGatlick or Crow 
Garlicke, 
B Theleaues ofRamſons | ſtamped and eaten of diuers in the low countries with fiſh for a ſauce, 
euen as we do eate greene ſauce made with ſorrell. | 
C Theſawelcaues may ve (well be catenin Apriland Maie with butrer, of ſuch asare of a ſtrong 


conſtiturion,and laboring 
The diſtilled water truck breaketh rhe he tpacand driverh it foorth and prouoketh wine. 


3 Scorotlopraſi 4 Alias Alpinune I en +y one 
molaing Garlick, Brode leaued r TAE 


Great 


wo \\ 
\\ \\ AAAS OILED 


Wn 


4 \\ WW 


41 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 143 
| * The deſcription. = | 
3 The greatmounraine Garlicke hath long and brode leaues like thoſe of Leckes,bur much 
ter and longer,embracing or claſping abour a great thicke ſtalke, ſoft and full of iuice,bigger = 2 
mans finger , and bare toward the top : vpon which is ſet a great head, bigger then a tenniſe ball, 
coueredwith a skin after the manerof an Onion, The skin when it commeth to perfeQion break- 
eth and diſcloſerh a great multitude of whitiſh lowers,which being paſt,blacke ſeedes follow inclo- 
ſed in a threecornered huske. The roote is bulbus of the bignes of agreat Onion. The wholeplanc 
ſmelleth very 250% HOY pie bps isinſhewaLecke , wher it was called Scorodepraſum, 
as if we ſhould ſaie, Garlick Leeke, participating of the Leeke and Garlick, or rather a degenerate 
Garlick growen monſtrous. bets” 4 7 
4 Thebrodeleaued mountaine Garlicke,or rather the mountaine Ramſons, riſeth vp with a ſtalk 
ofa cubite high.a finger thicke,yer very weake,full of ſpungious ſubſtance,neere to the bottom ofa 
purpliſh colour,and greeneaboue,bearing at the top a multitude of ſmall whitiſh flowers, ſomwhar 
ing,ſtar faſhion, The leaues are three or fomer fade ribbed like the leaues of greatGentian, re- 
bing thoſe of Ramſons, bur greater. The roote is great and long, coucred with many ſcaley, 
cotes, and hairie ſtrings, *+ Theplace. th, 
The great mountain Garlick groweth about Conſtitinople as ſaith Clu/is.I receiued a plant of it 
from M.T ho Edwards apothecarie in Exceſter, who found it growing in the weſt parts of England. 
Viforialis groweth in the mountaines of Germanic, as faith Cerolus Cluſins, and is yet a ſtranger 
inEnglandfor any thing that I do know, | 


Of eMoly,or the Sorcerers Garlick, Chap. go. 
.  w*% The kindes. : 
[Here be Guars ſores of Moly wiinen of by indric ofthe ancients, which ſhall bedeſeridedin 
.® chispreſent chapter. | 
x Moly Dloſcorideww. 
Dioſcoriaes his Moly. 


\ 
YEE 
<7 hdd 4 


-\ f 

- 

j_— 
, %» 


4 


- 
- 


WE, 
- 
-” 


a 
: 
PTE 
f 


\ | it = 
\ , 


/ wm 


X 
| 
+ | 
j | 


144 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
* The deſeription, | 

He firſt kinde of Moly hathfor his roote a little whitiſh bulbe ſomewhat long, not vnlike 

tothe roote of 0/2 Lecke, which ſendeth foorth leaues like the blades of corneor 

grafſe: among which doth riſe vp a ſlender weake ſtalke, fat, and full of juice, ar the op 
whereof commeth foorth of a skinni Giles a bundell of milke white flowers, not vnlike tothoſe of 
Ramſons. The whole plant hath the ſmell and taſte of Garlick, whereof no doubt it is a kinde. 
2 ts Maly hath likewiſe a bulbusroote with ſome fibres faſtened to the bottome, 
from whichriſe vp weake graflie leaues, of aſhining greene colour, crookedly winding and turning 
themſelues rowardthe point like the taile of a Serpent, wherof it tooke his name. The ſtalkis rough, | 
thicke, andfull of juice : at the top whereof ſtanderh a cluſter of ſmallred bulbes, like vnto the ms 
leſt cloues of Garlick, before they be pilled from their skinne. And among thoſe bulbes there doe 
thruſt foorth ſmall and weake foot $, cuery one bearing at the end one ſmall white flower ten. 
ding to a purple colour : whichbbein paſt, the bulbes do fall downe vpon the ground, where they 

irhout andrhereb greatly increaſe,as alſob the infinite bulbes that 

derocetdoccaſteiball che whole lan flock ad eatof Gariicku f iris alſo akinde, 


| \*] x LE 7 an Moy. 


(CY 1h; q 


. % j 


PA mmm re 


(AL A bbbbt b4 11 habtd 


HOP / 
f pF 

Fi » 4 : 

; L : of 
4 / / - P . \ " 
o 
n hs . IF, L % 
f if if d — o 1 \ 417- 
# . y A ju WY _ py - 
- . . \A\ = { F/ 
, | ____— 
_ 4 . 4 
[ PETTTTITTTRTATTYT, a ' 4 _ 
OY AAA : OY | - R | AY" 
% k - " a - ” co - P - v , "4 \ *  % 4 ”" we 
_ - " mama —_——_. . ts "I SO CONE Wenn Pe et" 2 hs > : \\ * - - 
AL 2 \ Y \ —X : 4 - 4 \y : 
s » ' % 
N R > 
\ \ - p - 
_ L = Pa N - Y 
Y one = ated LA A Re rr I PE IE > — * 1 9s Eng +5 
WY aaa Wk . 
xa - —— ———— m_—_—_ 


leh deſcription. "© 
aero dtoward the b hah erthepoire, anti 
c 


+4 Hamer Moly hath very rythicke leaues 
Geert: che 


lowed like a trough or 


—- which leaues neere vnto+ botrome c 


nn poo orballof a greene colour : whichbeing ripe and ſet in 

| 7 9" Cn Toke fork Flachmoches, nor e leaues riſeth wp 
Aire hunt fr a 119. JAP ing ſtaffe: arthe top ofthe 
ſtalke ſtandeth a A evemhaorer a awaſh of purplecolour, 


_ 4 /HISTORIE OF PLAN T8: 14 
zpeercth a blacke ſeede wrapped in a white | 
coed widhaiblackiſh skinne on the outſide, and — 


hath very thicke fat ſhort keaues;and ſharpe pointed: in the boſome whereof 
che kr that of HomereMoly. The ſtake isallo like tho puece- 
offeali di alargethinne akin or ile. | The rohre 
| | 1 * 3 hab | 573 0 Was <4 | | SLIT LOW 09 9713 - 
5 Caucafon, [| 
ther | uh Thedeſeription." ' 
s 5 | Cancafonorwithering Moly, hath a very great 
bulbus roote, greater than the roote of Homers 
Moly , and fuller, of a {linife iuice:fromwhich doe 
_ ariſe three or fower great thicke and bre $ 
witheredalwaies at the point! 


planted in the earth , dot! 
plant like vnto themothex, ++ 
[| * The place... 

| Theſeplants do growin my garden,asalfo in the 
gardens of Maſter James Garret Apothecarie, and 
I gentlemanand expert 


' They ſpringfoortho the grounde in February, 
and bring foorth their flowers,fruir,and ſeed,in the 
endof Auguſt, | 


4 * _ Some of the Grecke writers have derined the 


names of theſe plants Mply, from the Greeke word 

Moaxudy rs ros7's, that is , tb driue away diſeaſes. Ir 
may profitablie be argued, nr ay a certaine 
| bulboſe plant, moſt like to Garlick, by thewoord 
MaauZe, _ Hippocrates and Galen doc expound and call a Garlick head, giuing that mterprerati- 
on tothe Grecke word. As for repeating of fooliſh and vaine figments, the conring of witches, & 
magicians inchantments, which haue beene attributed vnto thoſe herbes , I leaue them to ſuch as | 
had rather plaic with ſhadowes,than beſtow their its about profirable and ſerious marters., . 

Wh KY | | 


VF 


| 427M 
g / [4 JIN 
WW WAG. 
, Ou k 


"AM |  . **+Thetemperature and vertues; | 5 
Theſe Molyes arc very hot, approching to the nature of Garlick, not doubring bu intime ſome 
excellent man or other will finde out as many pp vertues of them, astheir ſtatcly and comely 
proportion ſhould ſceme to be poſſeſſed with. But for my part,l haue neither prooued,nor heard of 
others, nor found in the "om of xhe ancients any thing touching their faculties, Onely Dioſco- 


rides reporterh, that they are of maruellous efficacie to bring downe the , ifone of thembe 
ſtamped with oile of the Flower-deluce according to art, and vicd in of a peſlaric ormother 


torie,| ſp | | | 
{any be defirous to heare of their charming qualities, wherewith the Circes and magicians haue 
Ved to bring to paſſe their diabolicall incantations,let them read Homer touching that marter inthe 
dreatic chapter of his Odye5and here ſhall they finde marter ſcarce woorth the reading, | 


| 
| 
| | | Fo 
* IF K as 


| | 
+ 


145 THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE 
| bs ab bt 44.7] bc 139923 l 2353574 [ e's . .mnchicl 
Of white Lillies. Chap: 91. 


Here be ſundry ſorts of Lillies whereof ſome be wilde, or ofthe field; others tame, or of the 
"| garden;fome white; others red; forme of our owne countries growing z others from beyond 
| the ſeas,and bicauſe of th viniad able ſorts we will deuide them into Chapters, beginning with 
the two _ Lillies,which differ lictle butin the natiue place of growing, | 


| 2 Lilium albuon Bizantinam or A 
The white Lillie of Conſtantinople. 


| | _ * Thedeſeription. | 
He white Lilly(which in beauty andbraueric excelled $«/omon in his greateſt roialtic)bath 
| long,ſmooth, and full bodied leaues,of a graffic or light greene colour. The ſtalkes betwo 
cubirs high,and ſomrimes more,ſet or garniſhed with the like leaues, but growing ſmaller 
and ſmaller towardthe top: and ypon them do grow faire white flowers,ſtrong of ſmell,narrow to- 
ward the foote of the ſtalke whereon they do grow, wide or open in the mouth like a bell, In the mid: 
dle part of them do grow ſmalltender pointels tipped with a duſtie yellow colour,ribbed orchamfe- | 
red on the backe (ide,confiſting of ſixe ſmall leaues thicke andfat. The roote is a bulbe madgof {ca 
' | ycloues,fullofrough andclammie iuice wherewith the whole plant doth greatly abound. | 
2 Thewhite Lillie of Conſtantinople hath very large and far leaues like the former,but narrowel 
andlefſer, The ſtake riſeth vp tothe height of three cubits , ſer and garniſhed with leaues alſo like 
the precedent, burmuch lefſer, Which ſtalke oftentimes doth alter and degenerate from his nat 
rall roundneſſeto a flatforme,as it were a lath of wood furrowed or chancled alongſt the ſame,as! 
wereribbes or welts, The flowers growe atthe top like the former ,ſauing that the _ _ run 


» T 
r 


1HISTORIE>OF PEANTS:|3 - 17 


themlelues more backward like the Turkes cap|, and beareth many more flowers than our Engliſh 


white Lillie doth. «20 Ad8.3! "| þ | 
| * %*% Theplace. | 9Y 
Our Engliſh white Lillie groweth in moſt ga won England. The other growerh naturally in 
Conſtantinople andrhe parrs adiacent, from whence we hadplants for out Engliſh gatdens,where 


tA EYAY-+. 51 
"EE 


they fdouriſh as in their owne countrey. Lorie tot 

Beth dane tet 4uty = ; % Thetime (i; 

The Lillies do flower from May tothe end of Tune. 
| xi deey ut :  %Thenames. Ak SA | 

The Lillie is called in Greeke zprawe : in Latine Li/zzon,and alſo Roſa Tumonits, or Tunes roſe, bicauſe 
; asitis reported, it came vp of hir milke that fell vpon the ground, For the Poets faine that Hercules 
whom Jup:tey had by Al/cwnena,was put to 1unos breits whileſt ſhe was a fleepe; & after the ſucking, 
there fell away abundance of milke, and that one part was ſpilt.in the heauens, and the other on the 
carth,and that of this ſprang rhe Lillie, and the (circle in the heauens called Zadew Cireulns, or the 
milkic way,or otherwiſe in Engliſh FOG {treete.D. Ba/alizzin the explication of the 44. Palme 
fith,that no hearbe doth ſo liucly ſer foorth the frailtic of mans life ol Lillie. Ic is called in high 
Dutch Ueiſz Gtlgen: in low Dutch UWitte Lilten in Iralian Gig/zo : in Spaniſh Zirio blanco ; in 
French Lys blanc :in Engliſh the white Lillie, | _” | 

Theother is called Lilium album Bizantinum, and alſo Martagon album Bizantinum : in Engliſh 
thewhite Lillic of Conſtantinople : of the Turkes themſelues Sultar Zambach, with this addition 
that it might be the better knowen which kinde of Lillie they ment , when they ſentroores of them 
into theſe countries Fa fiori grand; Biarchi, (o that Sultan Zambach , Fafiori grandi Bianchi , is as 
much to ſay,Sultans great Lillie with white flowers. | 

| *%* The nature. ; | 
The white Lillic is hot and partly of a ſubcile ſubſtance. Bur if youregard the roote, it is dric in 


. | 


% The vertues. | 
The roote of rhe garden Lillie ftamped with honic , gleweth togither ſinewes that be curin ſun- a 
der. Itconſumeth or ſcoifeth away the vicers of the head called Achores , and likewiſe all ſcurui- 
| neſſeofthebeardandface, _ ELSE” "1 
 Theroore ſtamped with vineger,the leaues of Henbane,or the meale of barly,cuterh the tumors 
and apoſtemes of the priuic members. Ir bringeth the haire againe vpon places which have beene 
burned or ſcalded,if irbe mingled with oile or greaſe,and the place therewith annoinred. 
The ſame roſtedin the embers and ſtamped with ſome leuen of rie bread and hogs greaſe , brea- © 
keth peſtilentiall botches, Ir ripeneth ok in the flankes comming of veneric and ſuch like. 
c flowers ſtcepedin oile oliue and ſhifted|two or three times during ſommer, and ſer inthe 
ſunne in a ſtrong glaſle,is good to ſoften the harfneſle of finewes and the hardnes of the marrix. 
Florentings ſcriptor rei ruficeſaith,that if the roote be curiouſly opened, and therin be pur ſome E 
red,blew or ye ow colour that hath no cauſtickg or butning qualiric, will cauſe the lowers tobe of 


the ſame colour. FE Se Lett 
diſtilled and drunke , cauferth eaſic andſpedie F 


o 


Inlins Alexandrinus ſaith , that the water thereo! 
dcliverance,and expelleth the ſecondine or after burthen in moſt ſpeediemaner. ©. 
Cefarius Archiater Faith, the leaues boiled infower wine and deepe andperillous wounds fo- G 
mentedor bathed therewith; doe greatly helpethe vers Sets other medicines that are applied = 
ec eq, the parts adioining,as nay on, report in his 7. booke de Simpliamed;. 
+ - 25 bory 7) 4 If L3iÞ&2 £52.24 BELT $4 obo ; 2 antes 
Therooteof the white Lillic ſtamped and ſtrained with-wwine , and giuen to drinke for two or x4 
three daies togither, expelleth poiſon ofthe peſtilence, andcauſerhit to breake forth in bliſters in 
theourward part of the skin,, according tothe expetience of alearned gentleman maſter #7 liam 
Godorws, Sergeant Chiturgion to the Queenes Miieftie : who alfo hath cured many of thedropſic 
viththe juice thereof, ' tempered with barly mealeand bakedin cakes, and ſo caten ordinarily for 


: 


lome month or ſixe weekes togither with —— —— Ha 


> FRE. os |. | 
| 0 pi 2 FRET 204 0 
i 'k + 
6 Las : : L 7 ; 
| - . 4 by # : ' " ky 5 3. F : ” *. 4 F 
% 4 E 7 LA Rs þ: a4 s - FA "FD + ©S « : : " 
* 1 | Gb 


148 THE FIRST BOOKE OF/THE 
| | Of Red Lilkes, Chap. TE 
Herebe lkemiſeſndryſoresof ly AS Code dangetenoarins call name: 
in Engliſh red Lillies, wherof ſom are of our owne countries nemran trad ance beyond 

| the ſeas, the which ſhall be diſtinguiſhed ſeverally in this chapter that followeth. 


by * The deſeription 


Q 


1 Hg Hegold redLillie groweth to the height of wo, and ſometimes three cubits, and often | 


higher than thoſe of the common white Lillie. Thz leaues be blacker and narrower, ſerve- | 
rie thicke abour the ſtalke, The flowers inthe rop be many from tento thirtie flowers, ac- 
cording to theage of the plant, andfercilicie of the ſoile, like in forme and grearnes to thoſe of the 
| white ilie.bu le,but ofa red colour tendingro afſaſfron, ſprinckled or poudered with many little blacke 
ſpeckes,likero rude vnperfect draughts of certaine letters, The rootes be great bulbes , coaliſting | 
of many cloues,as thoſe of the white Lillie. | _ | | 


2 Thefiriered Lillie hath rootes like the former : fromthe which riſerh vp aſtalke of acubire and 


halfe high, ſet with broadleaues like thoſe of Plantaine, Onthe top doth grow one flower or two, | 
ſeldome many,in colourzedor as the flame of fire,whichquickly doth fadeand periſh. | || 
3 ThegreatredLillieis like vato the former in ſtature,the leauesbe fewer in number, broader, & 
not ſo thicke ſer, The flowers in ſhapebe like the former, ſauing thatthe colour heercofis morercd, | 
and thicke daſht with blacke ſpeckes. The roote is ſcaley like the former. | | 
4 There is another red Lillic which hath man leaues omwhar ribbed,broader than the laſt before | 
mentioned,bur ſhorter,& notſo many in nun -The ſtalk gronethg the heightof wo cubits ant! 


1:1 HISTORIE (OF PLANTS! | wp 


ſometimes higher; w ndo ow flowers: like the former. Among the focteſtalkes of which 
flowers commeth foorth certaine s or cloued rootes., browne of colour tending to rednefle, 
which do fall inthe ende of 'Aaiguſtvpon the ground ; roote and growing inthe ſame place, 
whereby it greatly increaſeth for ſeldome or ner it bringeth foorth ſeed for his pro agation, 
There is another ſort of the red Lillies ,hauinga faire icaley.or clouedroote, yellow aboue,and 
browne toward the bottorne* from which riſeth vp a faire ſtiffe ſtalke creſted or furrowed, of an 
ouerworne browne colour , ſet from the lower partto the branches, whereon the flowers do grow 
with many leaves , confuſedly placedwithour otder. unove the branches Cloſe by the ſtemme, 
grow foorth certaihe cloves or roores of a reddiſh colour, like vnto rhe cloves of Garlicke before 
they be pilled , which being fallen vpon the grounde at their time of ripeneſſe, doe ſhoote foorth 
certaine render — or rootes that dotake hold of the ground wherebyirgreatly increaſech, The 
flowers are in ſhape like the other red Lillies , bur of a darke oreng colour, NS) a flame of 
fire ſpotted with blacke ſporg,whereofir rooke Ns name. ©. 


Lilizm cruentium Intifolumn. | | | as I 
; The firicred L.. = FA The plac 
INN (f / Lo Theſe Lillies do Go fon onde in at 


S *y\ \ a 4; yo" | fieldesof Iralic and Languedocke, inthe moun- 
| J 1 ; raines andvallics of ne and thoſe places 
| adiacent. They,are commonin our Enguih gar- 
dens as alſo in Germanie, ” 4: 
* The 
: flower com os a little before the 
white Lillies,when KN I 
There haue beene fro a —_ 
controverſies tbontrthe nam oft is red Lillie, 
or afrerſome purple : the which contro- 
uerſies haue beeneſo ri , and yetneuer 


| cenſured, that it wete much labour loſt to re- 
| peare them: for all andeueric of them haue ſaid 
ſomewhat, bur nothing tothe » purpoſe : for ſome 
haue ſought ro mende others errors , and haue 
made more than were before , and therefore it 
| +" haltſuffice cewp hath beene aid in the wenn 
110 p< /'Gnoride,” 
10) PARITY Bf * jers on 
The ins Sek red Liltie (as Gale ſaith) is 
<5 Weber non partly of thin, and parcly 
+ of ancarthlyeflence, 'The: roore and leauesdo 
001-2012 22 1% apo ene png digeſt or waſte 
F024 {he mona phe 
Kee (hi Shlige aint bs: 1. 
The lemesof te erbew piſtridorenchor, Teng aphid re good again the ſtinging of A 
me |. 163M 40-9 
_ ſame boiled and cer nh vineger, w good againſt burning, and heale greene B 
woun Sand vicers, YWORY O13? 
\The oore roſtedi cheemben | and. poundwithoile ofroſes curerh burnings, and fofreneth C 
$ ofthematrix, © - - axle" 
The ſame ſtamped with honie, crack the noundedfin inewes ind miviiers cur ofioiat: Irraketh D 
away the morphew and deformitic ofthe faceandtaketh away wrinckles. 
ate an EE re FLUE Ovrs Pune Frvellings ofthe B 
ſones,the yard andrmatrix. - : SH 
K g- | | "Ibhs 


6. © *W 


- 


TY THE FIRST BOOKE OF' THE 

F The rootes boiledin wine, ſaith Pliny, cauſeth the: cornes of the fi fall within 
Pagan gonna yy ena ru rms wait Nr Berber rag _> 
G Being drunke in honied water, they drive out by ſiege vnprofitableblood. 


Of mountaine Lillies. Chap.93. 


35 Lilim montanum mains. 


| "LOANS 
Ee VE 


7 Thegreat mountaine Lillie hath a cloued bulbe or ſcaly roote, like vnto thoſe of red Lillie, yel- | 
lowe of colour,very ſmall in reſpe& of the grearnes of the plant: fromthe which riſeth vp a ſtalke, 
ſomtim es two or accordingtothe age ofthe plant, whereof the middle ſtalke commonly tur- | 
neth from his roundnes into a flat forme;,as thoſe of the white Lilly of Sen Vpontheſe | 
| ſtalks dogrow faire leaues of a blackiſh greene colour,in roundels and ſpaces as the leaues of wood- | 
roofe,nor vnlike to theleaues of white Lillic,bur ſmaller at the top of the ſtalkes. The flowers bein | 
number infinite,or at theleaſt hard tobe counted, very thick ſer or thruſt rogither,of an ouerwome | 
purple, tending ro the colour ofred lead,fported on the infide with many ſmal ſpecks of the colour | 
of ruſtic iron. The whole flower doth turne it ſelfe backward,at ſach rimeasthe ſunne hath caſt his | 
beames vpon it, like vnto the Tulipa or Turkes cap, as the Lillie or Martagon of Conſtantinople | 
doth; from the middle whereof docome foorth tender pointels with ſmall dangling pendents { 
hanging thereat, of the ſame colour the flower is ſpotted with. z 8: 
8 Theſmall mounaine Lillie is verylike vato the former in roote,leafe, ſtalke and lowers , diffe- 
ring _—_— points, the whole plant is leſſer, the ſtalke neuer leaueth his rounde forme,and beareth 
Cwer owers. | | | | Pe zEN | | 


++ *% Theplace. | 
_ Theſe Lillies as Dioſcorideswriteth,do jo dr mars Laodiceaand Antioch,acitie of Syria: and | 
| hath likewiſe bin found in the mounraines of Italy,8 ſuch hot countries as do. border vpon __ | 


'{HISTORTE /OF PLAN TS; | 

Greece , many daies iourneies beyond Conſtantinople, from whence they are brought amon 
pn bulbus _ for the of the Turkesgartlens; and the curious Bath-Seopfion: 
whence they haue beene brought ro England ; whereithey Cer as in their native countrey. 


The ſmall ſort Thaue had many yeeres' growing inmy garden ;' ;/burrhe "14" ny not tluduull 
of late, giuen me by my louing friend maſter James G Fpochocaricin Lon 
* The time, 
no Lillie of the mountaine flower at ſuch tmoupeke common hide Laty doth,and mime 


Y 


| 6 E:folnenht m715ts; Het; ing93 
The grant mountaine + Lillie i is called of Taber Montanus, Lilwn Seritanicens ; 'receiued | 


_— 


maſter Garret aforeſaid , from Lie iPunders by the mane Hartagon Imperiale : of ſome Lil - 


S8r 4cenicum mas. 

The ſmall mouncaine Lillic is called i in Lacine Lilium montanwn, and Lilign | fire: : of ſome 
Hemerocallig,of other Maytagon; hut neither truly,for that there is of cither, other plants properly 
calledby the ſame names, ' Io heh Dprch ir is called Goltwurtz tin towe Datch Lilikens van 
Caluartenz in Spaniſh Lirio Amarilb: in French Zys Sauvage : in Engliſh mountaine Lillie. 

% The Hature and Vertues. 

There hath not been any chingleft in writing cicher of the nature or vertues of theſe plants : not- 
withſtanding we ma my On that God which gaue them ſuch ſecmely and beaurifull ſhape, hathnor 
left them hoe their peculiar vertues : the hnding out whereof we leaue to the learned and in- 
duſtrious ſearcher of narure, 


The Yi Lil of Gnftntingle (hap. 94. 


> Lilian Fic bfinaw. Who | | 
Teri iContainp % The deſcription. 


_ "11 '9 He red-Lillieof inople hath a 
CE of br #4 7 yellowe Tealy orcloued roote like vnto 


the mountain Lillie,but greater:fromthe 
un riſeth vp a faire fat ſtake af finger thick,ofa 
_  darkpurpliſh colour rowardthe top, which for- 


| © aflarforme,like as doththe great mouncain Lilly: 
; vponwhich ſtalke do grow ie faire and moſt 
; beauriful homers lien like thoſe of the moun- 
 tainLilly,bur of greter Collie ſeeming as it were 


© | 'From the middle of the flower commerh foorth a 
i tender pointell or peſtell, andlikewiſe many ſal 

. chiues tipped wit looſe and torrering pendants 

' hanging thereat. The flower is of a Tknghle 
Se ſauoure, The leaues are confuſedly ſct 
ao ee of the LEO on 


: = d , 
i & x 4 05 
| . »7 716 ' beyonde 
\ A gs, - 


Ace NES 
intic by inter Hobranam 


times doe turne from his narurall roundnes into 


i: amed of red wax,tending to ared leade colour. 


ray nas to ckp 
PEINRLY 


— SOS 


rn onongr nt 


pn IS, HE Br Done RE org (M2304 , 


152 THE" FIRST 'BOOKE OF; THE. 


* The time. 
They flower and flouriſh withthe other Liles. = | 
The Lillie of Conſtantinople i JU + lntr-orer OG: 1 Martagon of C aſtartine 

1s in 0 le, 'ﬆ 

L Obelius Hemerocalls Chalcidonics, and likewile Liliues Bizantinum: : ofthe Turksiriscalled Zufin. | 

ere: ofthe Venetians Adarecals. 


X& The nature and vertaes. | 
| Ofthe hamnevr vinades there is not any thing as yet ſet downe, ended eſpecially racks | 
beautic and rarenes of the flower, referring ww may be gutheenl hereof to a further _——_ | 


"Of the Perfian Lilie. Cp 95. Wl k 


W {- Lilian Per ficwn. rb 
The Perſian Lillie, | | * The deſe | 

l . = He Perſian L =. DIES ION | 

T white bulbe, differing in ſhape from the | 

| other, Lillies » hauing one- great bulbe | 

 firmeorſolide, full of tice, which commonlic ech 

| yeereſetterhofforencreaſeth oneother bulbe, and | 

- ſomtime more; which the next yeere after is taken | 

from the mother w_ and fo bringeth foorth ſuch | 

flowers asthe old plant did: from this roote riſeth | 

_ vpafat,thicke "8liraight ſiewn,of mo cubits high, | 

| re 1s placed lon narrow leaues of a green | 

colour , declining to blewnefle as doth thoſe of | 

woade. The flowers growe alongſt the naked ar | 

. oftheſtalke, like lictle een onerpreme you | 
colour, hanging downetheirheads, eueric 0 

uirig his owne foote ſtalke of ewoiinches long, as | 

; alſo his poinrell or clapper from the middle partof | 

' the flower; which being paſt and withered there is | 

: not found any ſeede ara. 225 inother plancs, butis | 

55 crnalodt calvin bile aphid | 

j * The place. e | 

| This Perſian Lillic groweth narurally in Perſia | 

/ .. and thoſe places adiacent, whereof it tooke his | 

name, andis nowe made ; the induſtrie of trauai- | 

.. Jers into thoſe countries, louers of plants, a dent | 

...zon in ſome fewe of our London gardens, | 

This plant flo ED beghaiig os 

lant flow A: » | 

& | n- Thioplenyon | 

| WY 5 nas s: 

'This Perfian Lillie'is called inLatin Lilwn \ Per ficum, Lilium Suſtamuns, Pennaci? Per ran 

waco Per ſian, either by the Turks themſclues , or by ſuch as out of thoſe brought | | 

| t both is yncerraine. Aphonſwsar his being in tinople ſent this plant | 

\ Carola ith this tide, Pennacio, Perſians 2 Pants bellifams & 2 ſpecie di Giglio 6 Mar- 

2 is js ella corona Imperiale : thatis in Engliſh, This moſt clegant PE PRnayy Fen | 

a kinde of Lillie ar Martagon,difftcring from.rh owelcaliedche cooneaimperial {| | 

MED actos hk -*% The nature and ertues. | 

\ Dewnqajihinginme aft ature or vertues of this Perſian Lillie, eſtcemed as yet fot | 

Ichoughif1 might be ſo bold with aſtrang zer thar hath vouch- | 

Fr pion and Wi es i Sd eu nchane ſnot Engel | 

Ly Hi cllng ir... oY 


* 


HISTORIE/ OF PLANTS. 153 
eriall. (hap-96. xr 


13 Civ HI | | duplict corona. 
- Thedoublecrowne 


: = 
_ x \Y — 
\ # 
>. , Fy - 
” RY \%\ 


F - 
. 4 - 
x _— - WH. 
A - 1 # % *% 
% vy Q 
BY =" _—_— 


FOTHHY 


? * The de ſcription. | #7 'D. 

11 He crowne Imperiall hath for his roote a thicke, firme, and ſolide bulbe, coueredwith a 
| _ yellowiſh filme orskin : from the which riſerh vp a great thicke fat ſtalkezrwocubits high, 

| in the bare or naked part ofa darke ouerworne duſtic purple colour. The leaues grow con- 
fuſedly abour the ſtalke,like thoſe of the white Lillie, but narrower, The flowers growat thetop of 
the ſtalke,compaſling it round abour in forme of an Imperiall crowne, (whereof it trooke his name) 
hanging their heads | Ain as it were bels : in colourit is yellowiſh, or to giue you the true co- 
lour , which by words otherwiſe cannot be expreſſed, if you lay ſap berries in ſteepe in faire water 
for the ſpace of two houres, and mixe a little Saffron with that infuſion, and laie it paper, it 
ſhewerh the perfe& colour tolimne,or illumine the lower withall. The backſide of the ſaid flower 
Is {traked with purpliſh lines, which doth greatly ſer forth the beautie therof. In the botrome ofech 
of theſe bels there is placed fixe drops of moſt cleere ſhining ſweete water, in taſte like ſigar, re- 
ſembling in ſhew faire orient pearles; the which drops if you take away, there doe immediately ap- 
pecre thelike, as well in bignes as alſo in ſweetenes z notwithſtanding if they may be ſuffered ro 
ſande ſtill in the lower accordingto his owne nature,they will neuer fall away, no notif you ſtrike 
bl prevtagy it be broken : among theſe drops.there ſtandeth our a certaine peſtell,as alſo ſindrie 


9p atuft og leaues like thoſe 


c followe cods or ſeede veſſels ſixe fquareJrotha 
ſpit, or like the nurof actofle-bowe/wheren is 60 
lour calle&mace, The-whoke 


ation 7% raw many ary woryad.var 


IR ys, 


© GL: ov Lt FR "9 


Ry O0NN 
s F b, 


2% fig eo YES aber Mos Of Ros 8 1 
” Zo a ye, CAA} 
. Hs F 


« 4 - 5 La A TIN 
CG AU EA, FEES BOY il. ie IEA tra 24s one ES ſpout ey one dalam praying ITED ATI UE ORAL Com « d 
Ge rb DOOR ee op re rt: » 5 Id, 2 ITS I ” ATI Rn WO OE TE” 
® £2; us j 04; = "I LG SET L254 F 


—— 
wes” Ws Le ts AC 


3:3 
23 
2\4 
z 
3:3 
$fY 
? 
$73 
34 
bi 
1:9 
4 


154 THE FIRST BOOKE (OF. THE 


of flowers amongſt the pages gee ons 05-7 meer pigs althoughin | 
har mms rim te is thought to.growe to a criple crowne, | 
which hapnerh by the age of the rote, Ararat z whoſe figure or type! thave wn | 
grodea poem) Fergie ab pthchinebe rinſe infancigthade, | 
This plant likewiſe hath been brought from Cfakatinopi! amongſt other bulbus rootes, and | 
made denizons in our London gardens whereof Thaue great plentie. 
| "3h The rome. 
It flowreth in Aprill, and ſomrimes in March when as the wearheris warme and plovding 
| + Thenanes. 
This rare andftrange plantis called in Latin Corons Imperialis , and Lilium Bizantingws : of the 
\Tarkes themſelues Cenale {ale,and Tſai. And as divers have ſent intotheſe parts, of theſe rootes at 
- ſundry times,ſo hauethey likewiſe ſent Ment by ſundry names,ſome bythe name Twfi,'e others Tow | 
ſad Twyſcbiacl;,and viſe Turfaniand Turfands. | 
* The nature and wyertues. | 
Thevertues: of this admirable plantis not yer knowne, neither his faculties or _ya— n 


| working, 


Of Dogs Fopeh. Chap. 97. 
14 Dig  flore a | folgs, 


; CORR PEO OAT Avrpaas nf ERIE EP RANTS 
Ten bedraetlorg focohnn the truc Saryrion of Dioſeorides that ir was cheriſhed 
andche veragerhereaffoundone "_ Rudious ſearchers —— 


_ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © wngs 
hathbeen found betwixt that plant of D;oſcorides and this Dens taninws,except in the colour which 


(as you know)doth commonIyvaric, pong thediucrhtic of places where they grow, as it fal- 
Tech out in Squilla,Onions,&rheorherkinds of bulboſeplancs. It hath moſt common y twoleaues, 
. very ſeldom three,which leafe in ſhape is much like to Alwn vr/inam,or Ramſons, thoughfar leſſer, 
The leaues turne down to the | tas ſtalke is render and flexible,like to Cyclamen or Sowe 
bread, about a handfull high; bate and without Jeaues tothe roote. The proportion of the flower 
i« ke thoſe of Saffron, or the Lilly flower; full of ſtreams of a purpliſh white colour. The roote is 
bigge arid like vnito'4 Date;with ſome fibres growing fromir: vnto the ſaid roote is a final Aatyhalfe 
round bulbe adioining, likevnto Gladzolay or cone: apge. OO” $447 
2 Theſtcondkinde is fatre greater andlarpet thawthefirſtin bulbe,ſtalkkeJeauesoweriiQ 6a, 
It yeelderhrrwoleaucs for the moſt part, which do oſt one within atother, and arthe firſt they do 
hide the flower(for fo long as it brings riot outhis flower)it ſeerries to haut biit 6he leafe like thE' Ta. 
lipaes & like the Lillies, thaugh ſhorcer, & for the moſt parr broader; wherfore I haue placed it and 
| his kinds next veto the Lillies,beforc the kinds of Orchis orſtones, Theſe eats whithhe'beareth , 
are ſported with _ grearſpors of a darke purple colour, narrow below, bittby little and little to- 
wardthe top waxing broade, and afterthat growing to be ſharpe pointed,in forme ſomewhat neere 
Ramſons,but thicker & more olcous. When the leaues be wide opened, the flower ſheweth ic ſelfe 
vpon his long weake naked {talke bowing to the earthward, which flower conliſterth of ſixe verie 
long leaues, of a fine delaied purple colour,which with the heate ofthe ſunneopeneth it ſelfe , and 
bendeth his leaues backe againe after the maner of the Cyclamen flower, within which there arc 
ſixe purple chiues anda white three forked ſtile or peſtell, This flower is of no' pleaſant ſmell, bur 
commendable forthe beaurie : when the flower js vaded, there ſuccedetha three ſquare huske or 
head, wherein are the ſeedes which are very like them of Leucozwn bulboſionprecox , but longer,flen- 
derer, and of a yellowecolour. The roote is long, thicker below than aboye, ſer with many white 
fibres, waxing very tenderin the vpper part, having one or more off-ſers or yoong ſhootes , from 
which the ſtalke ariſeth'our of the d(as it hath been faid ) bringing foorth two leaucs and not 
three,or onely one, ſave when it willnot flower. jh SE 
3 Thethirdkindisinallthings like the former, ſauc in the leaues which are narrower , andin the 
colour of the flower, which igaltogither white, or confiſting of a6lour mixtofpurple and white, 
Wherefore fith there is noother difference it ſhall ſufficetghaue faide this much for the delgtip- 


non, ; 


9 4 $ 
*# 
= 


-*% The place. Y. BE 
Theſe three plants grow plentifully at the foote of certainehilsin thegreene andmoiſtfFrounds 
of Germanic and Italy, in Styria not farre from Gratzium as alſo in Modena and Bononia in Iraly, 
. by gf” ” 4 


and likewiſe in my garden. | Z 
* The time, 
They flower in Aprill,and ſomtimes ſooner, asin the middle of March, 
| *% The names. | | | | 
The firſt is calledin Latine Dexs caninus herbariorwm, and Erithronzjum, that is, the Herbariſts 
Dogs tooth. The men of the countrey where it groweth do call it Schoſtwurts: and the Phiſiri- 
ans about Styria do call it Dentalz, and likewiſe Dens caninu flore albo, anguitioribus foliis,that is, 
$ tooth with the white lower and narrow leaties, | 
,\% Th ittive.. deck 
qocle are of a very hot temperament, windie and of ant excrementitious narure, a5may appecre 
y vertues. $ ge 3.1 241 Ft A, | | 


rofl go 10% The varies. gp | | 
The women that dwellabout theplace where theſe grewe #nd dogroive, have with great pro- A 
fire pur the dried meale. or powderof it in cheig eiklenin porrkget againſt the woormes ofthe 

Y. | | ; - 


ooued maruellouſlyts aſſivage the collickpaſſion, B 
grearmeaſare;and being drunke with water it cureth C 


bi hn re ifitbe Ir 1 ith wi ay D 


| -N. a7? 


Wy" THE FIRST. BOOKE OF: THE 


| Of Dogs ſtones. Chap.98. 


1 7-4 &+ The kindes, [1 

. Tones or Teſticles,as Dioſcorides ſaith, are of two forts, one named | ol L 
the other Orchis Sexapias, or Serapias his ſtones, Bur bjcaule there be many and ſundrie other 
ſorts differing one from another, I ſee not how they may be contained ynder theſe two kings 
onely: therefore I haue Pugs good todeuide them as followeth, The firſt kinde we baue named 
Cynoſorchicor Dogs ſtones : the ſecond, TeXicwus Moriomis, or Fooles ſtones: the third, Tragerchy, 
or ſtones : the fourth, Orchis Serapias, or Serapias ſtones : the fift , TeXiculwe adoratus, or 


fiveere ſmelling ſtones,or after Cordwe,TeHienlre Pumnilie,or Dwartle ſtones, #- 
0 a 2 Cynorchimajeraltera. | 
1+, White Dogs ſtones, 


| nt ; 
o q 


© L 


7 
Me > kt 


: of > ReatDogs ſtones hath foure,and ſamerimes fiue,great broad thicke leaues,fomewharlike 
| thoſe of the garden Lillie, but ſmaller. The ſtalke riſeth vp two hands high : atrhe roppe 
| whercofdoth grow a great thicke tuftof carnation ochiodls-Geſh pars flowers, thicke 
and cloſe rhrult rogither, made of many ſmall lowers ſported with purple ſpots, in ſhape like to an 
open hoodor helmer, And from the hollow place there hangeth fourth a certaine ragged Chioe 
- —_— ge like - a foure oacwgnenl fas _—_— be round like vnto the ſtones of a dog, 0t 
Ti rics, one hanging ſomewyhat ſhoreet than the other whercofthe higheſtorvpermoſt | 
is the ſinaller, burfuller and harder. Thelowermoſt is thegeeateRt, lighteſt, and moſt wrinckled x 


ſhriucled,nor goodfor any thing. F 2ond21 boikifg £2 
2 White Dogs ſtones hathlikewiſe broad leaves, but lefſer and narrower than 


thoſe of thefirſt kind, The ſtalke is a ſpan long , with fue ax fix leaucs claſpingor embracing 


__HISTORIE”OF PLANTS. 257 
| the fame round about, His ſpikie flower is thicke, buſhie, compact of many ſmall purple coloured 
m_ declining to whirenſls, ſpottedon the inſide with many finall purple ſpors and lirrlelines or 


akes. The ſmall flowers are like an open hoodor helmet, hauing hanging our of cuericoneasic 
m_ the bodie ofa little man withoura head,with armes ſtretched our, and thighs {tradling abrod, 
after the ſame maner almoſt , that thelirtle boies/arewoont to be pictured hanging out of Saturzes 
mouth.The rootes be like the former. FY = 


3 Cynoſorchis maculata. 
Spotted Dogs ſtones, 


lets” * The deſcription. x: KP 
3 Spotted Dogs ſtones bringeth foorth narrow leaues, ribbed in ſome ſortlikevnto the leaues of 


narrow Plantaine or ribwgort, daſht with many blacke ſtreakes and ſpots. The ſtalke is halfe a foot 


high :at the top whereof doth grow a tuft or care of crimſon flowers , mixed with a darke purple, 
but in the hollowneſle thereof whitiſh, of the ſame forme or ſhapethatrhe others are of, burleſler, 
hauing alſo hanging out of the gaping flowers alittle rude and deformed ſhape, asir were of ſome 
fower footed beaſt. Therootes - like the former, KS. 5 | 

4 Mariſh Dogs ſtones hath many thicke blunt Jeaues next the roote, thicke ſtreaked with lines or 
nerues like thoſe of Plantaine. The flower is of a purple ox-xiolet colour. The ſtalke and rootes like 


the former, 


Theſe kinds of Dogg ſtones do grow in moiſt and fertillmegdowes. Themariſh Dogs ſtones gro- 
nth forche mod partiumaiſtand ei woodes andalſ inqmgih grounds: SS 3 
EE <4 Therime.  %/ $1 I 
They flower from the beginning af iy to the middeſt of Auguſt. | : 
Sandor: tint 87 th Thenames. S IO 
des of Dogs ſtones ywhi 
gar 


—_— — 
. 


y 
in 
W's 
bo 
4 
*z 
Js 

4 
3 
E 
Kt 
3, 
» 


* 
S 
-- 2 
* 

L, ? J 
3 
4 
q os 2 
*5 
8 
"238 
2M 
3; 
13 [ 
Y 
5 
Wa - 
% 
=P 
Bp 
Re 
#1 
8. 
S! 
If 
ap : 
i 
| 
Þz 
Lf | 
: Er 
Ba 
- 
. | 3 
: os | . 


x56 THE 1&8 7/6 Ow me OF/ THE 


Of Degs flones.. | Chap. 98. = 


| * The kindes | 
S eo Tones« or Teſticles,as Dioſeorides "ej of two ſorts, one named Cynoſorchis 


PO | 
y> Ls Serapias, or Serapias his ſtones, Bur bicauſe there be many = ſun | 
þ> Luis from another, I ſee not how they may be contained vnder theſe two ” 
cn x wha ak haue thought good to deuide them as followeth, The firſt kinde we bauc nameg 
rcbigor Dogs ſtones : the ſecond, Te#iculas Morjomis, or Fooles ſtones : the third, Tragorchi,, 
ſtones: the fourth, Orch# Sexapias, or Serapiag ſtones : the fift , Tellicaley mma, or 

at {melling a after Gordws,T eHicalus Patwilie-gs Dwarffe ſtanes. 


"EI "e 2 E FD I NINUIENE! 
= 8 >. OO ags Panes: | 


" 4 % x 
6 f PE 
, ” — F " = 
- «] | h 
#5 4 - k . 
£4 a4 ” ap s 
” = 
- / _ . 
" — pn Ah i ot 
y j ». = 
, g LE F 
f | + 4 WM E- ha 
4 / " me i. - 4 
I" "mp 
- o yy —_ 1 P . Pg 
f "* © a ET 
. ” = 
_ pt 
= % 
- 
= - = 
: y —_— J 
N\ 
* \ Sa = » Q 
>. (EE > on : \ - x _ 
- 
--\ . . 
l vw d . 
%. 
-— * * 
_ _% . 
- + + « 


: | ' s 4 3% 131 0 
> Rear Dogs ſtones hath foure,and ſometimes fiue,grear broad thicke leaues,ſfomewharlike 


thoſe of the garden Lillie, but ſmaller. The fake riſe wp two hands high : atrhe toppe 
0-5-8 Fw e-fleſh pary=tn, FN flowers, thicke 
(ade ers ſported with pu ſhape lik 
open hoodorhelmer And from the hollow place there hangerh pas _ Chin 
_ —_— oo ww - a foure ervenar bore mop be round like vnto the tones o a dog, of 
anging ſomery tet than the other, whercofthe higheſborvpermoſ 
1s the ſmaller, but fuller and a 
Mriucled,nor ponies for an ping, POO pps ne wen pre mn? 
leſſer and narrower than 


2 WhiteDo thlikewiſe ſin Fi broad leaves, but 
thoſe of Ang Th The ſtalke is a fpanlong, with five or {ixe leaues claſping or m_—_ 


HISTORIE”OF' PLANTS. _ 


ame round about. His ſpikie flower is thicke: buſhie, compa of many {mall purple coloured 
— declining to whitentls, ſpotted on the infide with maty ſinall purple ſpots and licrlelines or 


' The ſmall flowers arc like an open hoodor helmet, hauing hanging our of cueric one asit 
_—_— bodie ofa little man withoutahead,with armes ſtretched our, and thighs ſtradling abrod, 
after the ſame maner almoſt , that the lirtle boies arewoonz tobe pictured hanging out of Saturnes 
* mouth. Therootes belike the former, 1 7 


3 Cynoſorchis maculata. | 4 C 'ynoſorchis paluftris. 
Spotted Dogs ſtones, | Mariſh Dogs ſtones. 


*% The deſcription. 


3 Spotted Dogs ſtones bringeth foorth narrow leaues, ribbed in ſome ſortlikevnto the leaues of 


narrow Plantaine or ribwoort, daſht with many blacke ſtreakes and ſpots. Theſtalke is halfe a foot 
high :atthe top whereof doth grow a tuft or eare of crimſon flowers , mixed with a darke purple, 
but inthe hollowneſle thereof whitiſh, of the ſame forme or oe thatthe others are of, burleſler, 

hauing alſo hanging out of the gaping flowers a little rude and deformed ſhape, asit were of ſome 

fower footed beaſt. The ——_—_ like the former. "ks. = #7 556 | 
4 Matiſh Dogs ſtones hath many thicke blunt leaves next the roote, thicke ſtreaked with lines or 
nerues like thoſe of Plantaine. The flower is of a purple ox-violetcolour. The ſtalke and rootes like 


the former, 


Theſe kinds of Dogs ſtones do grow in moiſt and ſertill meglowes, Themariſh Dogs ſtones gro- 
werh for the moſt partin moiſt wateriſh woodes,and alſo inmariſh grounds. 6-4 


% 


- 


Q / 
deſt of Auguſt. : 
£43 /# 35 ni ——_, 
s. ff o s Or 0s ' 
£ 


— % Thetime. 
* —— ks 


ons. mah ws Ws oh EG : 
al He 3 and Owe 


2 Pry 
ae LEES! 


 TIFY 
i NF 
3k 
153% 
iy 
i 
k.6 
0 
}7 
ig! 
l 
it 
a4 
- M Y 
"S 
=D 1 
> : 
* Wo, 
re 
_S; 
$4 
- 
» FH 
- 
:.42 k 
B2 
# 
x81 
"og a1 
* 
8 | 
Ws 
. 
-% 
a 1 
45 
". un 
»” Ws 
WM | 
KR 
I | 
* 
= B 
_ * 
. 
5 
t 
*% 
. 
7 
ſs 
2-1 
& i 
_ : 
' 
aS : 
D ) 
; 
L 7 
= 
= : 
> C1 
=£ I 
> 
"2 M 
7 
RT : 
. | 
$8 
F* 
If 
i 
; 3} L 
b 
3+ 
H 
#5 
©. 
nl o 
hES 
©# 
Ds j 
43 
21 
3b 
4 
£4 
: 
= | 
s | 
+J 
f 
If 
ft | 
B+ 
WE +: 
24 
Fs !: 
BSc ! 
EX 5) 
BN || 
WT | 
Bs | 
"F 
In 
: 
£7 
! 


158 THE FIRST: BOOKE OF THE 
4&0] LOT 144727770 o$ Thetemperature. | | 
Theſe kinds of Dogs ſtones be of temperature hot and moiſt , but the greater ſeemeth to have | 
much ——_— windines,andtherefore being drunke it ſtirrerh yp flethly luſt, "IL; 
Theſecond which is lefler, is quite contraric innature, tending toa hot and drie temperature; | 
therefore his oote is fo far from moouing venerie, that contrariwiſe it ſtaieth and keepeth ir backe, | 
- as Galenteatheth. He alſo affirmeth thar Serapias ſtones are of a more driefacultic, and do noth | 
much preuaile to ſtir vp the luſt ofthe fleſh, 3 $2 FR | 
| ad «a % Thewvertues. | + 1 
A lrtisreported as Djoſcorides writeth, that if men do eate of the great full or fat rootes of theſe | 
kinds of Dogs ſtoyes, they cauſe them to beger male children: and if women eate of theleſler, dris | 
or barren roote which is withered ot mow a , they ſhall bring foorth females. Theſe are ſome + | 
Doors opinions onely. E- | | | 4] = 
B | Iris further reported that in Theſſalia,the women gue the render full roote to be drunke in gotes - | 
mike,to mooue bodily luſt,and the drie|to reſtraine the ſame, 8-1 
C Ouragevſcthall x 6 kindes of _ to ſtirre vp venerie , and the apothecaries doe mixe any of | 
them indifferently with compoſitions ſeruing for that purpoſe. Burt the beſt and moſt weRuall are | 
the Goates ſtones as moſt haue deemed:yer both the bulbes or ſtones are not tobe takenindifferet. | 
ly,bur the harder and fuller , andthat which conteinerth moſt quantitie of inice: for that whichis 
wrinckled is leſle profitable or not fir atal to be vied in medicine. Andthe fuller roore is not alwaies 
the greater,bur often the leſſer,cſpecially if the rootes be gathered before the plant hath ſhed his 
 flowers,or when the ſtalke firſt commeth vp, for that whichis fuller of iuice is not the greateſt be. 
fore the ſeed be perfeRly ripe,For ſeeing that euery other yogr by courſe one ſtone or bulbe waxeth 
full, the otheremprie & periſheth, it cannot be that the harder and fuller of iuice ſhould be alwaies 
the Ro__— atſuch time as the leaues com forth,the fuller then beginneth to increaſe,& whileſt 
the ſam 


e doth by little &lirtle increaſe, the other doth decreaſe and wither vncill the ſeed be ripe: 
thenthe whole plant togither withthe [eaues and ſtalkes doth foorthwith fall away and periſh, and 


that which in the meane time increaſed,remainerh, ſtill freſh and full vnto the nexc yeere. | 
Of Fooles flones. Chap. 99. : 

5 Cynoſorchis Moriomas, | 1 6 Cynoſorcbis Morio faming, 
> ary Foole ſlooes] | - The femaleFoole ſtones. 


FO 


\i - X < 
MAT < 


| WW j 
| i 1 4 
& Wl d 


| KR 2 — < 
D AN) , 


"WIS 
* Is 


KN, 

\\ 
WA 

(WY 


'HISTORIE' OF PLANTS! ap 


% The deſeription. ©5107 291604) ianuang ol 


He male Foole ſtones hath five, ſometimes ſixe,long broad and ſmooth leaues, not vnlike 

T to thoſe of the Lillic , ſauing that they are daſhr Tod in ſundry places with blacke 

* ſpots andſtreaks. The flowers grow art the top tuft or ſpike faſhion, ſomewhat like the for- 

mer, but thruſt more thicke togither , in ſhape like to a fooles hoodor cocks-combe wide open, or 

gaping before,andas it were creſted aboue with certaine cares ſtanding vp by euery fide, and a fmal 
f 


or ſpur hanging downe, the backſide declining to a violet colour , of + hr ſauour or 
mell. | | | F 
6 Thefemale Fools ſtones hath alſo ſmooth narrow leaues,ribbed with nerues like thoſe of Plan. 
taine, The flowers be likewiſe gaping , and like the former, as itwere open hoods , witha little 
horneor heele hanging behinde euery one of them, and ſmall greene leaues ſortedor mixedamong 
them,reſembling cocks-combes,with little cares, notſtanding ſtraight vp , burlying flat vpon the 
hooded flower , in ſuch ſort, that they cannot at the ſudden viewe be percciued, ©, Fad. are 2 
couple of ſmall ſtones like the former, The flowers of this fort do varie infinitely in colour, accor- 
ding to the ſoile or countrey where they do goon : fome bring foorth their flowers of 4 deepe violer 
colour,ſome as white as ſnow,ſome of a fleſh colour, & ſome garniſhed with ſpots of diuers colours 
which arc not poſſible to be diſtinguiſhed. | F2 | 


* The place. 


Theſe kinds of Fooles ſtones do grow naturally to their beſt liking in paſtures and fields thatſel- 
dome or never are dunged or manured, 1 


*+ The time. PEE: 
They flower in June , Iuly and the baghniagres Auguſt, Their ſtones are to be gathered for 
medicine in September,as arethoſe ofthe Dogs ſtones, | 
; 3] * The names. 
The firſt is called Cynoſorchiomorio: of Fuchſia 


OM ores mas : of Apuleing Satyrion, and alſo Or- 
chis Delphinia :in Engliſh male Foole ſtones,and Cuckow Orchis. MEG 


| * The temperature. : | — 
Foole ſtones both male and female are hotand moiſt of nature. | 


| %* The verthes. | | 
The vertues oftheſeFoole ſtones arethoughtto haue the vertues of Dogs ſtones , whereunto 
they arereferred, _ FA | 


} 
: . 
fl 


| Of Goates flones. Chap.1oo. 


Here be three forts or kinds of Goates ſtones , which differ from the others before mentio- 


ned,aswellin ſhape of flowers, as alſoin theranknes or lothſomnes of imell. The laſt of the - 


 threeis thought ro bethe try —wh a 4 Lam according tothe beſt approoued oPt 
Dions : notwithſtandi g among themſelues there is great contention tor ſenioritie , as alſo for ita 
urcand perſonage; ſome hauing leaues like vnto the Lillie; others reſembling thoſe of the great 
Plantaine; ſome bringing foorth flowers of a perfect purple colour ; others white, and ſomeof mixt 


colours: the which rodiſtinguiſh particularly were too ſmall purpoſe , conſidering the great hat- 


ueſt we haue in hand, 
| | 1.7 ragorchis 


Me SOS CBEST HA AE RULE GATE 


ee IE i += 22% % eve ; ann 
Ay 


VO TION 1 AAS oe 5s 


wat 2 49% , ARR "bz 


TN As TR Ci A x ar oner 


THE FIRST 'BOOKE OF [THE 


: Tragorchiemaximm. | | 2 Tragorchiomas. | 


114 * The deſeription. 


3 tg He greateſt of the Goares ſtones, bringeth foorth narrow leaues, ribbed in ſome ſort lke | 
vnto the broad leafed Plantaine, but larger. The ſtalke groweth to the height ofhalfe ac 
| bir,ſer with ſuch great leaues cuen to the top of the ſtalke by equall diſtances, The tuftar | 
buſh of flowers be ſmall and flat open,with many tender ſtrings or laces commin from the middle | 
part of thoſe ſmall lowers, crookedly tangling one with another , like the rendrels of the | 
vine, orrather the laces orſtrings that growe vpon the herbe Sauorie, The whole flower con- 
fiſterhofa _ colour. Theroots are like the reſt of the Orchides, but greates. | _. * | 
2 The male Goate ſtones hath leaues like to thoſe of the garden Lillie , with a ſtalke a foote long, | 
wrapped about cuenta the tuft of the lowers with thoſe his leaues. The flowers which growe i | 
this buſh or tuftbe very ſmall,in forme like vntoa lizard, bicauſe of the twiſted orwrithen tailes and | 
ſported heads : euery of theſe fmall lowers is at the firſt like a round cloſe huske, of the bignes of a | 
peaſe, which when it openeth there commeth our of italirtle long and tender ſpur or taile, white | 
toward the ſetting ofitto the flower,the reſt ſpotted with red daſhes, hauing vpon ech fide aſall | 
thing adioined vnto it, liketo a little legge or foote; the reſt of the ſaid taile is twiſted crookedly | 
out, and hangeth downwarde. The wholc plant hath a rancke and ſtinking ſmell or ſauor like the | 

: ſmell of a goate, whereof ir tooke his name. HH NN if 
3  Thefemale Goate ſtones hath leaues like the male kind, ſaving that they be much ſmaller, hs | 
vingmday flewers on the tuft, reſembling flies that feede'vpon fleſh, The ſtones or rootes are like | 

ormer. = j- |? | | 


io abt | 3 Tragorchi | 


# 
. 


--; HISTORIE)OF' PLANTS. 61 
* Fs female Goare ſtones, | *% Theplace. 

IVY | Theſe kindsof Goates ſtones delight to grow 
in fatclay fon ACER in any other ſoile 
| tobe found, S | 


%* The time. 


' They flowerin Maie andIune, with the other 
kinds of Occhis. © | 


*%* The names: | 

The Grecians haue named theſe kindes of 
Goxe ſtones ray: in Latine Teficulus Hir- 
cinu, and alſo Orchis Saurodes, or Scincophor : n 

| Engliſhgreat Goateſtones. | | 
e ſecond Tragorchis mas, male Goartes = 
ſtones, | 
 Thethird Tragorchis famins, or Corioſmites, 
_ of ſome Coriophora: in Engliſh female Gotes 

Ones. | | 
*% The nature and vertues.. 


The temperature and vertues of theſe are re- 
ferred to the Foole ſtones, notwithſtanding they 
arc ſcldome or neuer vſedin phiſick, in regarde 
of the ſtinking and lothſome fimcll and fauour 
they are poſleſied with, no: 


Of Foxe ftones. (hap on. 


*% The kindes. 


7 Here be diuers kindes of Foxeſtones, differing very muchin ſhape of their leaues, as alſo in 
' | flowers. Somehaue flowers, wherein is ro be ſeene the ſhape of ſundrie ſorts of liuing crea- 
tures; ſome the ſhape and proportion of flies; in other gnats ; ſome humble bees; others like * 
vnto honie bees 3 ſome like butterflies; and others like waſpes that be dead; ſome yellow of colours 
others white ; ſome purple mixed with red ; others of a browne ouerworne colour. 'ſhe which ſeue- 
rallyto rpms. v1 , as well thoſe heere ſet downe as alſo thoſe that offer themſe]ues daily to our 
view and confideration , would require a particular volume : for there is not any plant which doth 
offer ſuch varierie vnto vs as theſe kindes of ſtones , except the Tulipaes which go beyonde all ac- 
count: for that the moſt ſingular Simpleſt that cuer was in theſe latter ages, Caroiue Cluſius(who for 
his ſingular induſtrie and knowledge heerein , is woorthie triple honor ) hath ſpent arthe leaſt fiue 
and thirtie yeeres, ſowing the ſeedes of Tulipaes from yeere toyecre, and to this day he could never 
attane to the ende orcertaintie of their ſeuerallkindes of colours. The greateſt reaſon that I can 
yeeldis this: for if yourake the ſeedes of a Tulipa that bare white lowers and ſowe them in fore 
panortub with earth, you hall recciue from that ſecede , plants of infigite colours : contr-'' 
wile, ſow the ſeedes of a plant that bearcth flowers of variable colours, and the moſt of thoſe p'-11t 
will be nothing like the plant from. whence the ſeede was taken, fo thatit ſhall be ſufficien: co !<: 
downe what may be comprehended in this chaprer eſpecially... 2. A 


-L I LA x dt SEEM 


wo 


4 Teſticulus V ulpinue maior. 
Great humble Bee Orchis. 


hh 


*”ﬀR. 


THE FIRST! BOOKE OF 'THE 


: 4+HISTOELOR REANHT S: :: 


[7 2qy Qenicrier > int Srl42% R Tet o-gpctieinpaſiuncdrnt. oing1ze wolly; !! 2 


a 


an: | A Fa antiain | babes like the for- 
"The weth to _ of an hand; whe are placed veric 
purer fowers Silke in _ ego and of the ſame colour. The rootei: 4. former. 
The Humble Bee Orchis hath a fewe ſmall weake and ſhorte leaves, which 
2bour the ſtalke. The flowers grow atthe top among the ſmall leaues,reſembling i 
ble Bee. The roote couliſterh of two ſtones or bulbes with ſome fewe threds an 
4 The great Humble Bee Satirion groweth out of the ground, hauing ſt; 
The leaues are like theformer, but ſomewhat greater, declin ning toa brownger Bike colour. The 
gowers be ſmall, of thecolour of a drie oken leafe,, in ſhape embling the gig Bee called in En- 
an Hornet or drone Bec. The roote is like the other. 
The leaues of Waſpe Saririon are longer than thelaſt before mentioned. narrower, turnin 
| Thom againſt theſunne as it were rounde. The ſtalke is round, tender, and veric fragile. Arthe 
top grow the flowers,teſembling the ſhape of the dead carkas of a Bee. The ſtones or bulbes of the 
rootes be ſmaller and rounder chan the laſtrehearſed. 
6 TheFlie Satirionis in his lcaues like the other , norte, be notof ſo darke a ” "lt 


ts icanay 9 a ns 0X (7228-255; tim 
c 


%* rhe 


taded, 7 new wm iy rn te pom ar rp elle clo yniep 
reenbling he yellow Flies.redin the dung of PRO | _ 


ST. } OOrE OF [THE 


*The deſcription. 


a won 5n: hath many largeribbed leaues, {pred vpon the groundlike eo thoſe of Pl | 


wings the which riſe vp tend ſtalkes couered cuen tothe tuftof the flowers with the like | 
leaues,bur! jn ch forr tharthe alkes be ſecne for the leaues. The flowers grow atthe | 
top not ſo thicke ſet or thruſt 


togither as the others , purple of colour like in ſhape vno little | 
birds,with their wingsfpred abroad readie to flic.The rootes be like the former. | 
10 Sported Birdes Satyrion hath leaues like vnto the former , , Rady ag they they be daſhe or ſpot | 
ted heere andthere with darke ſpots gr ſtreakes, hauing a ſtalke c with the like leaues, ſothat | 
he pln OE point,except the blacke ſpo lporswhich this kindis daſhe with, [| 

Butterflic Sa leaues fi ing inmedive) foorth of the ground like vnto the blades | 
oc hed es mong the which riſeth vp a ſlender Be is Go bandhk : 
high: <a low m4 reſembling he poor tad a ſmall bird readicto | 
Gn, 7 white with hir wing $ ſpread abroad. The moore errennGend egerthan oY | 
ofthe former. 


72 Souldiers forth ; many broad arge andribbed leaves {pred vpon the ground - 
like vnto thoſe of taine: among the which riſerh vp afar ſtale full of fap or 1uiCe, | 
clothed or wra orappedinie le eacrrin of flowers , wherupon doe grow little flowers | 


reſemblinga little man,hauing an hel his head,his hands and scur off z whitevpon the | 
inſide pomadnuto belly perrirting | dhe backepartofehe flower oa decpercolour tend | 
OE FE TI 


One: than any ofthe kindsof Satyzions. | 
Y 9 


” Lo 
» / . & , 


ISTORIE (OF PLANTS.'T 169g 
; 4 4 10 Orchis Ornithophors folio maculsſo. 
| "*"SpotreBirdes Orchis, ©* 

WOE 
E414 y 

WY SAP 

Wales 
1" (82 


oli{-+ + 


« 
3009.71 4 


ws | THE ond BOOKE OF THE 
' 2 ep 13 wy oogged | 
A 
Fi 
4 IF 'S 
| 7 hedefription Wares ypt 


13 Souldiers Cullonthachmany lea s ſpred ypon the ground , but leſſer than the ſoulliers $ | 
ryrion , as is the whole plant. The back ſide of the flowers are ſomewhat mixed with whirenefle, 
and ſometimes are — the inſide of the fioweris ſpotted with white likewiſe, 


'14 Maimed own __ leaues like vntothoſe of the Lillie, ſcatreringly ſet vpona | 
weake and ors 6 rin grow ſinall flowers, PTY as wellin ante as colour, 
the bodie ofa ay did, ; FS dotes like the former. 


wp + * The place. | 
Orchi is growe for themoſt part in moiſt medowes and nlputurs, acai | 


| IE Satyrions, do growe vpon barren thalkie hils and heathie 
| ng to a village in Kent named Greenc-hithe, long field downes | 
les from the Jne'5, x6 inmany other places of Kent: likewiſe in a field | 

on of trees half a mile from Saint Albons at the South ende thereof; They | 


Hathel: by therelation ofa ancAoer there dwelling | 
maſter EE ancxcellent and di ;gent Herbariſt, 


That kindewhichreſembleh the white Butter-flie, groweth vpon the of thehillar the | 
a ſmallcortage there in tema) de, as yegofrom | 
| ch in the fields adioining to the ad or pinfolde, | 
ke  attheVill ed gate neere London : andlikewiſe in oo | 
to a wotfh Dll man of Kent na d maſter S:dley of South-fleere » where doe grow | 
many other rare and daintic Simples,t are not to be elſe whereina great Circuit, 


_———_ othe endof Auguſt, | | 
Ch —_—_ 


1H HIST ORIE)OP!/PLANTS:” __ t67 


Muſt | *% The names... of 2:1; 

Tholekinds * edichantacadets much wicreoofbythe ancienss, beitierby che javeoricees 
to any purpoſe, ſo thatir may contentyou for this time to receive thenamesſerdowneintheir ſeue+ 
rall titles, reſeruing what elſe might be ſaid as touching the Grecke, French, or Dutch names, or 
any arg $58 YC rn a further conſideration or ſecond Edition. - ad\V3 1 oy 0 
Tot ww Thenature andvertnes. 1 
Thenature being vertues of theſe kindes of Orchis are referred vntothe has, R namely tothoſe 
of the Foxe ſtones: notwithſtanding there is no great vie of theſe in Philicke , bur regarded forthe 

pleaſant and beautifull owers,wherewith nature hath ſeemed toplaic and diſport hirſelfe. ' 


Of Sweete Collins. (op 102. 


_ ** The kindes. we. : 


T Here be ſundrie ſorts of Freete ſmelling Teſticles or ſtones SW the firſt is moſt ſweere and 

pleaſant in ſmell; the others of lefſe ſmell orſauour , differing in flowers &rootes, Some haue 
abice flowers; others yellow; ſome fleſh coloured; ſome daſhe vpon white with a little reddiſh 
waſh,ſome haue two tones,lore three,and others fower vherin cheir diftcrencedoth confiſt. | 


1 Tefticulus "an 2 Triorchjs. 
Ladie Traces. | Triple Ladie Traces. 


 X 
» 


VL 
——— 


42 
YA 
v*,< * 


I| 
R \ 
-v 
N 

% 

I 


SS 4 
» 7 
" 


Bet Smet omega inrſpetofalleber, The 
leaues be ſn ow and ſhort, growing 0: : among the which riſerh 

; ofa inget hag nteyondergr ſmall white flo- 

ale; £2 US AS mal tones in hape let 


<—poerWer 


5 FOE OR $$ oo * ns. #. i ING ” 
A Ll ie ER dens a GY PEO Et Ie HS BTR 


» | 'Tnz rams Tt! 
along the leaues ike thoſe ofPlantaine: ar 
dna ahphnks cafes Ke fl 


oorm OF' THE 
ich'come footth naked ſtalkes, ſinall and ten. | 
en ce fllion porſo inhtenx the eweri | 


aſc —o—_ 


- Friezland Lake rhcethibh two ſmall ditones or tbibe4fthe 
cal Rouncifal; from bach riſevp = area 11 thoſe 


Fo of he 
ſtake, "a 


pron "Pun hich com- 
, furrowed or made hollow inthe mids like yntoa trough, 
HE , ſerwith heb flowers as the laſt deſexibed, faung 


; yr nexor Cullions do gro 
hils,the which Thave os! boning 
London,wherte there is a bouling place vnder a 
| heath at Barne-elmes, neere hh ads OT 

rothe ate fit Frances Valſinghon. They x pron 


as yee'go from Branford to hir Maieſties honſe of Richmojd ; as alſ 
villag mageren ng j, by ch wlaroou Tearne, 


er 


"The cllow kinds 
akewiſeh  ento Muche: > 1nmowerr ; re 
gentlnanmaſicr lhe: Tag RE tht 


w_— 4 


} 


E11STORIE) OF PLAN 8: _? 
ue Thetime, 

Theſe kinds of Stones do flower fromAugnſtcorhr end of September, 

*% The tames... 

The firſt is calledin Larine TeHtiewlus Qdoratme in Englil  freemincting. 5 7 HAS Shoes, 
not of the ſwerenes of the rootes,bur of the flowers, Iris oy edallo/Orchis ſpirals, or _dutwrnalis, 
for that it commeth to flowring in Autumne : of oux, {h women they be called Ladic traces: in 
euery countrey by a ſeuerall name, as of ſome {weere: <4 ſiveere Cods, ſweete Cullions and 
Standergraſſe. In Durch Knabenkraut,and Standeicraut ; in French:Satjrien, - 

The nd fortis called Tr;orchis, and allo Tetrorehis: inEoglih triple Hodis laces or white 
Orchis. -; 

The third is called Orchis Frizia: in Engliſh Friezland Occhis..; -. 

The laſt oftheſe kinde of Stones or Teſticles,is called of ſome Orchis Leodiemſe, nnd Orchis Lu- 
» in Latine likewiſe Baſilic minor Syraphe; and Tyrorchis AE "gt in Engliſh pos Ladie 

' 1" The temperature. 

"Theſe kinds of fweere Cullions are of natnte and temperature like the Dogs ſtones ; alrhough 
not vſed in Phiſicke in times paſt, notwithſtanding later writers haue attributed ſome vertues wnto 
themas followeth. * The vertues. | © 

The full and ſappy rootes of Ladie traces caten or boiled in milke and drunke , prouoke venery, A 
nouriſh and ſtrengthen the bodie , and be good for ſuch as arc fallen ; into a conſumption or feuer 
Hediique, 


Of Satyrion rojall ? Chepaoy 


7 The kinds. $2] 16h 
Here be Gndric hevsof Stones compechendedofthcamelentyleethage nerallinle Sari 
rion roiall,notwithſtanding for diſtin&ions ſake, and forrhecaſier detdon of the Rea- 
der, I haue ſet downe res. 1 a4: thenciLhenyin gendthinche the lincder 
of Serapias Stones. > +» -; 


1 Palma Chrifti mas. 4 po vol otaring Pain Chr femine. 
The male Saryrionroya tary  Thefemale Satyrion ro 


r ] 
JN , 
VIWOEY l 


wer ai daſhtor omes with black ſpots: from 
the which ſpringe whereof doth grow a tuft of —_— Womens, in fa. 
ſhion like vntoa friers van pr ava g or hs ng according to the He foile and wa eG red, 
ſomnimes white,and gnne9'y t catnation,or fleſh colour. 


\*% The place. | 
The roial Caninl do grow FE the moſtparr pat and fennie grounds ,medowes and woods 

that are very moiſtand ſhadowie. I hue found them in many places, eſpecially in the middeſt of | 

awoodin Kent called Swaincſcombe wood necre to Graucſend oby the village ts ps | 
likewiſe in —_—_— wood fower fr London... | 


%'The time. 
They flower in Mate and Tune bur t une hg | x 


*|The names. | 
Roiall Satyrion or | Fl Orchis,is called of che Latines Pahwa Chrif#;; accord aliing there is 
another herbe orplant called by the fame name,which otherwiſe is called Ricinus. This plant is cal | 
led likewiſe of ſome Satirie Baſlzea,or Satir yoo would haue it to be Buzeidem,or Buziden 
Arabs, bit CAiicer faith Bazeiden be hard w K. rs rootes,like thoſe of Behen albwns: but contrath | 
wiſe the rootes'of Palma Chri#tt arcnothing lefſe than wooddie , ſothar it cannot be the ſme, | 
Adathiolu would haue Satirion'toiall ro be Dz viCuriniCAieenns, fault with the monkes | 

which ſer foorth commentaries vpon/Meſues compoſitions , auing itrothe cenſw 

_ Ting ofthe diſcreetReader. Yet do we þerter allow of the monkes NG of Mathiol aſlert- 

on, for Apicens wore Whatis Mabaſafra, or Digiti Citrini, anſwering the doubt him- | 

ſelte ſaith z it is in figute or ſhape like the hand of a man, ofa mixt colour berween yellow and white, | 
and of a hardand wooddie | ſtance Which words vndoubredly of CAuicenne and Khaſisin the = 


gares ofmen of iud that Satirion roiall or Pabms Chritth, are not thoſe Digiti 
Citrins of Mathiolu.. ; | ] 
*T "HT rature, 


| #5 TJ to th font cenetiiies bed enki Das foe | 
in ſauour andraſte 7460 wank robeofliefaulies 


Nicolaus ab , faith, thatthe rootes of Paims 


Chriſtiare 


[6 Dias | Ones. Chap.104, 

{ ias ft tha.” > 

\ \F EY -*% The kindes. h (- | 

Here befimdrigorcsof Ser ſtones, UL?! I nas Dt ers ferale lh ogue rms 

and ome of ler fx vary ing oe Rlemas Ne enTpinoſe 

O po and a j, alteringaccc ling to the ſoileor climate, partofbub | 
boſe rootes dot OUE. ie and fennie ed ee fer paſtures | 
ing open tothe vary: peo their raining the forme offlics,but | 


©$, "$ ; 
_ AE 4 - "% 1 1 
= hp E' = | 4 Serapid 
— F 7 —_— wi . . 
a no - ww o | > 


Fl e 
, wart! 
il Ju 


172 


L Hewhite havded Orchis or Sa 


| blacke ſpots,from the which 

_ ©* having at the top a buſhor 
Chri#;,wherof this is a kinde, The roo 
ers of a man,with ſome tough and 

2+ Red handed Satyrion is a ſmal low: 
three ſmall leaues like rothoſe of the Le 
ofagliſtering redcolour,with a roote | 


THE FIRST 


BOOKE) OF! 'THE 
*% T x rs ons 2 ax Al | 
tyrion, hath lc wu large leaues , ſpotted and daſht with | 
doth riſe vp a {mal fragile or brittle ſtalke of two hands high, | 
ſpokie ruft of white flowers, like in ſhape to thoſe of p,bn, 
ee is thick, far, and full of juice, faſhioned like the hand ang 
far ſtrings faſtened tothe vpperpartthereof. ' | 0 
and baſe herbe,hauing a ſmall ſlender ſtalke,ſet with two or 
eke, but ſhorter, The flower growerh at the top tuft faſhion, 
aſhioned like an hand, bur lefler than the former. 


» 
. 
. 


Serapias ſtones,ormarriſh Saryrian,hath/a thicke knobbie roote,deuided into fingers like thoſe | 
of Palma Chrifti, wheteofit is a kinde 4 from which riſe thicke, fat, and ſpungious ſtalkes, ſer with 
brode leaues like thoſe of Plantaine,cuen to e top of the tuft of flowers; burthe higher they rif: 


toward the top the ſmaller they are. The flower confiſteth of many ſmall hooded flowers ſomwhat | 
whitiſh, —_— within with deepe purple 
mixed with purple, th ÞA 
4 Fennic Satyrion or Serapias ſton ——_ 
ſmaller and ſomewhar ſporred, and the tuft 0 

mixed with them,withour difference at all in 


$3 the backſide of theſe little flowers are violer, 


little from the former , ſauing that the leaues are | 
flowers haue not ſo many greene leaues nor ſolong, 
the rootes. ' 


5. Serapias montana. 
Mountaine Satyrion. 


* 


FA 
— 7 
Af 


AR 


NR) 
N 
Q 

DD 


— EE 
WWYM.[= 
} K 


5 Mountaine orchis or Satyrion h: 
ſtalkesJeauces,and flowers,but ſc hatleſſer. 
6 CloueSaryrion otſweerte ſmelling Orchis , 


* The deſcription 
ith chicke, far, and knobbierootes , diuided 


like the formerin | 


hath flat and thicke rootes diuided into fingers like | 
thoſe of Palma Chri#4, fauing thatrhe fingers are longer, ſmaller , and more in number : from the 
which riſe vp long and narrow leaues likethoſe of Narcifaus or Daffodill: among which commeth | 
foorth aſmall tender ſtalke atthe top whereof, doth growe a purple tuft , compattof many at 
2 | ow I 


uS am TY >” 


1HISTORIEO@R: PLANTS311T _ 


flowers range ry ys omar bur farre ſiveeter 
and ogg, OTE "ROMA? ——— and ſinelc 


them in my garden. 


% The defer iption. 
7 Gelded Satyrion hath ſeaues with nerues and {inewes like to thoſe of Daffodill, ſer vpon a weake 
and tender ſtalke, with flowers at the to reſembling 7 the crowne or diademe of akin whitapf co- 
lour,ſpotred within the flower in hapelite ike Gnats + lictle Flies, The ſtalke is gelded as it were, or 
A PT handes cutoff, leauing for the roote two long legs or fingers, s with ow g fa- 
ro the top. 


8 ÞF popmokobinalthclonls vpon aflender weake ſtern: en:arthtopwherofd wherofdorh herow 


atuftof flowers aQ ofſugdrie flowers, which in ſhape 


ittooke his riame. oe emi gee, cn rent onal mtg ns wi 
cerrainefibres annexed thereto. | 
*% Thetime. | 
Theſe flouriſhin May and Iune,but ſeldome after Auguſt,except ſome de inde gehat 
hath had ſome impediment inthe time when it dgvgA banc flowred,as often 
*% The names.” 


| Wehauecalledtheſe kindes, ias ſtones, or Orchis Scrapiades, eſpecially porchatiſindrie 
of themdoe bring foorth flowers, reſembling PRs od ſuch like, takingthenameas it werefrom 
Serepias the dof che Citizens of "Alexandilaik ce who had Ln famous Temple at Ca- 
napus where I was worſhiped by all kinde of laſ wantonnes, ſongs ,dauncin en we may 
read in Szraboin his 17,booke. leis Db cates veaticos, Panion, nod ofite Lacines 7 
0ggror Satyrixom: of ſome Orchis: bes 1 onde Orchard Hae re 5 


and vertues. 
' Serapiasſtones are th GRE IHE, and vertues like vnto the Sary onrok 
alalhoughnotſomuch 


doubtefle they worke the elſe ofthe other to 


gt SET 
dinPhiſicke,yet, 


174 THE FIRST! vooKE OF THE 


raroomileru on na 40h Lg cthl ft WO 


| NE POO | 
'B FOE TT MW RY SM lhe fingers andch Mo viwo dh | 
is 


rootes of Palme Chri#t; wherec akinde: from the which riſerh vp a ſtalke of a foote | 

high ſer hecre and there with weyias Lillie like leaues,which do clip or imbrace the ſtalks | 

RE ne heletnrof : atthetop of the ſtalke growetha faire buſhof | 
white flowers ſj ordaſhc ouer with purp : among the which flowers many ſmall green | 
_— ol leaves, The ſecdel could nr r obſerue,, being a thing duſt that fliethin the | 


2 Smopioa handed Sarmricn difer h lizele from the precedent, burin z &colour of the | 
flowers: forthis plant bringeth foorth faire white flowers ga gaping vere mgm the hollowneſle | 
—_ appeere certaine things obſcurely hidden reſembling ce Helmers, which ſerterh foorth | 
3 Handed Satyrionhath ver 2 I FUJELS, with ſome ſtrings faſtened tothe | 
of, ooh. an hand, w it _ bs name; from which rſh wp indy (1 tr rs | 
armed leaves, verie Otanh | I with blackiſh Ee eh Gui | 
Tae ood Show the of & REOLTI Gecy Ns | 
greene ucs me. i | 

elſe but as it were duſt like tt orherc fhi 
4 The Eunuch Orchis eckanded | 


themſclues,or creeping farre abroad ip ped eter EO 


HISTORIE' 'OF7 PLANTS. was 
ro0tes are of the bigneſſe of ſtrawes in ſubſtance, like thoſe of Sopewoortz from the which imme- 
diately riſe fower or five broade fiooth leaues like vnto the {mall Plantaine , from the which 
ſhooterh vp a ſmall and tender ſtalke ; atthe top whereof growerth a pleaſant ſpikie care of a purple 
or incarnate colour, ſpotted on the inſide with little ſpecke of bloody colour. The ſcede is very 


ſmall, yet better to be obſerued than any of the reſt ofthe Orchides, 


3 PalmaChriftipaluitris. | 4 Palma Chrifti,radice repente. 


Handed marith Satyrion. * Handed Satyrion wi ſtones, 


' Theygrowin mariſh and fenny 
Thelaſt was found (by a learnedp | 
doggie groue where a Conduite head doth ſtan 
| towne. 1 
* Thetime 
They flower and flouriſh about May and Iune, #7 
There is little vſe of theſe in Phiſicke, onely the hap 


z 
* 


they are kinds: notwithſtanding Daleſcampixhath written in his great volume, tharthe'marſh Or- 
chis is of greater force than any of the Dogs ſtones in procuring of luſt. by 
_ Camerarizs of Noremberge,who was the firſt that deſcribed this kinde of creeping Orchis, hath 
ſet it foorthwith a bare deſcription onely ,and I am likewiſe conſtrained to do the like, bicauſeas yer 


EA PE FR 


Thauc had no tall thereof. 


Y DR Rs: * 
DT” OO CO IT DT OE SETTER on 269% coders TRI A A S> v nn er  , 


yare referred vnto the handed Satyrions, wherof 


S$\T. BOOKE 'OF THE &c, 
irdesneft. Chap.1o6. 


| % Thedefers | 
Irdesneſt hath many tan a! rootes plan | 
orcroſled one oner anorher veric intricately, | 
which reſembleth a Crowes 'neſt made o& | 
ſtickes: from which riſeth vp a thicke ſoft groſle | 
ſtalk of a browne colour, ſetwith ſmall ſhort leaues | 
| ofthecolourofa drie oken leafe thar hath lien w. ' 
| dertherreceall thewinterlong : on the top of the | 
| ſtalke * 90309 a ſpikie care or tuft of flowers, in | 
ſhape like vnto maimed Saryrion , whereofdoubr. | 
leſſe it is akinde. The whole plant, as well ſtalkes, | 
leaues , and flowers, are of as; browne co- | 


lour. 
*% Theplace. | | 
- This Baſtard or vnkindely Satyrion is very w. 
dome ſecne in theſe Southerly parrs | of England, | 
Iris reportedthat it groweth in the North —_—_ 
England neer vntoa village called Knaesborough, ! 
I found it growing in the middle of a wood in Kent | 
two Lites from Graues end,neer vnto a worſhipfull | 
| grnerors houſe called maſter YY ;/hom Swan | 
| Howckegreene. The wood belongeth to one me | 
| fer [vhs Sidley: which plant I did neuer fee elſe | 
where. And bicauſe it i dr re Iam the more | 
willing to giue you all the markes in the woodfor | 
your boner ach gir, bicaule it ” owe butin | 
one peece ofthe wood tha is to ſay, e grounds | 
couered all ouer in the ſame place neere abourit | 


with the herbe Sanyeleyand alſo the kinde ofOrchis called Hermaphreditica,oc Butrer-flic Satyrion. | 


*+ The time. 

It flowreth and floutiſherh in and . The duſtic or mealy ſecede (if it may be called | 
a: 4119s ell myi gementit is an vnprofir bed e ea} 
any ſcedarall, | | 


The names. 
| Iris called Satyrium abortimum afie Cidas avid in French Nijd &f auſes : mn Eng Bid 
neſt and Gooſe neſt. 


*% Thet ature and vertues. 
na y autoritie cither of che auncient or later writer 
bur is eſteemed as a degencrate of Orchid tenor, | 


The endaf ube uftBavke 


C) Oi] bt C257 | x | 17 
THE SECOND. BOOKE OF 


THE HISTORIE OF 
PL A Ter. 


_ Containing the deſcription, | ace, time, names, nature, and 
vertues of all forts of herbs for meate, medicine, 
or ſweete ſmelling vſe, &xc. 


| Hetreatic of Grafſes, Ruſhes,Corne and bulbusrootes,, we haue in our 
fiſt Booke ſufficiently deſcribed, 8 ſuch alſo. as whoſe braue and gallanr 
flowers do decke and beautific Gardens , andfcede rather the cies than 
the bellie. Beſides theſe,there remaine cerraine other bulbes,bur yet not 
all ſeruing for foode ; of which notwithſtanding we will alſo diſcourſe 
dI9 |o{| in this booke,deuiding them in ſuch ſort, that thoſe that maybe judged 

AC | to be of one kinde, ſhall be ſeparated one from another. It may theretore 

1} ſuffice that we haue ſevered the bulbed flowers from theie thar ſerue for 


== AN meate and nouriſhment, which otherwiſe might haue beene alſo com- 


prehended in one booke togither,as by ſome they haue beene. 


Of T urneps . The firſt Chapter. | 


'] Hacks fndteibersof Tanepe; ſome wilde; ſome of the 13 ſome with round rootes 
globe faſhion zother ouall or peare faſhion ſome grear and tome of a ſmaller ſorte, 


2 R4/Wwnminue. 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


k # Lf 
+ The deſpinn,) ; 
=" He Ihrtep hath long, rough &greene leaues , cut or ſnipt about the edges with | 
>. decpe gaihes. The ſtalke duuideth it ſelfe into ſundrie branches or armes, bearing 
Y | atthe top ſmallflowers ofa yellow wy vas tr ſometimes of a light purple ;whick | 
| being paſt , there. do ſucceed long cods full of ſmall blackiſh ſeede lke rape ſeede. 
Theroote is round like a bowle;2nd{ometimes alirtle ſtreechedour inlength, pro. | 


g to roundneſſe, and of colour ted or red 


diſh which hath | of T urnep. 

Ke BW | *% Theplace. Lane I EE 

The Turnep proſpereth well ina light, looſe , and farcarch , andſo looſe as Perras Creſcentin | 

' ſheweth,thatir may be turned almoſtinto duſt. It groweth in fields and divers vineyard ook | 

* gardens in moſtplaces of England. {1 | | © 94.99, 1 (SY ENT + 

The ſmall Turnep groweth by a village neere London (called Hackeney) ina ſandieground,and 

brought to the Croſle in Cheap-{ide by the women of thar village to be ſolde',and = 
that cuerI raſted. | | © 9h 135% | 
* The time. 


Turneps are ſowen in the ſpring,as alſo in the end of Auguſt.' They flower and ſeede the ſecond 
yeere after they are ſowen; forthole which lower the ſame yeere that they arc ſowen are a degene. | 
rate kinde, called in Cheſhire abourt|the Namptwitch Mad neeps , of their evill qualitic in Call- | 
{ing frenſieand giddineſle of the braine fora ſeaſon, ' ne” Vis eTabol 
| FE: &+ The names. _ PE eſe et Bo; 

The Turnepis called in Latine Rapier : in Greeke ya», which is commonly vſed in ſhops,and: 
; euery where Rapa. The Lacedemonians call it a4: the Boetians Zwwit as CNhenew {mM 
high Dutch it is named Ruben: in low Dutch Rapen t.in French Naueay rond : in Spaniſh Nak: 
in Engliſh Turnep and Rape. &4\ | LOW 


Y | 
e temperature and vertnes, 


| | | Ld : T4 | : 
A Thebulbus orknabbedroote , which is properly called Zapzmor Turnep , and hath giuenthe 
name tothe plant,is many times cater raw eecially of the youre people in Wales, burmoſtcom 
monly boiled. The raw roote is windie and engendreth grofle and cold blood:the boiled doth coole = 
leſſe,and fo little as thatitcannotbe perceiued to coole arall,yetitis moiſt and windie. | | 
B H1ravaileth notalittle after what maner itis to be prepared; for being boiled inwater or incer- 
rainebroth,itis more moiſt and ſooner Furry 21 maketh the bodice more ſoluble zbut being 
roſtedor baked it drieth and ingendteth lefſewinde, and yet it isnot altogither withour winde, But 
howſoeuer they be drefled they more plentie of nouriſhment than thoſe that are eatcn rave: 
they doincreaſe milke in women breſts,and naturall ſeed, and provoke vrine. f 
C ThedecoQtion of Turnepsis good againſt the cough and hoarſneſle of the voice, being drunke 
in the cucningwitha little ſugar or a,quantitic of clarified hony. Rh ewieel 
D DpDiiſcorides writeth that the Turnep it ſelfe being ſtamped is with good ſucceſſeapplied vpot 
mouldie or kibed heeles , and thatalſo oile of roſes boiledin an we Turnep vnder the hot 
embers doth cure the ſame, ft | = 
E The yoong and render ſhootes pr ſprings of Turneps at their firſt comming foorth of the 
, ground,boiled and eaten as a fallade, proucke vrine. | AA 
F Theſeed is mixed with 409 nd rreacles: andbcing drunke ir is a remedic againſt 
oiſon., | | RI | Ig 7 
G : They of the lowe countries doe giue the oile which is preſſed out of the ſeede, againſt the a 
ter throwes of women newly m_ ttobed, andalſodo miniſter it to yoong children againſttic 


wormes,which it both killeth and driveth foorth, © Bn, 
H Theoile waſhed with water doth ic the feruent heat, and ruggidnes of the skin. | 


? 


of 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. :' 179 


Of wilde Turneps. (hap.2. 


NIP" | * The hindes. © 

Here bethree ſorts of wilde Turneps ; one our common Rape, which beareth the ſeed where- 
of is made rape oile,and feedeth ſinging bixdes : the other the common enimy to corne,which 
wecall Nyicrwroe'r nada pared pan flower, the otherwith a 


white ower : there is alſo another ofthe water and mariſh 
| S ? 
2 FFT 1008 47 HOY 108, 
Charlodt or Chadlock. 


I Ilde Turneps or Rapes,haue long,broad, and rough leaues like thoſe of T, s, but 
V V not ſo deepely gaſhed in the edges. "F ſtalkes are ſlender and brictle, ſomewhat hai- 
ric, of two ctibie high , diuiding Sarthe top into many armes or branches, 

whereon dogrow little yellowiſh flowers : which ep , there doe ſucceede ſmall long cods 
which containe the ſecd like that of the Turne) naller,ſomewhatreddiſh,and of a firic hot and 


2 Charlocke or the wildeRape, hath leaues like vnto the former,burleſſer,andnor ſorough, The 
ſtalkes be of a cubite high, ſlender, and branched, the flowers are ſometimes purpliſh , ſometimes 


derwith certaine threeds or ſtrings hanging on them, | ” os 
3 Water Chadlockgroweth vp to the height of three foote.or fomewhatmore , with brayriches 
flender and ſmoorh'in reſpe& of any of thereſt of his kinde , ſer with rough ribbedleaues #deepely 


| indented about the lower part of the leafe. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, vmbleor 
uerfaſhion ſornetimes of one colour,and ſometimes of another. The roote is long, tough, and full 
| ol itrings, 2-5 on | | A | 
; : | M 2 3 Kapiſtrum 


biring taſte as is the muſtard, bur bitterer, The roote is ſmall, and periſheth when the ſecede is | 


white, and often yellow, varying in colour according to the ſoile and climate. The rootes are flen- 


Mm aged 


LG {oC 


0. ABC 5 
Ma Wa 


. 


180 THE SECC 
3 Rapiſtrum aquticin. 


ND BOOKE OF THE 


 Warer Chadlock. [2B3 * The place. .: 4 

WIG DES Wilde Turneps or Rapes,do grow of themſelue 

£7 in fallow fields , and likewiſe yhigh WaiCS neere 
"4 wnto olde walles, dirche es, and neere 


vnto townes and villages , and in other vnroileq 
and rough places. L 6s | 

The Chadlocke groweth for the moſt part 
among corne in barraine grounds, and oftenby | 
the borders of fields and ſuch like places, 

Water Chadlock groweth in moiſt medywes 
and mariſh grounds, as alſo in water ditches, and 
ſuch like places, Fay | 


*% The time. 


Theſe do flower from March till ommerbe fa | 
ſpent,andin the meane ſeaſon the ſeede is ripe, | 


+ The names. 


Wilde Turnep is called in Latine Rapifirum, 
Kapwn ſylueſtre, & of ſome Sinapi ſzlueFre,orwid = 
muſtard: in high Dutch + in low Dutch | 

- Oerick ; in French Yeler : in En | 


| ; ; *% Thetemperature, Es | 
The ſeede of theſe wilde kindes of Turneps as alſothe water Chadlock, are hot and dric asmu. | 
ſtard ſeed iis. Sore haue thoughtthat Carlock hath a drying andclenſing qualititic,and ſomewhat | 
digeſting, | | 1 | 
2 he? * The vertues. | | 

A Diuecrsvſethe ſecede of Rapein ſtcedof muſtard ſeede, who cither make heereof a ſauce | 
the name of muſtard, orelfe mixc itwith muſtard ſeede: but this kinde of ſauce is not ſo pleaſant = 

| | 


p *heraſte, bicauſc iris birter. [Ws | 
Galewwriteth that theſe being eaten engender euill blood: yet Dioſeorides ſaith , they warme the = 


fromack and nouriſh ſomewhat. = 
F 


Of Ne 5 


never. Chap.3; 


be | The kindes, we 
Here be ſundrie kinds of Nape or Natiewes degenerating from the kinds of Turnep zof which | 
T few nib Nope Neve eg oF | 


q 


| np * The deſcription. 4 

by Auew . any is like vato Turfieps in leaues, ſtalkes , flowers , and ſecede, differing in the | 
|, penned Turnep is round ea globe, the Nauew roote is ſomewhat ſtretched foorth in | 

| | | | 


12 Theft or wilde Nauewe is like yato the former,fauing thar it is altogither lefler. The roots | 
is ſmall,omewhar long, with threads long and tough at the end thereof. | 


1 Bund | 


HISTORIE) OF'PIANTS, 1117 181 


«+ 4 
= 


HAAR 


| —_—_ " 


—=N_— — 


= 5 4 
gt *-) 


0 
wy { 
4 


) 


uhh, 


i”) oh : L 2 %e | wy | * The place. | 
ate penile requireth a looſe & yellow mould cuen as doth the Turnep A proſpererh in afruit- 


£ 
. , 


N 
full ſoile ; he is owenin Fraunce, Bavaria,& other places in the fields fort ake,as is likewiſe 
that wild Colewoort called of the old writers Crambe: forthe plencifull nereale.of the ſeeds bring- 
eth no ſmall gaine tothe husbandmen of that countrey , bicauſe that being preſſi pan! jets 
oile which is vſednot onely in lampes,burally inthe making of ſope; for of this oile and a lie made 


of cerraine aſhes , isboiled a ſope which 1s Sdn the Low | where to feowre and 
; w linen clothes. Thave harditreported that it is at this day 5 wen in Fond for the ſame pur- | 
The wilde Nauewgroweth og on ditch bankes neere vnro villages and good townes 5 as alfo vp 
on freſh, marſhic bankes in mo places. . Dirtet 2733 iily arm ne 7 1.5 11G v3 51ls WRb99JEHION: 
| 4 * The time, | CIVGIIZE 30 
The Nauew is ſowen,floureth and ſeederh 2786 ſame time that the Turnep doth. 
| on 1s Themes." \( | | ns, 

The Nauew is called in Latine Nap, and Mo Banits : Þ Greeke Beriag: the Germaines callir 
Steckruben : che Brabanders Steckrapen: in Spaniſh Nos: in Italian Nawo: the Frenchmen 
Xaneau: in Engliſh Naucw gentle,or French Naucan.”: SOLD 

14» % Theremperatwregndyertues. 

The Nauew aridthe Turnep are. all one in' ti AEM ind y 
Naucwis a lirtle drier arid not fofbone concodted, not j 

ingender lefſe winde. In the reſt iis anſiverable to the 


Fo 


. 
wy oor rorornee ere 


EET _y TP ACHES Meg ee ono We: ai E ESTES 
p CY 
__—" 44. - + 46 LY Soar os Ld wor WI w 
. w " m ny WET! 4 F 1 kt ' SEL 
WR ETON TE OTIS TT I Oo INILSE 1 . WR : 


| 
$2 THE SECOND: BOOKE OF THE 


of Lyons Trrnep, Lyon leafe. (Chap-4 : 


* The deſcription. 
Yons Turnep or Lions leafc, hath broad 
leaues like vnto the Colewoorts, cur and 
deuided into fundric 2s : the 
ſtalke inore frove kmgahikegs of juice, 
diuiding it ſelfe intodwwers branches or wings; 
in the tops whereof ſtand red flowers : after. 


las - mg 0 long cods in which lie 
the ſeedes ”. , or wilde ciches, 


eb ard likeaT and 
blacke — Ny Gig 
- * The place. 


Tels he i Blnnnia 2nd Apulia, in Candic 
alfo, andin other Prouinces and Ilands to 


wow real bh rk. 


* The time. | 
Ir flowreth in winter,as witneſlcth Petr 


Belbnins. 
&* The names. 
| The Grecianscall itLuyrminan, that is Les 
yr Hes or Lyons leafe : {nie doth callic 
O Leonto, gen noir ons at 64m 
there is UA, plant called bh 
4, name. Thetebe many baftard fone 
_ vnatoſt, as Reprions, > eptercalan Som Lenin Po ning rene OR He 
| leaſe andLyons Turnep. = 
T'; 


[1700s Tumepixofforcero del hot 


rature, | 
drizin the thinddegree, 1 Catnrechet. 


* The ereuer, 
The roore(faith DifenidesNakeninwinedodh b thatarebirten of Serpenrs,andit doth 
moſt ſpeedily A908 64 WH GRR hg. «remand mamas mand BE 


the 5 6 Si 
| Of TY "Gs. 
a 6 6 8 | 6-7the kindins: 


Here be Grndcic Fords of Radiſh , , wheteoFome he "E-PEEM tn wl wndblace; 
ſore round andwhite ; others round, or of the forme of apeare and blacke 
wilde , - tO ſome rame > crof the : garden, whereof we willincreat here 


: © "WM 


chaprer. 
I Ryphanm 


"tHISTORIE) 1 


C 


w- © - 
4 6 _ 


*% The de rods ry Gl 
I He garden Radiſh ſendeth foorth great and large leaues, greene, rough, cut on both ſides 
' |} with deepe gaſhes,notwnlike to the garden Turnep,but greater, Theitalkes beround and 
: parted into many branches : out of which ſpring ſmal flowers of alight putple color, niade 


of fower little leaues and when they be paſt, there do come in place ſharpe pointed codspuiftox2 . 
blowen vp toward the ſtalke,full of a ſpungious ſubſtance, wherein is contained the ſeedeof a light 


browne colour, ſomewhat greater than the ſceds of Turneps or Colewootts. The roote is ec, 
long,and white both without and within,and of aſharpe raſte, We: h C 

2 TheſmallgardenRadiſh hath leaues like the former, bur ſmaller, and more brittle in handling. 
The ſtalke of two cubits high, wheron bethe flowers like the former. The ſeed is ſmaller andnorſo 

ſharpe in taſte. The roote is ſmall, long,white both within and without, cxcepr a little that ſheweth 

itſelfe aboue the ground of a reddiſh colour. © *' | | £ | 

3 Radiſhwith a round roote hath leaues like the garden Turnep: amongſt which leanes ſprin- 

geth vp a round and ſmooth ſtalke , deuidingit felfe roward the top intotwo orthree branches, 
whereon do grow ſmall purpliſh lowers made of fower leaues a peece: which being paſt, there ds 

come in place ſmall long cods puft vp or bunched in two, and ſometimes three placesfull of pith as 

the common Radiſh, wherein is containedthe ſecede, ſomewhat ſmaller than the Colewootr ſeede, 

butof a hottertaſte, The roote is rounde and firme , nothing wareriſh like the common Radiſh, 

more pleaſant in taſte,holfomer,nort cauſing ſuch ſtinking belchings as the garden Radith doth.” 

4 TheRadiſh with a roote fathionedlike a peare, groweth tothe height of rhree or fower cubits, 

of 2 bright reddiſh colour. The leaues are deepely cut or jagged like thoſe ofthe Turnep, ſomewhat 

rough, The flowers are made of fowerleaues, ofa light carnation or fleſhic colour. The feedis con: 

tained in ſmall bunched cods like the former. The roote is faſhioned like a peare orlong Turnep, 

blacke without and white within,of a firme and folide ſubſtance, The taſte is quicke and ſharpe bi- 

ing the toong as the other kindes of Radiſh,but more ng 


4 | 3 Raphaniy - 


OE TOPS oe Tf 0 "7 


\ 


184 THE SECOND BOOKE/OF THE 


+ Allthe kindesof Radiſhrequirea looſe gr which hath beene long manured and is ſome- 
what fat. They proſper wellin ſandie ground where they are notſo ſubic& to wormes , as in other | 


ounds. | 
y | * Thetime 


-Theſe kindes of Radiſh are moſt firly ſowen after the ſommer Solſtice in Tune or Iulie : for being 
ſowen berimes in the ſpring they yeelde not their rootes ſo kindely nor profitably , for then they do 
for the moſt menu fetal and ſeede, where otherwiſe they do not flower and ſeed ill 
bare, 260/9 F/ o BR get ten moneths inthe yeere,bur as I ſaid before,the belt 


time isin Tune and lulie. 
- 5--t | | * The names. | . 
Radiſh is called in Greekof Theophy aftus,Dioſcorides,Galen, and other old writers aparic: in ſhops 

ws, and Satiue Radecals :\in high Dutch Retticht in low Dutch Radits tin French Rezfort : 
inItalian Rephano: in Spaniſh Raveno: in Engliſh Radiſh, and Rabone: inthe Bohemian om 
R3zedfew., Ce/ affirmeththatche ſeed of Radiſh is called of Marcelus Empericxs, Bacanon, 
ſo likewiſe of Ler-w inthe ſecond chapter of the ſecond booke of his Tetrable : yet Cormarims 
dothnor reed Bacanon, but Cacanon: The name of Bacanww is allo founde in V. Mirepſine the 155- 
Compoſition of his firſt booke. | 

| | % The temperature. 


Radiſhdoth manifeſtly hear anddrie , open and makethin by reaſon of the biting qualitie that 
ruleth in it. Ge/e> maketh them hor in the third degree, and drie the ſecond,and ſheweth that it15 


rather aſawcethan a nouriſhment. 
gn” | | * The vertnes, 
| A Radiſharceaten raw with breadin ſteadof other foode; bur being eaten after that maner , hor | 


| HISTORIE'OF PLANTS. 185 
veeld verie little nouriſhment,and that faultie andill, But for the moſt part,they are vſedas aſawce 
with meats to procure appctite,& in that ſortthey/ ingender blood lefle faultie, than eaten alone or 
with bread onely: but ſceing they be of a harder digeſtion than meates , theyare alſo many times 
troubleſome ro the ſtornack ; neuerthelefſe , theyſerue ro diſtribute and giſperſe rhe nouriſhmene; 
eſpecially being taken after meat; andraken befede meate, they cauſe belchings , and overthrowe 
the tomacke. | Z 
Before meare they cauſe vomiting, nd eee therinde: the which as ir is more biting than B 
the inner ſubſtance,ſo dorh it with mote force cauſe thateffe& if ir be given with Oximel,which is a - 
fyru e made with vineger and hony, | | id | 
| MorcouerRadiſh proucket vrine and diffolueth cluttered fande,and driveth it foorth, if a good C 
draught of the decoQtion thereof be drunke in the morning, Plimie writeth and Dzoſcorides likewiſe 
thatit is good againſt an old cogh ; & to make thin, thick & grofſe legmwhich ſticketh inthe cheſt. 
' Infteedheereof the Phiſitions of our age do vie water diſtilled thereof: which likewiſe procureth D 
vrine nn? driueth foorth ſtones inthe kidneis, © wh 100 cots 
The root ſliced and laid ouer night in white or Rheniſh wine,and drunke in the morning, driveth E 
out vrine and grauell mightily,bur in taſte and ſmell it is very lothſome, Me 
| The roote dwith hony and the powder of aſheepes hart dried , cauſethhaire tojgrow in F 
ſhort ſpace. y | bby *y 
The ſeeds cauſeth yomite, prouoketh vrine : and being drunke with honied vineger, it killeth and G 
driueth foorth wonnes, | " | 


The roote ſtamped with the meale of Darnell andalittle white wine vineger , raketh away all H 


oy 


blew and blacke ſpots,and bruſed blemiſhes of the face, | 


(! 


The roote boiled in broth, and the decoftion drunke.js good againſt an olde cough : it mooueth I 
womens ſickeneſle,and cauſeth much milke. | | | - 


Of wilde Radiſh. 


I oy IN 
ildeRadiſh. 

h A $128 QA.S Wa ( 

- iN \ NZ 3." Lg 


SAUIRN\ AVE 


' T% 
N j 
5; 


WA 

JA / 
V. 
NY 


£4 WW 
SICY 


186 THE SECOND; BOOKE OF THE 
| + The deſorption, *% | 


I IldeRadiſh hath a broader Scrougher leafethan the commonRadiſh, & not ſo deep 
vw cut or iagged,almoſt like the leaues of Rocket, bur much greater. The ſtalk is ſlender 
& rough, of two cubirs high,deuided coward theto * into many branches.The flowers 
are ſmall and yellow : pots ongandſlender, wherein is the ſced. The roote is of the bigneſle of 
a finger,white within fa tha and biting taſte. 
2 e waterRadiſh | and broad leaues, deepely indented or cut euen to the middlerih, 
© Theſtalke is long, peney prone way aud that way being notable to ſtand vpright with. 
out a prop, in ſo much that yeeſhall neuer finde ir, no not when iris veric yoong, butleanin om 
vpon tbadlor mice nnoiey oweth, The flowers growe atthe top made © foer fn 
leaues. The roote is long,ſet in ſundrie ſpaces with ſmall fibres orthreds like the rowell of + Lag 
and I bo ENLE i Ethan wy of garden Radiſhes, 


| * The place. | 

Thefirtdo grow vpbathe borders of bankes and ditches caſt vp , andin the borders of moiſt 

fields. 
The ſecond grow in dnches tandin waters,and riuers. [> 


There is a kinde heereof growing irrthe ioints or chincks amongſt hemotrar of aſtone walltha | 
bordereth vpon the river s by the Sauoy in London, the which yee cannot finde but when = 
the tide 1 , _— pene:) A | | | 
| * The time, 


They | Who in ned the ſecde is ripein Auguſt, 


%* The names. 


 ThewildeRadiſh is called inLatine Radiculs ſylueftrs, and Rophanus ſpluefiris, in Greeke jag; | 
dyeie, and of ſome CAHrmoracra : in high Dutch Wilder Retich: in Spaniſh _ in Italian 
Ramoelacci : in Engliſh Y\dde Radiſh. | | 


*% The temperature. 
Theſe wilde Radiſhes are of like temperature with the garden Radiſh, but hotter and drier, 


% The vertues. 


A Doſeorides writeth, that theleaues are receiued among the pot herbes , and Lcmiſe th bole [ 
roote, which DIR rn heatc and prouoke vrine. 


© | Of HoſeReth. Op. | 


t% The deſcription. 


Orſe Radiſh brin foorth grear leaues,long, broad, ſharpe pointed, of a deepe greene E 
colour like thoſe nog he Docke, Sledof ſome of ſome $ Rubarbe , of ow | 
Patience, but greater and rougher. The ſtalke is ſlender and brittle , bearing arthe top : 
ſmall whire flowers: which being paſt , there follow ſmall cods, wherein is the ſeede. The rootcis 
long and ry of colour,jn taſte ſharpe,and Tore much biring the toong like pepper. | 
2 or pepperwoort, hath broad leaues, long, and {harpe poinred,of a blewiſh greene. 
colou liſewond Sortheg ſnipror cutabour the edges ike a ſawe. The ſtalke is roundand tough: 
vpon the branches wherof grow Ficele white flowers, The root is long and} g far abrode 
| mitheground, in ſuch le char hen fe is once taken in a ground,it is not le to roote it our,for 
itwill vnderthe gal, few ound creepe and ſhoote vp and budfoorth in many places far abroad. The roote 
alſo is ſharpe birerh the mg open hapetugbe the name pepperwoort. Mi 
z Ry 
g 


\F 
F 
[ 

: 

f 
F 


HISTORIE: OR: PLANTS. 187 


" 945 
Om A Sos ane I ae we * T =— = 
ys 4s v i 


a haue Ifound irwilde in i 
ET bent mary | ; 


ps EE es 


clog renin cope nk in ond ann noniigof ice 
bow pegs. rs 
_Drcaereplani ingardens , andis we par 66 


en Rn Sno ras ns coExceſterinche Welt : 


time 
(recom {he odesipein 5 x 

rar domme 
tt cor feene, 


—_—_—_— 


PREY rho 
mrs Wn cy 
Te ano Detnlly ce on ne ſpng 427 hoe malay, 


188 THE- SECOND! BOOKE |QF!/THE 
cis alſo reported that the roote heercof ſtamped, andcaſt into good andpleaſant wine, doth 
foorthwith rurge.itmtro -i% Bur the oleexvriters do aſcribe this cnmitic to. the-ving andBrul. 
fica,our prhproceg ich moſt auncientstaue named fapares. OSA SSH 
ed 10 reaps thename of Zepidixmin his 19. booke 9, Chapter , likewiſe 
bby the name Lepidiam,in ſhops gephonte fiery and Pj. 
pf raut: the lowe DE —-{ 5 the Engliſhmen 
ous " The temperature. 
iſhes,are borand dric in the thirde degree:they bauc a dryingand de 


ling ic hardigeſting... # The wertacs. 

A | pedwith  endeepor therero,is commonly vied among the Gam 
for ſauce to care fiſh with , and ſuch like meares, 2s wedo muſtarde; As this kinde of fauce doth 
heate the ame auſerh beter digeſtion than muſtard. ..  . 

; & 6 an vg which the rindes of Horſe radiſh have bcene 
ic omu mmended againſt the quartaine ague. 
- The leaues boiled inwing,an lack: ode olive addeJrherero andlaid onthe greehed partsin 
Uandriee by awd the hard ſwellings of the liver aud gukey and being * 
c botromeoftthe bellyas aremedic for the ſtrangurie, 
r pn, wee (5k ie ipcorhtnnc, colin led 
'k daf eat ce hip orbau Cc Gahuakcs, | 

: Irproficerh michagaind tecollie ſtranguric, and difficultic of making water, vied in ſteade 
ofrruſtard as aforelaidy” | 

G Therooreſtamped ind giuento drinkefkilleth che wormesin children: the iuice giuen doth the | 
ſame,an ointment made thereof,doth the like; being annotnted vponthe belly of the child. | 

The leaue3 of Tyre but ef _ che WATT ont, for they hauea burning 
and bitter taſte. Ir 3. the number of ſcorching and bli ſimples faith P/;zie in his 20, booke, 
17.chapter,and rhereforeby his horqualitie, ir mendeth theskinin area face,and taketh away ſcabs, 
{carreg,and it any ome reiwaine after rhe aint vicers and ſuch like, | | 


1 = Berbatd Aa 
"Maes *> Ons. - > Chap. 8... 


: 7 IT 3 : 4 "IX . PAY by L aa rs 
_—_— ” O—O TU e-ES Y wow 5 III, Crean oo —_— %u. +2" Pye aw Y OIL Y _ "n 
2.4 Ly #©- 


hou HISTORIE|OF PLANTS. : 189 


* The nature, 
This herbe is hovand drie in the ſecond degree. 


w The wertwes. 


The ſecede of wimer Creſle cauſech onetomake water, driuerh oorth grauell, and helpeth the a 


frangurie. 


The iuice therof mundiGerh corrupt and flthie vicers,being made in formeof an vnguent with B 
waxe,oyle,and turpentine. 


Inwinter when fallade herbes be ſcarce, chisherbeis thought to beequall with Creſles of the © 


garden,or Rocker, | 3. ; 
This herbe helpeth the ſcuruie being boiled among ſcuruie grafle,called in Latin Cochlearia,cau- D 


lingir to worke the more effeRual'y, 


- 


" Of eMuilard. Chap-. 


* The kinder. | 
There be three kindes of Muſtarde': wo of the Garden,andrhe cede mide, 
I Sinsps ſatiuun. | 
Garden Seed, ; | 


agrter e toon dur common le maine, 
other tame Muſtarde is like to the former inleaues, Granchedfalies, barlelſs 
nemore hin andounh Hb ors everndet rank eg webaoer urethane ve 


kede wichis alſonota lirtle ſharpe or byring.” 


\ 


_—_ 


3 Sineps 


790 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Smaps (ylue re. | 
Wi du Itard. % The Ueſeriqtien. 
Mp 4; The wilde Muſtard hath leaues like thoſe ”Y 
heards purſe, but rougher,and more: 
indented, with a ſtalke gong o the heightof 
wo foote, bearing atthe uy ow flow. 
ers made of fower leaues : the codsbe ſmall and 
ſlender, wherein is conteined reddiſh Coded 
ler thenany of the others, but nor ſo —__ or bi. 
ting. 


| . *Thephace. | 

Thegarden Muſtard with whitiſh ſeed is "A 
in gardens : Palladixs faith, itloueth to growein 
Fi Line ianor andis delighted with moiſture, 

q s kinde is not common in England, yer I haue 

ed the ſcede thereof into ſundrie parts of 

this lande ; ſo thar I thinke itis reaſonablic well 
knowne at this day. 

The other kinks do "—_— of their owne c- 
cordein grauelly andditch bankes, and 
by high waies,and among rubbiſh. f 

Maltand nay be Greinke beginning 

ma owenint ofthe 
ſpring. The ſeedeis ripein Iulyor or Auguſt: itcons 
meth to Pn” eee gs £5 


%* The none 
The Athenians have calledrauſtardin the L» 
| | tines Sinapj: the rude and barbarous' $ 
FT tat + Sent: the Frenchian Sexeay, and Mou#arde: the lowe Dutch Mottaert ſatt; 
bur the ſauce which is made of theſeede, is ſimplic called Muſtard in Engliſh : the Italians Semaye: 
the Spaniardes Mo#az4 and MoFealk : the Bohemians Horeice: Plinicalleth it Thisſpi, whetedl 
| doubrleſle itis akinde, and ſome haue called it Saurſon. 
1 ; ring\ CT ee Gee RUE Mehed. 
| n Muſtarde,or fielde Senuie. + 
Th hed Nallrdrace Mata | 
© | th Thetemperatare. 
The ſecede 0 that which vec eg heme dna tine, andalo 
drawe foorth. It otic he ou eg according to Galen. 
| % Thevertues. 
| Byron 1 EE APIS DT" 
ID telpe digeſtion, warmerh the ſtomacke, and prouoketh 


ws appetite. BIN 
1 B TN giuen with good ſucceſſe in like manner to ſuch as beſhorr winded, andare Roppedia the 
i breaſtwith tough flegme from the head and braine, 

C lr appeaſerhthetoothach,being chewedin the mouth. 

D Theyvſetomakea gaepyine with honie, vineger, and Muſtard ſeede againſt thet cumors wi 


—- of the Vuula, and the Almondes abourzlie throateand roote of the toong, 
dronke with warer and bonic ;Proucketh the rearmesand vrine, . -.. - 
F The eede ofmuſtrd beaten and pur inc the noltl auch ſneezing andraiſehwomenk 
of themother outof their fits. - 
G ir rodagainfth ling mes and ſuch ax have the Lthargi the aid plairmep 
the heade(after ſhauing) being {£1dpaiy 


$4 
4 H -Ithelpeththe: a orache in hippeor cklbonerieallcurtll 
[ I Itismixedwith good ſucceſſe whh Feronig plaiters and with ſuch as alle andconſuncro# 


procceding ofa jor mg 


EC 4 4 _ ww Aw 


«7 HIST ORTE OF) PLANTS. | "| 9m 
and hard ſwelling: 


It helperh choſe pot hr it Hake amay che blew andblackemacke that K 


comeofbruſings, - 


i» Of Rechet. (hap.to. k- 
* The kindes. 


T Here indy revoke fometame rol the grteniteel the beldes ſome 
ofthe water,and of the ſeg. 


4: V Vl 2 4} F.-Y 
v/ aux ' Wm. <2 | Nh k 4 
FF ”/ PE % - , ” 
J - yr (1 - "" —_ 
k - bs '*) _ "7 Z) / 


"A A 
"8 


i 

6 : , by ; we it T7 : "+. . ; 
* + 1 F/ : 199Y f {+ j I Aw 4 1; | 
, $41 PEEL S $5 $4 37373 . ; | : 4 

{lt ? EC "3-5 : » 


[= Rocket — rt As. T4 but not 


alrogither ſo great, nor rough. The ſtalkesxife vp of a cubire, and ſometimes two cubires 


high. weakeand brittle; atthetop whereof growe:the flowers of a-whitiſh colour, and 


which being paſt, 
nts gp ere do ſucceed longeoddes, whichcomtein te led, 


? Thecommon which we haue inour gardens; eallcil the wilde Rockers leſſer thei the 


Romaine Rocker, OY TY xs on War, The flowers be | 


rloveghe code allollendecr he edesreddſrid bee roong 
3 Erucs 


- +... 
CI EE OC In Tas On CIC OO een gy———=— 


| 

: 

n 
.# | 
i 
_ . 
$7 | 
\ ; 


mp _—_— er vs 
2, = th 7 WS ISS #4 4 


192 THE. SECOND B QIOKE' OF! THE 


4 -_ 


"Pre 991, KeThrdeferrion... 

"This kinde of Rocket hath loug n 
feos almoſt ſuch as thoſe of Tarr; 2ngbe 
chicker & farrer, reſembling rather the | 

ther vnlike heretiors 
'F; ; fauing that —_—_ flower, and 
14; There is ano eter hom 
a reuerend and excellent Herbariſt ca 
robe akinde of Creſſes, ifnotCrefles 
ſelte, yer cofin germaneatthe leaſt:mtowbek 
pans oli Obelns is indifferent, whether tocallir 
Rocket withthinne or narrowe leaves, or tocall 
it cofin tothe kinds of -hauing therafte 
of the one, andthe ſhape of the other. 
da "#60) inde ot Re rkit 


ſucl:rime as I 


rock 
Theſckindes of Roclec 
The Romaine Rocket dic: 
| - *% Thenames. 
Rode i call in Gece our Lat Eric: 


Roquette; in lowe 'S 
Racker. ThePoers do ofte 


1 Hrs aid 2 © bl ho 
ani dd Reon erate 
K. Mt £7 LOEB, MIIAI IE od.439 P13 471 [V0 OLIN GY a s, 


* T, he Vertmes. 


* HISTORIE: OF' PLAN 


193 


The vſe of Rockerſtirreth vp bodely luſt , eſpecially the ſecede. | . B 
hy ra 1a ont oe th good digeſtion. C 
cereporteth,that whoſocuer taketh theſcede otekerdinhebewkie talldeſ hard. D 
he ſhall endure the paines. 
wha carpal os Sonam, comard with vineger, and lofanvoze, taketh away frec- E 
A Tt 20 VA ns TIT mae: of the 
611, Of Tarrggone. Op T 
; 6 6 digi 
Arragonthe fallade herbe, hath long and 
I aro laues ofa Þope 1, fog 
thanthoſe of common 
t ri rounde ſtalkes, two 
] :abour a porn yg 
Kenn en eh. 
a ycllowe colour mixed la 


EY | +7fletwinies; 
Gi SY 
Ir —_ ZH Dia: of the Tian Dragonce 


wk res ac of it. / 
1,|that a Targin, _ rn is rH Greet, herewith 


« common Wormewoode, erotey vu ma 
| | and fibrous, creeping farce abroad wader the 
; .earth, as doe the rootes-of Couch-grafle, by 
hich foorth ir increaſerh , yeelding 
\noſcede atall , a5 it werea-cerraine chaffic 


"OX duſticmatter chat 1 — 


is _ 
err wand ſuch 
man + T etales heerof, 
ſcarſe worth Jy 18 - br wgardod 
flaxe put into a radiſh rooteor ſea Onion, and fo' 
Era = Pl 
YES, 


Fr Br in = 


SS aS 
p  . | 
no - 
7 ” 47 , 
a A z 
g—_— 1 4 £3 _— 
M 
\ | [the Wn 
# S* , 
” \Y —M 
#4 "=: 
, . Ll z 
: . »& | : j 
f f k. 


n 
» 
ho "IR % 


eirocer berbes is 


a preetgt doch neuter do weknowe 
N 1 | of 


,A 


— 


194 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| 1 Natturtius Hertewſe, Of Garden Crefſes. Chapt. 


A + 


»% The defer rpt. 708. ; 


T Arden Creſſes or Towne Crefles,hath ſa] | 
{om iagged leaucs, ſharpe and burning 
taſte.The {talks be round,a cubite highwhich 
| bring foorth many ſmall white flowers, and.afterlj. 
_ tleflac hkearicode veſlels , like to thoſe of ſhey. 
heards purſe, wherein are conteined ſeeds of a brown 
reddiſh colour. The roote.dicth when the leeei; 
ripe. 4 ; 

: here is another kinde in taſte like the former, but 
in leaues farre different, which Irecouered of feedes, 
fent me from Robinws dwelling in Paris. Theſtalkes 
riſe vp to the heighrof a foote, garniſhedwith many 
broade leaues, deepely cut or indented abour the 


wy, a middle of the leafe is deckt and garniſhed ; 
with many lictle-ſmall leauesor rather ſhreddes of | 


leaues , which make the ſame like a curlde fannevf 
feathers, The ſeedeis like the former in ſhape, *' 

2 + Spaniſh Creſles riſeth foorth of the grounde like 
-vnto Baſill, afrerwarde the leaues growe larger and 
broader, like thoſe of Marigoldes, among th m_ 


riſeth : at Is reup 

growe {mall tuftes or ſpokie rundels of white Bowers. 
The ſecede followeth, browne of colour , and bitterin 
taſte, The whole plant is of a lothſome ſinell&cfauor, 


BO $34 | 3 N efturtiow Petrexn L Obclii 


/* 


$43.3 Be rr . XY » s ®Q,,..-<F *3, 
14319 26144195 $i 10971197 Olis Vert 11 3602980 7 | 
| | 6.7% & 7 EB ob hy 

| ths todo zide he 9dke 1567 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 195 


3 Stone Creſles groweth flarvypon the grounde,with leaues iagged and cut abour the edges like 
the oken leafe , reſembling well theleaues of ſhepheardes purſe. Ihaue not ſeenethe flowers, and 
therefore they benorexpreſt inthefigure ; novvidiltanding i itis reported vnto me, that they bee 
ſmall and white of colour,as arethoſe of the gu rdeq Crefles.The leed is couemnes' in ſmal pouches 
or ſecede vellchs the thoſc of Treacle muſtard or Thlaſpi. | 


. . % The labs 
ez is ſowen in gardens, Skils not what Lo bezfor that irliketh any ground, Spacey if 
icbe well watcred. 
*T hetime 


k may be ſowen at any time of the yeere,vnleſſe irbein winterzit _ vp OY &bringerh 
foorth rwbvat both ſtalke and ſeede : ir dierh = yeere , andrecouereth it (eſe of the fallen or 
ſigh ant. | 

* The Maes. 


 Creſſesis called in Greeke wer. in Latine Natur tinom: in Engliſh Creſſes being a name bor- 
rowedof the Germaines , whocall irKerffe : and in French Crefoz: the Italians N aiturtio and 
Agretto : : of ſome towne Creſles and garden ;Karſle, Ir is calle Naſturtium,as V arroand Plinie 
thinke 4naribus torquendis,thar is to ſay of writhing the noſethrils,whichalſo by the lothſome ſmell 
and ſharpenes of the ſeede doth cauſe Stermutamentas ,or incezings. | 


*% Thetem Per abare. | is 
The herbe of g arden Creſles , noon, and <ike the troong and hinted it is very hot and 
te 


drie,bur lefle hot  whileſt] it is greene nder, byreaſon of the watery moiſture mixed therewith, 
by which the ſharpnes is ſomewhar alaied. 
The ſeed is much more biting then the herbe,andi is hot anddric almoſt in the fourth degree. 
*% The wvertues. 


Gulenſaith that Creſſes may bee eaten with bread Yelati obſoniun, as PE Countrie men , 


many times do,who commonly ve to feede of Creſſes with bread and butter, Itis caten with other 
falladeherbes, as Tarragon and Rocket: and for this caule it is chiefely ſowen. 

Itis good againſt the diſeaſe which the Germaines call as das 1 and Sco2buyc t in Lanine B 
Scorbutws: which wen England call the Scuruie, and Scurby , and ypon the ſeas the Skyrby: it is 
as good and as effectuall as the Scuruie grafſe,or water Creſſs 

Droſeorides ſaith, if the ſeede be ſtamped and mixed with honie, it cureth the hardneſſe of the C 
milre: with vineger and barly meale parched,it is a remedie againſt the Sciatica, and taketh awaic 
hard ſwellings,and inflammartions, Ir ſcoureth away tetters,:mixed with brine: it ripeneth felons 
called in Greeke dirs: ir forceablie cutterh and raiſerh vp thicke and rough humours of the cheſt, 
if it be mixed with things pro ainſt the ſtuffing of the lunges. | D 

Dioſcorides faith iris is hurt tothe ſtomacke, and troubleth the belly. 

It h foorth woormes, bringeth downe the flowers, killerh chechldein the mothers womb, E 
and _— bodily luſt. 

Being inwardly taken, it is good for ſuch as haue fallen from high places; it diſſoluerh cluttered Þ 

oud,and preuenteth the ſamethar it donot congeale and thicken in any part of the body: it poo: 
cureth WIN the later Phyſitions haue found and tried by _—_; 


Of Indian Croſſes. Chap. 3. 


* The deſeription. 


Reſles of India hath many weake and feeble branches, riſing anda fromthe ground, 
diſperſing themſelves farre abroadey by meanes whereof,one plant doth occupic a greatcir- 
cut of ground, as doth the OE OYID The tender ſtalkes deuide themſelues into 
ſundrie braunches , trailing likewiſwpe grounde, ſomewhat bunched or fwollenypar eueric 
lointor knee, which are incolour of a li = ure paces berweene TIS The 


N 2 | leaves 


LG 


4 Steyr: Bf Ut ESI 


_ 4, —— GR rs as ISIS —_ G 2 A "_ 
43 $2; Ef” -*$: bY Fe 4 a9 $2 EW TTY 2 WES. © 

Mn rc; Sg NF 1 IF7+1, 008 Eb Fe MM WS 3155 2 7 "1! 200 

Yb 99 Sie BONG WI} coin ga ns NIE, ION ee? > "IE J 


cede awalwacantcedgeotewr ewe, ws. eeww@oco@crooaOoc]}ﬀ}w<@=r@r_oacnc.c. 0.0 @.. Eo eee A Eo DE2.CS- 


woos. ic 4 


: . 


196 THE SECOND' BOOKE' OF THE 

leaves are round like wall peniwoort,called Cotyledon, the footeſtalke of the leafe commeth forth 
on the backſide almoſt inthe middeſt ofthe leafe,as thoſe of Fogbir,in raſte and ſmcll like the gar. 
den Crefſes. The flowers are diſperſed throughout the whole plant,of colour yellowe, with a crof. 
{ed ſtarre ouerthwart the inſide, of a perfe& purple colour; vato the backe part of the fame doth 
hang araile or fpurre, ſuch as hath the Larkes heele, or Monkes hoode, called in Larine Conſolids 
Regalis,but greater,and the ſpurre orheele longer : which being paſt there do ſucceed bunched ang 
knobbed cods or ſcede veſlels,wherein is conteined the ſeede, rough,browne of colour andlike w. 


tothe ſeedes of the Beete,bur ſmaller. | | ql 
Tags” 1 Naſturtion Indicun. 2 Flores & femina Nafturtii Indies. | 
Indian Creſſes. The flowers and ſeeds of Indian Creſles, 


| | | | * Theplace. | 
The ſeedes of this rare and faire plant came fir{t from the Indies into Spaine and thoſe hotre- 
regions, and from thence into Fraunceand Flaunders , from whencel haue recciued ſeede that 
hath borne with me both flowers and cede, eſpecially thoſe I recciued from my louing friend Jobs 
Robin of Paris, , | *Thetime, | 
The ſcedes muſt be ſowen in the beginning of Aprill,vpon a bed of hot horſe dung,8& ſome fine 
fifred earrh caſt thereon, of an handtull thicke. The bed mult be coueredin ſundrie places with 
hoopes and poles, to ſuſtaine the mat or ſuch like thing thatit muſt be couered with in the night, 
and laid open to theſun in the daytime ; the which being ſprung vp and hauing gotten three leaves, 
- you muſt replant them abrogd in the hotteſt place of the Fpacen, and moſt fine and fertill moulde. 
Thus may you dowith muske Melons,Cowcumbers, and all colde fruites that require haſte, for 
that otherwiſe the froſt will ouertake them, before theyeometo fruite bearing. | 
| * The names. . 
. ,-» This beaurifull plant is called in Latine Naſturtiwm indicum : inEngliſh Indian Creſſes. Al 
though ſome haue deemed it a kind of Conun/as or Binde-weede : yer I am well contented that 
itretaine the Indian name, for thatthe ſmell and taſte doth ſhewe ir to be a kinde of Creſles. 
494 L axflore $ 3-14: 27: * The nature and vertues. ; | 
We haue nocertaine knowledge of his nature or vertues, bur are content to refer ic tothe kinds 
of Creſles,or to a farther conſideration, | | of 


HISTORIE, 08: PLANTS. © 197 

of Cehaics Greſſer Chap. tf £ 

=. + Th w tin> £ | 
Gigs Cine hank cath lender braunches, from vtalls of acubite high, ich 
ſmall Hammer. like thoſe of gar ap es, The flowers be very lmall,and yel- 


low of colour, the ſecede veſlels belittle flar Thaffi huskes , wherein is the ſeede of a reddiſh 
, goldecolour, arpeandvey bitter incaſte, The roote is fimall, tough," white within and withour, 
andofa biting taſte. | | 
theris Cardamantica, | 
-— rr | Ir grow # Theple androueh places 
t growe andr sby 
high BG ſides. and ſuch like: I haue founde it 
corne fieldes aboutSouthfleete necre to Graue| 
end in Kent, 
. * 7 he time. 
Ir flowrerh according to the late or carely ſowing 
of it in the fieldes, wins andIuly, - : 


_ 1h ns. 

Sciatica Creſle is called in Grecke i&is, and 
zrlauermd:; in Latine tbera:of Plinie H beris, and 
NAfurtium ſplueftre, andin like maner allo; Lepr- 
dixm. There is another Lepidium of P lanie © wn kn 
| 40h Sciatica Creſle, 


*% The nature. | 
| Sciarica Creſle is hotin the fourth degree, an and 
like ro 2200 Creſles both i in {mell and taſte. 


+ The otrives. 
| Therootes VE dnt in Autumne, faith Doſes 

 rides,do heare andburne,, andare with good {uc- 
- cefle with ſwines greaſe made vp in manner of a 
he Scye put ypon ſuchas aretormented with 
Scigtica: itis to lic on kj page place but 

owers atthe moſt, and then taken away, 

bt oy patient bathed with warme water, andthe 


place afterwards annointed with oile and moot ldoons itz which things Galewin hisninth booke 


of "—y ancrogtings tothe 6; my GuthoucoF.Demerarsincentaine varkey tending 
tO 


Of Bank ſo A (hp 5. 


*% The deſeript, 

Ancke Creſſes hath long leaues, oo ori vpon both FF%A vnlike to thoſe 
of Rocker;or wilde muſtarde. The ſtalkesbe ſmall,lumber or pliant, yer very rough,and will 
twiſte and writhe as doth the Ozzer or water willowe; whereupon do growe ſmall yellowe - 
flowers, _—_ paſte there do ſucccede little llender cods,full of lmallicedes, in taſte ſharpe 

_ = the toong as thoſe of Crefles. . > (i 
of bancke _ PT ern 2 0 rs of Dandelion, franetdi reſem- 
Ge pinach, Thebraunchesbe » and + p57 x pogo This flowers beyellowe, 

ch bring foorth final biting ſeed acivocher of his kinde, 

| Ry, I Ery/mun 


THE/SECOND' BOOKE OF THE 


1 Ery/anum Dio boridis,L'Obelii, | " 2 Eryſamwnſluetre. 
Bancke ene 0 | Wn tar Creſles. 


eo *"4I7; 
"ly 
S\ 


| 
| 
| 
| 
« | 


| 


| * The place. 
Bancke Creſles is found in ſtony places han by path waics,vpon carth or mudde wals, 
and in other vntoiled places. | 2 - 
The ſeconde kinde of bancke Creſſes, groweth in ſuch places as the former doth:I founde it 
growing ata place by Chelmesforde in El called lirtle Baddowe,and in ſundric other places. 


| | + Thetime. 
| They flower in June andTuly,and the fadeis ripe in Auguſt and September, 


| Fa % The names. | | 
- Bancke Crefſles is calledin Greeke ipvnwr, andof foe zeuamdier: Chamaplium according to = 
cor ides : Theophrafiw hath an other Exy , enen-that which D joſcor ;des calleth Ayagram, andis 


the plant that DoQor William Turner of f: memory called winter Creſles:it is called of D-oſt# 
rides and Theophrajtm« likewiſe Ir50,and Irion. 


{Oo 
| 


The ſecede of bancke Crefſſes is like intaſte to garden Creſles, and is as Galen ſaith of a ficric tew 
| perature,and doth extreamly attenuate ormake gow | 


£ 


——— 


A , The ſeed of banc ke Creſſes is good againſt the rheume that falleth into the cheſt, by rotting the 

B Itremedicth the cough, the yellow iaundiſe, and the Sciaticaor ache of the hucklebones gfitbe 

; PI honie in manner of a often licked. + I B 4 
tis allodrunke againſt deadly poiſons, as Divſcorides addeth: and being made vpin aplaiſter wi 

. watcrandhonicandapplied, itisa edi againſt hidden cankrous a chnnes trhingertt cares, 

hard ſwellings,and inflammations of the pappes and ſtones. P 0 ” 


< 


HISTORIE QF PLANTS. i: }: 199 


— Be aſs . Chap.16. 


OY 


bis ef: 


fide. like Sn —_ 5 al Tum 

ſer. The ſtalkes g By 
deuiding 
ſmall brauniches; w 


yellowe, homer lhe tho chols; fs Hreionct or auke- 


weede, 
| *% The place. 
Docke Ca ar ian) when by high 
maiceomn ae madeofagiece earth, and in 
jooigy | 


rconad | top, _- fundrie 


-% The time. 
br flowreth fronMaie to theende of Auguſtzhe 
ſeedeis ripc in September. 
"% The names, | 
[Docke Creſles is calledin Greeke Auer :in La- 
tine Lampſans and N apron. | 
| *% The nature. © 
| Lampſana is of nature hot, and ſomewhat ab- 
ſterſiuc or ſcowring, | 
* The VErtmes. 


ir;engendreth euill iuice , and Ls apts 


rene, 


Of water Creſſes Chap.17. 
,%* The lindes. 


Tens oneof the marſh grounde cheoder of the river th 
laſt ofthe nab oocIrs running ſprings. | 


% The deſcription. 


Rear water Parſnepe , groweth vpright, and is deſcribedlto have leaues of apleafant ſa- 
uour,fat and full of ines 2s thoſe of Alexanders, bur ſomewhar leſſer, reſembling the gar- 
den Parſhep; The ſtalke is rounde,ſmooth and hollowlike to or Caſshes. The roote 
conſiſtent of many Gall coho __ threddes, ing ap ito che ſtalke within the water or myric 
grounde: arthetop do rundels like Fennell, which being bru- 
led do yeelde a ſtrong / ai dots vpendrh Ten» doththe reſt of the plant, 
2 Small water Crelſ hathgrea ap. che hollow ſtalkes,ſer with great leaues made of many 


{mall.fer vpona middle rib like heals one oppoſite againſt another, bur confuſedly and our | 


of dider Botmuchaltke che leaues of Tiomlocke pr Change, inall other points like theaother of 


his kinde 


N 4 | I Sum 


foote, 


ſmall 


; Taken in meateas Ge/ey and oro _ A 


2 or OO OY US 
R's I Fa "I F003. 3% 
NO Ogg * © ts ky 
INS. 8 Wert fe 7 n 


' THE SECOND©BOOKE/ OF| THE 


1 Sum mains. 


Great water Parinep\ 


. — 
- ud Cy 
- 
% 


- Lo 
ol 
® \ a 
© 7 . - - 
- ' 


\ 4 
ms 8. 
Li "> « 


4 - if A\ 
Z j —_— —— — 
DUES 
of o 


3 Naſtartiun aquaticum. 
Warer Creſles. - -'\\ 


DES AS 
4% - 
7 «I SL. . 
% TA% i Fo 
\ Co 


d 
» 


7 SES 


6 


IIL7 « 
Www '# 4 
Tk 


37, 


- 


_- 


WAI 
——_— 
= 
"a "Fs 
© > _ ” Y 


Td 


2 $1401 minus. 


2+ + 15 SmallwaterCrefle. 


*+ Thedeſeription. 


''3 WaterCreſſes hathmanyfat and weakehol- 


lowe braunches, trailing vpon the grauel! and 
carth whereir growerh, kige holde and rooting 
in ſundrie places as it creepeth ; by meanes wher- 
ofthe 9, 2 ouer a great compaſle of 
grounde, The Jeanes are likewiſe compact and 


b 


* winged with many ſmalleaues, ſet vpon a middle 
. ribbe one againſt another,except the point leafe, 
© which ſtandeth by himſelfe, as doth that of the | 
. Aſhe,if it growe in hisnaturall place; which isin 
x gravel ſpring. The ypper 


ing. The. ypper face of the whole 
w__ is ofa browne colour, and greene vnder the 
eaues, which is a perfe& marke to know the Phi- 


-ficall kinde from the others. The white flowers 


growe in ſpokie roundels, The roorc is nothing 


clic but as irlvcre athrum or bundell ofthreedes. 


| 41.,./>,, -: 3 Theplace. | 
The firſt growetrh 11 mooriſh and: marſhic 


E grounds,and in medowes and woodes that be {el 
Some: dei f 3M | 


The ſeconde andthirde do growe in Mnning 


| brookes of moſt clecre fountaines and grauelic 
ſprings, where the beſt for phiſick do vie togrow- 


*% The tome. AT 
They ſpring and waxe greene in Aprill, and 


flower 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. RW? 201 | 
flower in Iuly. | = 
1 he water Creile to beter infallades, heweth itſelfe in Match when! it 1s beſt,and fowreth -i' 
in ſormmer with the reſt, | | 18 
* The napees. hy 4} 
"Thefirſtis called in Latine Sim .mnaiar; ind Let mater of Diordie of others iscalled's; T3 
1 04oratwn Trags, andallo One: | b M 
"The ſecond iscalled in Greeke #/»: in c Sim alterum,and allo Sifpmbrion: inEngliſh great gl 
warer Creſſe,for that it hath the taſte of garden Creſles. . '" 
Warer Creſle is called of Cratens $4 and Siſymbrium : ofthe newe writers XN 2ftur- 1 
um aquat icum, and Lazer Crateue: inEn water lr gon bronne Coty "” 
*+ The renopeyabmre. - RS Ch | 'T} 
Water Creſleis evidently hotand drie | ANG Bb | | 
_ *+ Thevertues. | 
Water Creſle being boiled in wine or vii and drunke for certainc daick rogither , is veric A : 
good againſt the ſcuruie orſcorbure. | "” 
Being chopped and boiledin thebroth officſh,'andeaten for xx. Jaits rogither ar morning, B ; 
noone and ni rouoketh vrine,waſtcth the ſtone.and drineth it foorth. Taken inthe ſame tman- ; 
ner,it doth cure yoong maidensof the greene ſickneſle,bringeth downe WE RE a Rdech % 
into the face os 2 aan, hs -_ he oP nEG a EE ; | 
Of: pilde water Creſſes or Cackos flowers. ae ; : 
* The hinges. : 
There be ſixe kindes * wilde herbes numbred among the water Crſſnhich followe: in order, « 
xs ; | 
LS v1 Wh 2 5 14 
© [| 
'F 


"Ts, , . IOC 
aA 4 > 
4-4; NOS nog 
bs Ys © es don _ 


l > WAY 


ad. ache i 
+ 0 * / 
Ls WO. pO" 5: FOO WET" wt 


OV = 
DD. EV DU YG 
j 2 In L vo; 0); Tr 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF/THE 
2 Cardamine T rifolta. | 4 Cardamine latifola. 
Three leated Ladie ſmocks | iJ 


{ Arm 
«E =E . 
Ob, A 
SJI1+-o=Tc "0 
<p Ea 


3 Cardomine lates. —_ 
: Milke white Ladie ſmocks, | |. Mountaine Ladie ſmocks, 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. '* 203 


| | * The deſcription. 
I He firſt of the Cuckowe flowers , hath leaues at his ſpringing vp ſomewhat rounde , and 

'F thoſe that ſpring afterward grow 1ageed like the leaues of Grecke Valerian :among which 

riſeth vp a ſtalke a foote long , ſerwith the like leaues,burſmaller and morc ia goed, reſem- 
bling the leaues of Rocker, The flowers grow atthe top in ſinall bundels,white of colour, hollowe 
in the middle,reſembling the white ſweere Iohn: after which do comeſmall chaffic huskes, or ſeeds; 
veſlels, wherein the ſeede is conteined. The roote is ſmall and threddie, 
2 Theſecond fortof Cuckowe flowers,hath ſmall iagged leaues like thoſe of ſmall water Valcri- 
an,agrecing with the former in ſtalkes and rootes, The flowers be whute,cuerdaſhr 0 declining to- 
ward alight carnation. | | | 
The thirde fort of Cuckowe flowers gmt creeping vpon the ground, with ſmall threddie 
ſtalkes , whereon do growe leaues like thoſe of the fielde Clauer , or three leafed graſle :' among 
which do come vp ſmall and tender ſtalkes two handfuls high, hauing flowers at the top ingreater 
quantitiz than any ofthereſt, of a light fleſhic colour daſhr with white. Theroote is nothing elſe 
but as it were a bundell of thrums or threds. Bs | | 
4 The ourth groweth likewiſe flat vypon the grounde: the leaues growe vpon aſlenderribbe, as 
doth the leaues of Setwall, or rather water Tre toyle,among which do riſe vp ſtalkes a cubite high, 
The flowers groweatthe 1 ho or feather faſhion,with a threddie roote like the former, 
5 Milke whiteLadie ſmockes hath ſtalkes riſing unmediately trom the roote,deuiding themſe!1ics 
into ſundrie ſmall twiggie and hard braunches,ſer with leaues like thoſe of Serpillum. The flow-rs 
owe at the top,made of fower leaues of a yellowiſh colour, The roote is tough and wooddy, wic!1 
ome fibres annexed thereto, 
s Mountaine Ladieſmockes hath many rootes, nothing elſe but as it wereabundell of th reddy 
ſtrings, from the which do come foorth three or fower ſmall , weake or tender leaues, made of 
ſundrie ſmall leaues,in ſhewe like thoſe of ſmall water Valcrian, Theſtalkes bee ſmall and brictle, 
whereupon do growe ſinall flowers like the firſt kinde. wy | 
* The place, 

Theſe kinds of Cuckowe flowers, grow not ſo much in waters as they do in meiſtmedowes, and 
_ inſuchplacesas be verie often ouerflowen not onely with raine water, but alſo with riucrs and 

nds, | ; 

Thar of the Alpiſh mountaines is a ſtranger in theſe colde countries,the reſt are to be found eue- 
ric where,as aforeſaid,cſpecially in the caſtle ditch at Clare in Eſſex. 

* The tome. 

Theſe flower for the moſt partin Aprill and Maic , when the Cuckowe doth begin rofing her | 
pleaſant notes withour ſtammering, | | | | 
* The names. | 

They are commonly called in Latine Fks Cucul;, for the reaſon aforeſaid, and alſo X' a/Znrtium 
aquaticurm minme, or the lefſer water Crefle: of ſome Cardamine,and Siſymbrium alterun of Dioſeo- 
rides :itis called in the Germaine toong Ulildercreſz: in French Paſerage ſaaurge: in Engl 
Cuckowe flowers in:Northfolke,Caunterburie bels:: at the Namptwich in Cheſhire where Thad 
my beginning, Ladie finockes, which hath giuen me cauſe to chriſten it after my countrie faſhion, 

Lf % The nature and vertues, 

Theſe herbes be hot anddrie in the ſecond degree : we haue nocertaine proofe or authoritic of 
their vertues, but ſurely from the kindes of water Creſſe they cannot much differ,and therefore to 
them they may be referred in their vercties, x 


Of Treacle euilarde. (hap.1g. 
% The binds. | 
E \ Here bediuers and ſundrie ſorts of Treacle Muſtardes , orwilde Creſſes, whichyoupleaſe to 


callthem, for thatthey may be referred vnto cither, as herbes participating of both, as wellin 
qalitic as caſte, 6x WY 0 | 
| | 1 Thisſpi 


. 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
1 Thi:ſþi Dioſcoridis. _ = 2 ThiſpiY uleati : 
be | || RET 


ls 
i 
- 
- 


\46 
WAS 
>. f - 
WWD es 
WES $ - IE 
F\(/% 4 
8 H1 6X0), - Y Wy 
p 'S > ETA, 4.14 


> NNE 


NTS. 


OF PLA 


IQ Cas. _ 


7 Thisſhi Chpeatum Lobel. 


F; 
tally thoſe next the 


? Reacle Muſtarde hath long broade leaues;eſpec | d, the others leſ- 
ſer, ſlightlyindented abour the edges like thoſe delion. The ſtalks be long & brittle, 

.,  CQeuidedinto many braunches euen from the ground tothe top, where grow manye ſinall 
idle lowers tuft faſhion, after which ſucceede flat, thinne,chaffic huskes or ſeede veſſels hart faſhi- 
n,wherin are conteined browne long ſeedes, ſharpein taſte, burning the:roong as doth iy 
| | | cede, 


oy) 


206 THE 'SECOND BOOKE' OFTHE 
ſeede,leauing ataſte or fauout of Garlicke behinde for a farewell. ; 
2 Mythridate Muſtard hath long narroy leaues like thoſe of Woad,or rather cow Baſil. The all, 

be incloſed with ſmall ſnipr leaues cuen tp the braunches, Pyramidis faſhion, that is to fay, ſmaller 
and ſmaller toward the top, where it is deuided into ſundrie braunches , whereon do growe {ml 
frowerszwhich being paſt, the cods or rather thinne chaffic huskes do appeere, full of ſharpe ſeege 

like the former. The roote is long and ſlender. 
3 Thethirdekinde of treacle Muſtarde,named knaues Muſtard , (for that it is too bad for honeſt 
men)hath long,fat,and broade leaues,like thoſe of Dwale,or deadly Nightſhade: in taſte like thoſe 
_ of Vuluaria or ſtinking Orache, ſer vpgn a rounde ſtalke two cubits high, deuided at the roP into 
ſmall armes or braunches,whereon do growe ſmall foolith white ſpokie lowers. The ſeede is con- 
reined in {mall far pouches like thoſe of Shepheardes purſe, browne and ſharpe in taſte , bur of 

rancke ſauour, | | | | 
4 Bowiers Muſtard hath very ſmall leaues, like Toade flaxe,but ſmaller, The ſtalkes be ſmall,ſlen. 
der,and many. The flowers be ſo ſmall, that they ſeeme to be duſt. The ſeedes be placed vpon the 
braunches from the loweſt part of the planc cuen tothe top,cxceeding ſharpe and hot in talte,with 
a {mall andingle roote. | [, 
5 Grecian Muſtard hath many leaues ſpread vpon the ground, like thoſe of the common Daifie, 
of a darke greeniſh colour : from the migſt whereof, ſpring vp ſtalkes two foote long, deuided inty 
many ſmalk braunches; whereupon do growe ſmallwhite flowers,compoſed of fower leaues, after 
which ſucceede rounde flat huskes or ſeede veſſels, ſer vpon the ſtalke by couples, as it were ſundry 
paires of ſpeRacles , wherein the ſeede js conteined, ſharpe and biting as the other, 

6 Clownes Muſtard hath ſmall tender ſtalkes riſing immediately from the ground,ſer with leaues 
like thoſe of ſmall Haukes weede, ſlightly indented about the edges. The flowers growe at the top 
in ſpokie rundels like thoſe of Se/el; Crepicum, not much differing from the flowers of wilde par 
neps. The ſeede is as ſmall as ſande,yer biting the roong as the former. The roote is ſingle with cer- 
taine threds hanging thereat. n | 
Buckler Muſtard, hath many large [eaues, ſpread vpon the grounde like Hjeratiu or Hauke 
weede,ſomewhat more toothed or ſnipt abour the edges : among which come vp ſtalkes ſmall and 
brictle,a cubite high, garniſhed with many ſmall pale yellowiſh flowers, in whoſe place ſucceede 


many round, flat, cod , or yours ,buckler faſhion,conteining a ſeede like vnto the others. 
3 


$ Smallbuckler is a very ſmall, baſe,or lowe plant , hauing leaues like thoſe of wilde 
Tyme, ſet vpon ſmall, weake and tender braunches. The flowers growe at the top like the other 
buckler Vuſtard. The ſecede veſſels are like,bur not ſoround, ſomewhat ſharpe pointed, ſharpe in 
taſte, andburning the roong, The whole plant lieth flat vpon the ground, like wilde Tyme. 
| * The place. | | GEE 
 Treacle Muſtard groweth wilde in ſu - vlatedtn corne fieldes,ditch bankes,and in ſandy,drie, 
& barren grounde. Ifound it in the corne fieldes berweene Croydon and Gods ſtone in Surrey, at 
Sourh-fleere in Kent,by the path that leadeth from Harnſey,(a {mall village by London)vnto Wab 
tham croſle,and in many other places. | | 
The others do growe vnderhedges,pftentimes in fieldes andin ſtonie and vntoiled places; they 
growe plentifully in Bohemia and Germanic they are ſeene likewiſe on the ſtonie bankes of the 
riuer Rhene, They are likewiſe to be found in England in ſundrie places wilde, the which I hauege 
thered into my garden, | 
| : %* The time, ba 
| Theſe treacle Muftardes are found with their flowers from Maie toIulic , and the ſecede is ripen 
theend of Augult, Lld: 
| + The names. 


| The Grzcians call theſe kinds of herbes 44m, of the huske or ſeede veſſel, which is like a lietle 
ſtuffed ſhielde.Theyhaucalſo othernames which be found among the baſtard wordes: as Scandy 

| laceum,Capſells,Pes gallinaceus. Neither be thelater writers without their names, as Na#urtiw* 
reftorum, and Sinap: ruficum: itis called in Durch UNfldeRerſet in French Sexeue ſixnage* 
Engliſhtreacle Muſtarde, Bowiers Muſtarde,diſh Muſtard,of fome Thlafpiafter the Greeke name 
churles Muſtarde,and wilde Crefles. : cb # | | 
Treacle Muſtarde is called of ſome x coroderhlaſps, thatis toſay, Garlicke Thlaſpi, of therandie 

and ſtrong ſmellir hath of garlicke. if 24 | jb 


HISTORIE- oF PEANTS, 51: 207 


*% The 
The ſeede of theſe kindes of treacle Muſtards, be hocand dren theende ofthe hirddegree. 
* The yeremes. | 


The ſecede of Thlaſpior treacle Muſtarde carer, purgeth | choler both vpward and downwarde, A 
prouoketh flowers,and breaketh inwarde apoſtemes. 


The fame vied in ew ga yep the ſciatica Andi is ; good vnto choſe purpoſes for which Muſtard B 
ſecdeferueth. 
& Thedimper. | 


Theſeede of theſe WT ſoextreeme hot and vehement i in working) het bein taken in too 
eat aquantitie,purgeth and ſcoureth cuen vntoblood, and is rei Women wi i 10 and . 
þ cu great cate 15 to be hadin giuing them ivatdh, ” 


: 


Of Candie «MM, wiard Chap.? 20. 


Thiiſþi Candi. | 
Candie Muſtard. [: * The deſcription, 

2; Andie Muſtarde excelleth all the reſt, as 
well for the comely flowers that i pf; bring- 
eth foorth for the decking vp of gardens 

| and houſes, as alſo for thatir goth onde the 
reſt in his phyſicall vertues.Itrifeth vp witha very 
brirtle ſtalke of #cubite high, which divideth ir 
ſelfe into ſundrie bowes or braunches , ſet with 
leaues like thoſe of the ſtocke gilloflowers , of a 
graie or ouerworne greene colour, The flowers 
growe atthe rop of the ſtalkes rounde, thicke clu. 
ſtering rogither, like thoſe of Scabious or Deuils 
bit, ſomrimes blewe,often ſometimes car- 
nation or horſe-fleſh, and dome white, for any 
thing that Thaue ſeene, varying according tothe 
foile or climate, The ſeede is reddiſh, ſharpe, and 
byting the roong, wrappedin lictle huskes faſhio- 
ned ce ahart. 

* Theplace. 

This plant growerh naturally in that Pannonia 
which is yon. called Auſtria, in vntoiled places, 
_ by high waie ſides: in Crete or Candia, in 

Spine and Iralie, and ſuch like hot regions , from 

whence I receiued feede., by the liberaliric of the 
right! Honorable the Lorde Edward Zonche,at his 
retyrne into England from thoſe partes with ma- 

other rare ſeedes, which do wg ininyRar 
_ oth fine my Ge much bounde ts good Lordſhip. 
© The 


f cine 
Enngh ' x innin of Maie wed, 
Org onal hve or braunch KA rip 


v4, 


e at w time you ſhall 
pe pr a. 


. Thisplantis calledin Cneke oo ea Tate dren ove chaunging'imo<in Doing 
Arabi add-Drabe : Pliniean his 37 « nameth it.Dyyophonos : On 5k 
Tfocombierin Engldh Can ine E:Multarde.. "y hap 

#% The temperature: © -1:8,0hiÞ 
| Theol of CandioMuſtrde ichorand the thondof hen deg avisrhar called 
A " * Th 
E 


26k THE SECOND BOOKE' OF THE 
The wertwes, 
A faith,that they vſe to cate th dried ſeede ofthis herbe with meate,aswe do Muſtard, 
eſpecralyi in Cappadocia. 
They vſe likewiſe to boile the herbe wit] the decodtionof Batl called Prifanajo which being 


b_ it concoQeth and bringeth foort of thy chelf tough and rawe flegme , which ſticketh 
fNCTEnn, ' 


It is reckoned a chiefe among thoſe Si ples with which mithridate and weacle is made, andis 
' mixed in counterpoyſons and ſuch like compoſitions, + - * 


"of Treacle oils Chap: 21. 


2 Thlsſþi Pannonicum Clif. 
- >< ny ee 


B 


#9 de ſeription 


argy, aues , [ee ape groin 
= utnot ſo ſharpe ſharpe pointed: among which riſe, yp hoars 
of aſhes., whereof it tooke his name , which arc ſet with 
c, encloſing'or embracing the ſtalkes, asdo the leauesof 
- wers (being of fmall reckg w at the top of thebraur 
__ of byeoirrs aig there do ſucceede flar huskes or Foes ke hoof th of Shep- 
heards purſe, with hot —_— © LOONg2 4: WT vs 
2 Hungarie Muſtardbringerh Ore Theleaues which fi 
peere are flat,ſorawhat round like | thoſe leaues which aftcrdo g 


the ſtalks are long and broade like 
vpperſide,and vnder declining to wh 
conſiſting of fower ſmall lcaues, v 


3p. 


A add F Pe n "as yore neg 5k 
Ee Eds 
roar oc ea TIS 


2% HIST ORTE©OFUPLANTS HT = 20g 
« incaſte;The roote is whiteand ſmall, creeping vnder thegromnde fatabroade like the roors 


ſharpe mt® ; | abrod | 
Couch graſle, preparing newe ſhoores and brauynches for the yeere following; contrarie to all 
Eo his kinde,which are increaſed by ſeede,and not otherwiſe. T- 


Thlaſpi Narbonenſe L'Obelii. | 4 Thiaſpr ombelitins Narborenſe. 
; Cocks Muſtarde, | _ Pefants Muſtarde of Narbone. 


; 4 C1 ” : 
bl *. » 4 ——. , 7 . . 
» bs 3 +0 bd bh445 + I L134; kt 
£23 13s 


: : 
brug 


TE} * The deſeription.- , 
3 ' Churſes/ Muſtarde hath manic ſinallrwiggie ſtalkes , ſlender, rough and pliant, ſetwith/frnall 
leaues like thoſe of the Hyſope, with ſmall and idleflowers, leane hifsks ſcarſc yeelding' two ſeedes, 
andthoſe fewe,(harpeybitrer and vnſauorie, notfit for meate nor medicine, and therefore we call _ 
themas youſce making 99 reckoningofthem,” | | .* SV 
4 Peſants:Muſtardeh ny {lender pliane braunches like the former, with hi pbgged 
leaues like thoſc bf Harts horne but ſmaller: a pleaſaht fauce herbe, in ſauour and taſte like 
Vuluaria, The Gowersbeyellowe, andgrowe ina: ſpokie tuft, The ſcede in taſte and fauour 
is equall with the other ot his kindeand countrey, {| - IF {| 5 
5 Yellowe Muyſtarde hath anexceedingnumber. of whitiſh leaties, ſpread vpon, the grounde in 
mannerof aeurffe or haſiocke fromthe middeſt wherof riſerh an vpright ſtalke of three foot high, 
putting foorth many ſmall, braunches-or armes:.an the rop whereot growe many ſmall yellowe 
flowers like thoſe of the Wall flower, but muchlefler, which being paſt , the huskes appeere flat, 
pouch faſhion,wherein.is.the ſeede like Freacle Muſtarde tharpealſo and biting. |; - : 
6 White Treacle Muſtard hath leaues ſpreade vpon the grounde like the other,but ſmaller. 'ſhe' 

ſtalkes riſe vp from the middeſt thereof, braunchedyſer with leaues ſmaller then thoſe thatlie vpon 

Segroundewucn tothe gopyyhere doth growa tuft of white flowers in faſhion likethofe of Tan- 

/7. The ſinall kinde of Muſtarde, hath a fewe ſmall leaues fpred vpon the groundclike thoſe of 

Mouſe-eare: from which riſe vp {mall tender ftalkes; ſet with three and ſomtimes fower ſnal ſharpe 
pointed leaues, The flowers grow at thetop,lmall, and of no moment, bur as it were duſt, The cods 


arc flar faſhion, like of zurſe. | 
| zpouch 1 ins Sp "ap 


= 


BOOKE: OF THE 


Theſe kindes of treacle Muſtarde 
and mounraines in corne fieldes in 
adgraody grads. "| 
- w*%Thetime. 
| || Theſe flowerin Maie, June, anduly, The ſeede 
i rpein September 
| "The nones. ' 

Theſe herbes/are called by one mera! name 
jw ah the Getmaines tt+ the Bro 
| 2 in EngliſhBeeſoine weede, 
'or Broomewoorte,and treacle Muſtarde, Norwith- 
7 Nt mae pwr haue with 

nuſtarde & Crefles, I haue thought it expedicntto 
ns noon bicauſe their 


rwoounces & a halfe of them, as Dire 
-ievitlrech. They are mixed in counterpoiſons, as 
PII ſuch like compoſitions. 


of 


2 T'-aſpi fruticoſum minus. . 
Small wooddy Muſtarde. 


5 F 
k i 
»> of 


"> * k 
1 
N 
w. x # 
> _ #, 
. #>\ Ly " 
WC HA 
iS »- 7 < 
Lp *% - . 


_ 


WL, Y; 
= D 
\ WARS 


* The deſcription. 


iT Oodie muſtarde hath long narrow oreene leaves , declining to whiteneſſe » like thoſe 


of the Stock-gillofer , bur ſmaller , FY well reſembling the teaues of Roſemarie ; 
rough ſtalkes very tough and pliant , being of the ſubſtaunce of woode : the flowers 
yore at the top white of colour,in taſhion of the great Clauer or fielde Trefoile : the ſeedes do fol- 
= in taſte ſharpe and biting; the huskes or ſeede veſlels flar,ſpade faſhion, like the otherkinds of 
pi, EN ES £ 
2 Smallwooddie muſtarde groweth to the height of two cubites,with many ſtalkes ſet wich ſmall 
narrowe [eaues,like thoſe of Hyſſope; and at the top you flowers like thoſe of Treacle muſtard, 
or Thlaſpi. The whole plant groweth as a ſhrub or hedge buſh, SÞ 0h. 
3 Thomiemuſtarde groweth vp tothe height of fower cubites,of a wooddy ſubſtaunce like vnto a 
hedge buſh or wilde ſhrub with ſtalks beſerwith leaues,flowers,and ſeedes,like the laſt before men- 
tioned,agreeing in all points ſauing in the cruell pricking ſharpe thornes wherwith this plant is ar- 
med, the othernot. The roote is tough,wooddie,and ſome ſtringes or fibres annexed thereto. 
4 Thercis another ſort of Thornie Muſtard growing in (ſhadowie and obſcure mountaines, and 
rough ſtonie places , reſembling the laſt deſcribed; ſauing that, that this plant bath lirtle orno bi- 
ungraſt atall,whereinconſiſterh the difference.. | . 


— 


— 


3 Thief 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
: Lig rw * The place. 


Theſe plants do growe vpon the Alpiſh oe) 
Pyrene mountaines, in Piemont, andin Italic jg 


ſonic and rockie groundes. 
* The tame. 


They flower when the other kindes of Thlafi | 
do, thatis,from May to the end of Auguſt, 


*% The names. | 


: Ifinde nothing more ſaide of theirnames, ei 
ther of the auncient or later writers, then is ſt 
downe in their ſeucrall tytles. 


*% The nature and vertues. 


Likewiſe I finde nothing extant of their nx | 
tures or vertues, but are referred to the kihdes 


of Thlaſpios, whereof no doubt they ate of kin 
red and afhnitie, | Do 


— 


| nn : ] 
Se utars, | Of Towers Muilarde. (ſhap.22. 
W- | 4 | * The deſcription, - 
I Owers Muſtarde,ot ſome hath beene taken 
| for a kinde of Creſles, &referred {hope 
\ to it:of ſome, for one of the Muſtardes,and 
ſo placed among the Thlaſpios as a kinde thgreof, 
and therfore my ſelfe muſt necdes beſtowe it lome 
where with others, TherforeI have wich C/aſwand. 
L'Obell, placed it among the Thlaſpios as a kince 
thereof; which commeth outof the grounde with 
many long and large rough leaues, like thoſe of 
Houndes-toong,eſpecially thoſe next the grounde: | 
among which ſeth vp along ſtalke of a cubiteor | 
more high , ſetabout with ſharpe pointed leaves! 
like thols of woade. The flowers growe atthetop, 
i ifImayterme them flowers, bur they are as itwere 
/ | - alinleduſtiechaffe driven vpon the leaves & bran- 
ches with the winde : after which come very imall 
cods, wherein is ſmal reddiſh ſecede like that of C 
meline,or Engliſh Wootmſeed,with a roote made 
of a tuft full of innumerable threcdes or ſtrings. 
2 Goldeof pleaſure is an hetbe with many brauy 
ches ſer vpon a ſtraight ſtalke, rounde and deuided 
into ſundrie wings, in height two cubires, -3n& 
leaues be long, broade and ſharpe pointed, ſome- 
what ſoipr or indented abour the ccges Like 6 


--- 


5 wry, ef Th tow OD w 3 hows = ow 


a” 0. 


7 


HISTORIE {OF PLANTS. 213 


' of Sowthiſtles. The flowers along the ſtalkes are white, the ſecede conteined in rounde little 


veſſels,is far andolilie. Si | 1 ba | | 
Treacle,.Wormeſcede riſerh vp with tough and pliant braunches, whereupon do growe manie 
{mall yellowe flowers,after which come long ilender cods like Flixe-weede, or Sophia , wherein is 


conteined ſmall yellowiſh ſecede,bitter as Woormeſeed or Coloquintida, The leaucs are fmall and = 


darke of colour,in ſhape like thoſe of the ſtocke Gilloflowers, but nor ſothicke,nor far. The roote 
is {mall and lingle. | | | 

There is a kinde of muſtard called DrebsYukgaris, or drunkards Muſtarde, ithath finall rounde 
talkes a foote and a halte long , ſer with greene leaues like vato the Marigolde , though not fo 
thicke or fat: the top of the is diuid:d into.many braunches of equall height , charged on the 
rop with many white flowers like vnto Elder, and of the ſame ſmell. The ſecede is contained in ſmall 
garhuskes,ſharpe >. Non 1 as it were a lirtle raiſed vp like the breſts of a woman. PETE 

ean 


- There is likewiſe anotherſorr of byting muſtard or Treacle muſtarde, which hath manic weak 


 braunches trailing,or as it were leaning on the grounde, vpon which do grow whitiſh leaues ſome- 


what toothed or ſnipped abour the edges, bearing at the top of the ſtalkes ſmall white lowers, after 
which there followe long cods like the Stocke lloflowers, but much ſmaller, whereia is the feed, 


" of aſbarpeand biting alte, | 


2 Myagrum. | 3 Camelins. | 
Golde of pleaſure, 7 Treacle Wormeſeed, 


5 - - 
: F 4 - - 


oo - 


| hay Invers Treacle groweth in the Weſt partof Bnglendovine ding andſuch like places, 1 


likewiſe ſeene itin ſundrie other places, as;at Pyms by a village Edmonton neere Lon- 
"by the citie wals of Welt-cheſter in the corne fieldes, andwhere flaxe did growe about Cam- 


fc OR AE ht of Leoden in Zelande, and man places of the Lowe coun- 
Tics, and likewiſe wilde in ſundry places of England, : | 5} i 
L408 * The 


f 
7 
[1 


214 
Theſe herbes do flower in Maic a 


THE SEC: 


DOND BOOKE OF THE 

*% The time, 

nd Iune,andrheirſeede is ripe in September. 
 t*% Themones. 


Golde of PR is called in 
there is another herbe called Ery 
where they vic the oyle thereof in 
Treacle wormeſeede is called 
his firſt booke of the faculties of 
bed by Disſcorides in his ſecond 


Latine roong Ery/amune;it is called properly Ayagrwnr; for FR 

zin the Getmain toong Flachſpottern: in ſhops Se/amun, 
of oyle of Seſavanm | 

| graine which Ge/exin 


4, and is that Ery 
1d iporuor,Y is deſcri. 


cines hath made mention., much di 


_ venture through the likeges of the 
ſims and Galen, differing allo from 


Theſe plants be hot anddriein 


A Alris thought ſaith Dioſcorides,t 
the oilie fatneſle of the leede of 

B KRuclhwteacheth, that the juic 
peaſant doth vie the oile in banqu 

C Theſeede of Comelinaſltamped 
foorth both by ſiege and vomit. 


Of Sh 


1 Burſa Paitoris. 
Shepheards purſe, 


t the roughnes of the skinne is poliſhed and made ſmooth with 


[J1grum, 


ot the herbehealeth vicers of the mouth, and that the poore 
5,and therich in their lampes. *' 


d giuen children to drinke, killeth wormes, and driucth they 


-pheardes purſe. Chap.22. 


 - 2 Burſa Paſtoria minima. 


Small Shepheards pure, 


'Þ 
: 
x 
s 
. 
u 


: 
k 
£ 
A 


11 HISTORIE) OF PUANTS.' 0  #t6 
dar: *T he deſeription. ngilarh 


; He leaves of Shepheards purſe growe vp at the firſt long, gaſhed in the edges like thoſe 
T « Rocket,ſpred vpon the ground: fr6 theſe ſpring vp verie many little weake deuided 
into ſundrie braunches , with like leaues growing on them,bur leſſer; art chetop wherof are 
orderly placed ſmall white flowers : after theſe come 'p litrle ſecede veſſels, flat,and cornered, nar- 
row at the ſteramelike toa cerraiae lictle pouch or purle,in which lic the ſeede, with a white roote 


commeth foorth of the ground like the cuckowe flower, which I 


2 Theſmall Shepheardes 


' haue Engliſbed Ladie ſinockes , hauing ſinall leaues deepely indented about the edges; among 


which riſe vp ſinall tender ſtalkes with lowers at the top, as it were chaffe. The huskes and ſecede 
js like the other before mentioned, 


Theſe herbes do growe of themſelues for the.moſt part,neere common high waies, indeſertand 
vntilled places,amongrubbiſh and olde wals, | 


Ry Ee i, us” , / % The £7180. 
They flower, flouniſh and ſeede all the fommer long. 
| * The names, 


Shepheardes purſe is called in Latine Pa#ort burſa, or Pera Paſtoris: in high Dutch Seckel : 
inlowe Dutch Bozſtkens crupt; in French Baurſe de Paſteur ou Cure : in Engliſh Shepheardes 
urſe or Scirp: of ſome Shepheards pouch, and poore mans Parmacetie, and in the North part of 
Eng and Toywoorr, Pickepurſe, and Cafewcede. 
| *% The temperature. 
They are of temperature colde and drie, and very much binding after the opinion of Xuelixe , 
Mubiolus, and Dodoneus;but L Obel and Pexahold themrto be hot & dry,iudging the ſame bytheir 
ſharp taſte, Which hath cauſed me to inſert them heere among the kinds of Thlaſpi,coſidering the 
faſhion of theleaues, cods, ſeede,8& taſte theregf,which do ſo well agree togither,that I might very 
well haue placed them as kindes thereof, butrather willing to content —_ that haue written 
before,then to pleaſe my ſelfe,] hauc followed their order in marſhalling them in this place, where 
Soy biafnds for coll Carnaltee WY 23 | otra, 
TI % The vertues. lid hegollctd of d5 
heardes purſe ſtaieth bleeding in any part of the bodie , whether the iniceor the decbftion A 
Fs = raven whetherit be vied Pulons wiſe cr in bath,or any other way cle, _ 
Inaclyſter it curech the bloudy flixe: it healeth greene and bleeding woundes: iris maruelous B 
good for inflammations newly begun,and for all diſeaſes which mult be checked backe and cooled. 
The deco&ion doth ſtop the lake , rhe ſpitting and piſſingof blood, and all other fluxes of C 


blood, 


T as 


-Of Fralian Rockeri - Chapage 
" |  *The deſeription. Dir wovo5t> 


1 Þ Talian Rocker hath long leaues cut into many parts or diviſions like thoſe of the Aſhe tree, 
reſembling &welhs his Buckes horne :among which riſe vp ſtalkes weake and tender , bur 
thicke and groſle, two foote high, garniſhed with many ſmall yellowiſh flowers like the mid- 

dl partof Thnſic flowers,of a naughtie ſauour or ſinell, The {cede is ſmall like fande or duſt, in taſte 

lkeRocker ſeede,whereof in truth we ſuſpe&irto beakinde, The roote islangand wooddiesy = 

2 CramblingRocket hath many largeleaues cut into fandry ſefions deepediyrhruſt tothe middle 

nbbe, braunchedlike the hornes of aſtag or hart:among which there do riſe vplove, far & fleſhic 
$twocubites high, lying flar vpon E unde by reafon of his weake and feeble braunches. 

The flowers pony arthe cop cluſtering thicke togither, yellow of colour like thoſe of Diers weede. 

The ſeede is like the former. | $Wet:s 9F1 $30 3% ; 


O 4 . 2 Rheſeds 


( 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
wh | 8 2 Rheſeda maxima, 


rp * The place. 
- Theſeplantsdogrowein Gindie tonic gram and chalkie barren grounds. I have founde them 
in ſundric places of Kent, asar Sourhficere neere maſter Swannes houſe vpon longficlde downes, 
- which is a chalkie and hilly ground, very barren, where grafle will ſcarſely growe or any thing cli 
bur Iuniper and theſe plants. They/grow at Greene-hithe vpon the hilsneere vntothe village, and 
in other places of Kent : bur Thaug nor ſeene them elſe-where , although I doubt nor buc thar they 
. grow inother places of this lande, 3 | | 
| 


* The time, 
Theſe plants do flouriſh in Tune,luly,and Auguſt, 
* The xames. 
The firſt is called of Plinze, 


de, Ernca Peregrima, and Eruce Cantabrics : in Engliſh Tealin 


£ ; 


ocket, | q. : 
The ſecond is called likewiſe of Ka Kr: jr Reſeda maxima,of Anguillera Þ ignamon, wit 
c |. £ 


# 


> 
. > 


of I findenothing extant woor of temperature or vertues. 
i | $ 


Of Ground, El. Chap.25. 


-R He ſtalke of Groundſell | ifered & deuided into many braunches:the leaues be 
oreene, longand cut in es almoſt like thoſe of Succorie, burtlefler, like in a mannet 
to the leaues of Rocket. owers be yellowe and turne into downethatis carriedaway 
with the winde. The roore is full of ſtring hreds, SA ge [- 
2 Geron Gaye ire fie otp.h purplecolour,couered with a fine cotton | 
or downic haire, ofthe height of t) 0 cubies, The leaves ae like thoſe of Saint Les woorr on F 


and fundament: by adding to little ſaffron 


- - HISTORIE/ OF'PLANTS.' ” | «uy 
aoort;and at the top of the ſtalke growe ſmall knops, from which come flowers of a pale yellowe 
Ree Gant nn. gre ſpred hl but they change into downe laradge- the 
Thiſtle, cuenthe ſamehower of his flowring,andis catiedaway with the winde, The roote is ſmall 

x Erigeram, | 
'  Groundlell, 


| * The place, ES þ 
Tex lnaberyro wry comman thronghoun Raglandand 6 FRIED, 
: _ %Thetime, 
They flouriſh almoſt euery moneth in the yeere. 
nas % Thenones. 
Groundfellis called in Greeke ieq#or: in Latine Senecio,bicauſe it waxeth oldequickly: it is called 


| by a baſtarde name Herbautwm: in Germanie Creuſzwurtz: in lowe Dutch Cruys cruyt , and 


Cruyſkencrupt zin Spaniſh Terms cane: in Italian Cardoncello fpelicieſa:in Engliſh Groundlell, 


Cotton Groundſell ſeemerh to be all one with Theophraftms hi = he maketh mention of 
phace in his 7.booke, which is not onely a kinde of pulſe, butan allo, vnto which this kind 


of rouncſell is very like. For as T heophra#tuws ſaith, herbe _Aphace is one ofthe potherbes and 
kindes of Succorie : adding further that it lowxeth in haſte, bur yet ſoone is olde and turneth into 
downe,and ſuch a one is this kinde of Groundfell. But TheophraFws faith further, that it lowreth al 
the winter long,and ſo long as the ſpring laſteth,as my ſelfe haue often ſecne this Groundfell do, 


* Thes $24; d, 2%: "3 
Groundfell hath mixe faculties :ircoolerh vo: withall digeſteth as Paulus AEgineta writerh, 
Theleaues of Groundlell boiled in wine or water and 


thatproceederh of choler. * | gr ey, 


The leaues and flowers d with alittlehogs .ceaſerh the burning heateof the ſtones B 


1 


218  THE./SECOND: BOOKE OF/THE 
.c plea potocfioens into milke and drunke , helperh rhe red gummeand freesjy 
children, | 
Dieorides faith ghatwithebe fine powder offrankenſence it healerh wounds inthe finewesTh 
like operation hath the downe of the flowers mixed with vineger. 
E Boiledinale with alittle honic an ger ponrpeacs vomire, ſpecially if yee adde therer aene 
rootes of Afſarabaccs. | 


Of Saint I Tames his woort. PETS 
%* The kindes | 


T He herbecalled CE bk noewithout cauſe thoughttobeakinde of Ground, | 
ſell, of which there be ſundrie ſorrs,ſome Ga ofdle aſture; == Ns ch RAe Dame: 
ling;and ome ofa lodhfome fauourgllw which kinds will ſee downe, | 


2 Iatobeamarins, ' 


BE 


, 
> '* 
7 
y CE 
i - 
. = 
% 
% 4 
J 
$ , 
- _ 
8 * 
F 
8 &S fi 
>4\ 
- % _- 
F7 
" f 
* if 
4 
hc E 
£&< 
S. 
£ 
Y $\% 


[2 


- » 7 | $M 
- \» ; 3 ©. a. 
: WS, A * = 


TIN 
[| 


Aint Iames his woort orR; gwobre is very well knownee eue ce and binge foorth 
Y at thefirſt broade leaues,ga ay ewmeey ts defended orm 

bur longer,broader,thicker,not whitiſh or ſoft,of a deepe greene colour,with a ſtalk which 

riſeth yp aboue acubite high,chamfered,blackiſh and ſomwhar red withall. The armesor winges 
arc ſet with leſſer leaues like thoſe of Graundlſell or of wilde Rocket. The flowers atthe top be ofa 
yellowecolour like Marigolds, alwellche middle button as the ſmall flowers which @apdeina Per 
round - LAs turne into dow 2m} am zthe roote is threddic,” God 
+ Wit 


HISTORIE! OF PEANT 5 7 219 


X SeaRagwoort eroweth tothe —_— oftwocubirs ; the ſtalkes be not ks as the other, bur 
contrariwiſe aſhe coloured,graic and hoarie; the leaucs be greaterand broader then the other : :the 
fowers growart the top ofa pale yellow colour, couered on the cup or Iuske of the flower, as al 
the leaues , with a certaine ſoft white downe or freeze; the flowers aniſhi into downe , and flic 
_— the wiade, 

* T rheplace. 


kin PET where in vntilled paſtures and fieldes whichare ſornwhat moiſt 
eſpecially,and neere vnto the s of fieldes.. 


The Wd kinde of hag oweth neere the ſea fide in ſundrie places : I have ſcene 
Quea 


it in the fielde by Margate es houſe, and Byrchenton in the Ile of Thaner; likewiſe 
it groweth neere the kings hngy in the Ile of Shepey, in the way leading to Sherlande houſe 
where Sir Edward Hobby ah and likewiſe at Queeneborough caſteil inthe ſame llc, and in 
other places, 


©. Therime 
They fowerin Iuly _ SO which time they are carried away with the downe, 


* The names. 


The firſtisealledin Latine Herbs $. Jacobs, or S. Jacobi flo, and Isrobea: in bigh Durch Sant 
Jacobs bloumen: in lowe Dutch Sant Jacobs cruyt : in French Flaer de $.7acques: in Englih 
$ br the countrey people do callir Stagger wool, md Sragerwooet, andallo Rag. 


"The Theſecondi is named Ciner «ri«,or aſhe coloured Saint lames: woort: ſome call ir Erigeren mari- 
num, or ſea G Carremifia marina. 


* The pemperatare. 


Saint Lames woort is hotanddricin the ſeconde degree,andalſo cleaſingby reaſon of the bitrer- 
nefle which it —_ 
%T he vermny 


Itis commended by the later phyſitions to bee goo for greene Hondibcadd olde filthic vicers A 
whichare not Sd mundified & made cleane, and alſo healerh them withthe iuicc hereof rem- 
pered with honieandMaie buner boiled r cotheformeotan orfalue, ' - / 

Itis much commendedand not without cauſe tohelpe olde uamaigper, B 
andlegs boiled with hogs greake tothe forme of anvinement. | 
Moreouerthe decoction hereof gargarizedis much erby 3s a remediragainlt ellings andim- © 

poſtumarions of the throte, which it waſteth away and throughly healeth. - 

The leaves ſtamped verie fivall, GA TWEEN the D 
juice, addihg thereto inche ende of the boiling alittde Maſtich and Olibanam,, andrhen ſtrained, 
taketh away the oldearhetarhe bucklcbones "_ Sciatica, 


Of garden Sutcore Say. 


* rind on 3 


THE SECOND: BOOKE OF THE 


2 Cichoriam ſatiuwn Aoifalim 
Broade garden Succorie, 


Gerl chemi broade line: ndawcdege with narrow deeps 
ly both fides. The firſt hath broad leaues ſomwhar hairie, not much v- 
like to Endiue, butnarrower ;amongſt whichdo riſe vp ſtalkes , whercon are placedrie 

like leaues, bur ſmaller. The deuideth it ſclfe rowarde the t own braunches, whereon 

do growe little blewe flowers conſiſting of many ſmall leanes, a white ſcede, 
 Theroote is tough, lon , and whi = tay Srurreerancar ia from the which as from 
eucty part of che plane iſ | wich its endenBiounts Thewholeplantisofabius 
taſte likewiſe. | | 
is like vnto the former, bur greater in cuery point. That which 
eth flowers white of colour tending to — the othets 
blewe, as I haue ſaide. | 

3 Garden Endiuebringeth ſoortlilon leaves, broade,ſmooth, more greene abu white, likea 

moſt to thoſe of lettuce, fomthing nicked in theedges .The ſtalke groweth vp among the leauesb& 

ingrounde and hollowe, deuided into braunches, out of which being broken or cut there i 

a iuice like milke ſomewhat bitter: the flowers vpon the braunches conſiſt of many leaues, in colour 

commonly blewe, ſeldome white. The roote is $ long white ; 51 z with ſtringes growingehereat, v 
witheteth after theſecde is ripe. | | 

4  Curled Endive hath leaues 'ni "vhlike to thoſe of the curled or Cabbage Lec <br 

w p firong and thicke Rialkes , ſer. with rhe like leaues bucleſfer, 
gro -arthetop! ER os The roore peril 
his rips fevile.. "Tt 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 221 


wu /at ins. | 


| f] 
Gar WD 
es We wall L 
De V1 [-” -/ = = 
41 = " 224, __ f; 
| A], 
E357) 2 
We Ny * 
A AR 
) EAN 


% The place and time. 

Succorie is not onely ſowen in gardens,but growerh alſo by high waies fides, and in vntilled and 
barren grounds in moſt places of Englange, and eſpecially that ſort which hath the deepe gaſhes, 
which 1s alſo bitrerer then the reſt. | : | 

Endiuc gm. {> inthe ſpring quickly commeth vp to flower, which ſeedeth'in harueſt and 
afterwarde dieth.Burbeing ſowen in Iuly it remaineth ill winter, at which time it is taken vp by the 
rootes and laide inthe ſunne or aire for the ſpace of two houres, then will the leaues be tough and 
eaſlyendure to bewrapped vpon an heape, & buried in the earth with the rootes vpward, where no 
earth can get within it, which if itdid, would cauſe rottennefle,the which ſo couered may be taken 
yattimes conuenient,and vſed in fallades all the winter , as in London andother places is to be 
ſeene,and then is it called white Endine, whereof Plinie ſeemeth nor cobe ignoraunt, ſpeaking to 
the ſame purpoſe in his 20. booke8.chapter. | 

*% The names. "4 | 

Theſe herbes be called by one name in Greeke Sie: notwithſtanding for diſtinRion ſake they 
have called Succorie in Greeke oizs 55eia: Plinie hameth the broade leafed Succorie Hedypnois: and 
the bitterer Djoſeorzdes callerh met: in Laine Son  (placfre, Int ybum <grefte Intybum erraticum, 


BE RESRSS TS 


Q 
(A 


and Cichorjzry : in ſhops itis called Cicores, which name is not onely alow 
buralſo of the Poer Horace in the 31. Ode of his firſt booke, 
Me paſcunt oliue, 
Me Citores, leneſque malue. 


T 


Give, Ambugia (others read Ambabeis :) and ſome there be that name it Rojtrums porcinuns: and 

s 4s Guiliebmus Placentings, and Petrus Creſeentius terme it Sporſe ae : the Germaines call it 
Wegwarten, which is as much ro ſay,as thekreper of the waies: the Italians Cichorea: the Spa- 
nards Almerowes : the Engliſh men Cicorie and Succorie: the Bohemians Czakazka. 


TREE Oe IRE * 


ofthe later Phiſitions, 


Wich vs faich Plinie in his 20.booke 8.chapter, they haue called- 7ntybum erraticum , or wilde En-. 


Endiue | 


| 


222 THE SECOND BOOKE OF; THE 
Endiue is namedin Greeke Sie ihesrt in Latine Intybum ſatinwn : of lome Endaijuia* Of Auicenne 

and Serapio Taraxacon: of the Italigns Staris/a, which name remaineth.in moſt ihops,allo Serial, 
as though they ſhould fitly call fe Sex, but not ſowell Serrzela, with adouble y : for Serid: is Lac 
ruce ſyluetris,orwilde lettuce: it is called/in Spaniſh Serraya Exuide: in Engliſh Endiue and Scari. 
olc:and when it hath been inthe carth buried as aforcſaid,then js it called white Endiue, 

Sd , | iid” | |; W The mature. £27 | 

 EndineandSuccorie arecold ang dric in the ſecond degree, and withall fomwhat binding :and 
bicauſe they be ſome thing bitter they do alſo clenſe and open. | | 


GardenEndiue is colder and not fo drie or clenſing,, and byreaſon of theſe qualities they are 
thought ro be excellent medicines fora hot liuer, as Ga/ex hath written in his 8, booke of the com. 
poſitzons of medicines according to theplaces atfeed. | 

T3 | | The wertwes. | | 

A Theſcherbs when they be greene haye vertueto coole the hot burning of the liver , to helpe the 
ſtopping of the gall, yellow iaundexs, lacke of fleepe, ſtopping of vrine,and hot burning feauers, 

B A fyrupe madethereofand fugar is very good for the diſcaſes aforeſaid, = : 

C Thediſtilled water is good in pqtions, cooling and purging drinks, A 

D Thediltilled water of Endiue, Plantaine andRoſes "offer y 
of the yarde to be inieted with airing, whether the hon came by vncleanneſle or by ſmall ſtones 
and grauell iſſuing foorth with che vrine as often hath been ſeene, R's 

E eſe herbes caten in ſallades or otherwiſe eſpecially the white Endiuc,doth comfort the weake 
and feeble ſtomacke,and coaleth and refreſheth the ſtomacke ouermuch hearted. | 

F The leaues of Succorie bruſedare good againſt inflammarion of the cics being outwardly ap- 
plicdto the greeuedplace, | - i BY | 


Of wilde Succorie. (hap.28. 


| * The kindes. | | : 
ry ſorts of Succories and Endiues, ſois there wilde kindes of eithet 
of them. | | 


: Cichorium fylueſtre. Wilde Succorie. —& 2 Cichorium lutewn. Yellow Succorie. 


* 


ainſt excoriations-itithe conduit 


] Nlike maner as therebe ſundric 


Sy A 7 jo : N k 


* 49 
©) A GR 
” - X 


re 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS 29 


| w% The Cription. 
: Tide Succorie hath lon oo; omewhat ſnipt about the edges like phage of 
V Sowthiſtle, with a ſtalke growing to the height of two cubirs, which is devided ro- 
warde the top into many braunches. The flowers grow atthe top blewe of colour 
the roote is rough and woodic , with many ſtrings faſtned thereto, 
2 Yellowe Succorie hath longand large leaues , deepely cut about the edges like thoſe of the 
Haukeweede. The ſtalke is braunched mto ſundrie armes, wheron do growe yellowe flowers verie 


double.reſembling the lowers of Dandelion or _—_— which being withered, it fieth away 
in downe with cuery blaſte of winde. 


3 Intybun ſplueftre. 
* Wild Endiue, 


= jemes flcighrl Pen, OED 
np rhe <5 of neem tat 


hk lants do erowe wilde in f Soo ta Bangles, cen hd tr 
grounds elpeciall in chalkie and flonie p | 


* The time. 
They flower fromthe middeſt tothe end of Auguſt, 


| *% Thr names. 
Yellowe Succoric is not without cauſe 


thought whe Huſrw, TL "NL I 


ris, 


| 


SO nt 0 rt RY no Ads 


214 * THE SECOND BOOKE+OF.THE 
ris,of which Pliwie in his 20.book 8.chapter writeth; hoſiris(faith he)is like ro Endive, bur leſſer xy q 
rougher,itis called of ZObelins Hedypnats, the'teſt of the names ſer foorth in their ſeueral! title, 
be ſufficient for this time, | | (of Fi.” 2 * | 
& The tem | 


They agree in temperature with the garden Siſccorie and Endive 
A Theleauesof theſe wilde herbes are boiled in-portage or brothes for ficke and feeble perſons 
that haue hot,weake and feeble MHNa' ks ro er theTame, | 
B They arcuidgedtohauethe ſame vertues with thoſe ofthe garden, if not of more force in work. 


ing. | 


| Of Gumme Succorie. Chap.2.9. 
| pf | | 


'% The kindes. 
TD frrider deferiberh ewo ſorts6r kindes of gum Succorie, norwithanding by the diligence of 
| laterwritnrs there be ſundric forts founde more, differing as well in colourof the flowers | 
as alſq in the ſhape and proportion ofthe whole plant, which ſhall bee deſcribed in this Chaprer 


folowing. 


x Chondrills cerales. 2 Chontdrillacerales latifolia. 
Blewe gum Saccorie | Robinus gum SUCCorie. 


Ip a® 


| *F << 
- uu» © n® ; ba 
Es Em & 
ARTE ( B-S== Js. i» £ . 
IVY if ne? , 4p i 
\ : Id tZ4 \ of 
by ', \t .. _ "*. 2; L a 


Vie Succorie with ble 
nexed thereto, full of a mi 


| 
«| 
j 


heigheof two footeto 


[4 
. 
e 
4 


of 
5 
[4 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. 225 
ſometime more brannches, bearing very pleaſantflowers of an azure colour or deepe blewegwhich 
being paſt the ſeede flicth away in downe with the winde. © 

> Gum Succoric with broad leaues, which I hape named 24b;as gum Succorie (for that he was 
the firſt that hath made any mention of a ſecond kind,which he ſent me as agreat dainty, as indeede 
Iconfeſle ir)in rootes is like vnto the former;the leaues be grearernor vnlike vnto thoſe of Endiuc, 
but cut more deepely euen to the middle ribzthe ſtalkes growe tothe height of two foore: the Bow- 


ersare likewiſe of an azure colour, but ſprinckled Quer as it were with (iluer ſande,which addeth vn- 


tothe lower great grace and beautie, : | 

Yellowe gum Succoric hath m_ leaues like in forme and deuiſion of the cur leaues to thoſe of 
wilde Succorie, but leſſer,couered all ouer with a hoaric downe. The ſtalke is rwo foott high,white 
and downie alſo, diuided into ſundrie braunches : whereupon do growe torne flowers like thoſe of 
Succorie,but in colour yellowe,which are turned into downe that is carried away with the winde. 
Theroote is long and of a meane thicknefle, from the which as from all the reſt of the plant doth 
iſſue foorth a milkie iuice, which\ being dried is of a yellowiſh red, ſharpe or biting rhe roong, 
There is founde vpon the braunches heereota gumn as Dioſeorides ſaith, which is vid at this daie 1 
Phiſicke intheIle Lemnos,as Bel/onims witneſlerh, 
4 Spaniſh gum Succorie hath many leaues ſpreat{ vpon the ground,in ſhape like thoſe of Ground- 
ſell,but not ſo thicke and fat: among which riſe yp braunched ſtalkes ſer with leaues like thoſe of 
Stoebe ſalamantica or ſilver weede,whercof this is akinde, The lowers groweat the top of an ouer- 
worne purple colour, which ſeldome ſhewe themfelues abroade blowen. 


3 Chondrill lutes. At 4 Chondrilks Hiſpanica, 
Yellowe gum Succorie, F- | Spaniſh gum Succorie, 


\ 


5 Ruſhic gum Succorie hath a tqugh and harde roote, with a fewe ſhort threeds faſtened there- 

;to:from the whichriſe vp a fewe iaggedlleaues like thoſe of ſuccorie. The ſtalke groweth vp tothe 
h and limmer like vato ruſhes , whereon are ſer many graffic leaues. The . 

flowers be yellowe, "a and ſinall, which bcing faded, do flic away with the winde, The whole 

| | | - MY. plant 


Ft es Hrs 87 
FI Nite 4 Ea 3 07 


225 - THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
plant hauingmilkie iuice like vnto t other of his kinde, I 
| 6” Sea gumSuccoric hath many knobby or tuberous rootes like thoſe of Chamebalanus, or Pele. 
carth nut, withlong ſtrings faſtened thereto : from which immediately riſe vp a fewe ſmall thinne 
leaues faſhioned like the point of aſpeare; amongwhich ſpring vp ſmall tender ſtalkes , weake and 
reeling this way and that way lying r ypon the ground. The flower groweth at the top, of an'ouer. 
wore or euill yellow colour. The whole plantis whitiſh or hoarie, asare many ofthe ſea plants, 


C__—_—_— 


5 Chondrilla Tuncea. | be 6 Chonar ile marina L'Obels. 
* Ruſhie gum Succotie.| | "SLE Sea gum SUCCOTIE. 


- 
128 


E we & ps 
Y y af , 
—_ M | 
- CY 
” » - 
* 
- _ 
% L , = 
ww, 
, % 4 my ; = - %z 
— 4% V T's * » 
- . 4 - 
Ul & —_— >. SG 
£ , * 
"; ag5 > Pe. 
4 _ F 4 gn n 
| SS = 
"i - > 
F q Sr 2 E 1 
; p 7 
/ 4 x "4 
b , —< 4 F _ _—_- 
% — ; ; 
_ % 
\ —_ +, # 
"T > & Gn nrnmnm erneel = —_ — ——= 5 # 4.© 
PIES RR "_ 
I % _ 
L £5FY 
- « - 
\S : : ; a . TT ' 
_—_ \ " { <Y 
oy 4 [ wm 
' 


7 Swines Succorichath long,ſmall and tender rootes,from the which rife many indented leaues 
like thoſe of Sowthiſtle, ſpread or laide flat vpon the grounde; from the middeſt whereof riſe vw 
ſmall ſoft and tenderſtalkes, bearing atthe op ſinalldouble we flowers like thoſe of Dande- | 
/ lion or piſle-abed, bur ſmaller. The ſgede with the downie tuft flicth away with the winde. 
$ Jo male PP are hath along oy my 90g with ſome fewe threds gn g,- 
ned thereon: from which ſpring vp|{mall tender ] read vpon the ground,cut or ſni | 
the edges confuſedly,of an ouerworne ruſtic grayiſh —_ , full a milkic juice: among whichui | 
vp divers ſmall render naked ſtalkes, bearingat the top of eucrie ſtalke one lower and no more, of 
a faint yellow colour and ſomething double; which being ripe doe turne into downe thatis carried 
away with the winde, The ſecede likewiſe cleaueth ynto the ſaide downe, and is likewiſe carr: 
away.Thewhole plant periſheth when it hath perfeed his ſecede, and recoueteth it ſelfe againedy | 
the falling thereof, 8 | ? | [| 


F 
* 


, 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS. © 227 


7 Hypocheris,Porcelhia. Et $ Grismaſcula. 
Swines Succoric. | «BY ale Swines Succorie, 


, 
; 
: z _— 
? 
[4 
. 
: 
[2 


- 


* Theplace. Fe (s 
Theſe kinds of gum Succories dogrow in vneilled places vpon ditch bankes and the borders of 
fieldes. | | *% The time. | 
They do flower from Maic to the end of Auguſt, 24 
*% Thepames. | 


Gum ſuccorie hath beene called of the Grzcians w»d:2a» : of the Latines Cendrills 2nd Chondrille, 
: Dioſcorides and Plimie calit Cuhorion and Seri, by reaſon of ſome likenefle they haue with Suc- 
corie, eſpecially the rwo firſt which haue blewe flowers as thoſe of-the Succories. ZObeltie 
| Maketh Cicoree werrucaris to bee Zazintha of | Mathiolus. Divers haue taken the plant with 
blewe lowers to be Seſamoides magmumr; bur withqut any reaſon, for that Se "ag hath borrowed 
his name from the likeneſle ir hath with Seſamum: but this herbe is not like to Seſ@nwn in anic 
one point,and therefore I thinke it berter referred;vnto the gum Succories, for the flowers haue the 
forme and colour of gum $uccorie, and yeelde the like milkie juice. 5 **=a 
CG go EY % The nature. | 

Thekinds of gum Succorie arelike in temperature ro the common Succorie, but ſomwhar drier, 

| | | % The vertaes. | 

The juice of gum Succorie taken with red and thicke wine and drunke,ſtaieth the laske, A 
.. Theroot and leaues tempered with & honie made vp into Trocis or little flat cakes wirthniter B 
orſaltperer added thereto, doe clenſe away the morphewe, ſun burnings,and all ſpors of the face, 
| Thegum which is gathered from the braunches whereof it tooke his name , laieth downe the C 
ſtaring haires of the eic browes and ſuch like places. | 

"The gum powdered with myrrhe and pur into a linnencloth and a peſfaric made thereof likea D 
bnger, and put vp,bringeth downe the termes in yoong wenches and ſuch like, 

The ſeedes of Zazrmths brought to powder and giuen in the decreafing ofthe Moone to the E 
quantitieof a ſpoonefull, raketh away wartes and ſuch ike excreſcencein what partof the bodic fo- 
ever they bezthe which medicine a certaine Chirurgion of Padua did much vie, whereby he gained 
great ſits of money,as reporteth that auncient Phyſirion 72achimm Camerar:ms now living in No- 
temberg a famous citic in Germanic, P 2 of 


hr P - 
z 


# * Tous” A 4d « ts os Re 4 p 
— Well 4 Ag At 2 - ” oy - p > 6 bom R AOIENSS 3 , ? + Nt 
oY hexry 2. ol + 2 Pt M7 Ws DIY oe wy 0 A* 6,5 EP = x. 4; du, Sr" # A. 
£ Pen THE TRACY A FTI 1 7 hf = Og 2 v- 1 4 


CONT BIERETTO a TOY TO 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
© Of Dandelion, Chap.30. 


| | # The deſcription. 0/4 | | 
+4 He herbe which is commonly called Dandelion; doth ſende foorth from the roote long 
- leanes deepely cut and gaſhed in the edges like thoſe of wilde ſuccorie, bur ſmoother: 
vpon cueric ſlalke ſtandeth a flower greater then that of Succorie , but double and 
thicke ſer togither, of colour yellowe and fweete in ſmell , whichis turned into a round dow- 
nic blowball, that is carcied awaie with the winde. The rooteis long, lender, full of milkiciuice 
when any part ofitis broken,as is the Endiue or Succorie,but bitterer in taſte then Succorie. 
2 Thercisalſo another kinde of |Succorie which may be referred hecreunto, whoſe leaues are 
long ,curlike thoſe of broade leafed| Succorie: the ſtalkes arc norvnlike, being deuided into braun- 
ches as thoſe of Dandelion, bur leſſer,which alſo yaniſherh into downe whea the ſeede is ripe, hv 


uinga long and white roote, 


They are foundoften in medows neere Tra ditches,as alſoin gardens and in high was 
much troden, | x xt = f 


Fi 1 + The time. 
Theyflower moſt times in the yeere,eſpecially if the winter be not extreame colde.. 
*% The names. | 


Theſe plants belong to the Succories , among which TheophraFas in his 7. booke nameth 
1124-99 , Leonardus Fuchſeus thinketh that Dandelion is Heaypmois Pliny , of which he writerh inbis 
20. booke 8. chapter, affirming it tg be a wilde kinde of broade leafed Succoric, and that Dandetr 
on is Tarax4cox: but T&raxacon a5 _Aujcenteacheth inhis 692, Chapter is Garden Endciue, a yh | 

| | b- 10 | r4p79, 


HISTORIE 'OF'PLANTS. We” 


-e2iamentionerh in his 143. chapter,who citing ? 4ulus for a witneſleconcerning the faculties, ſer- 
rech downe theſe words which Paolus writeth of Endiue and Succorie, Diuers of the later Phiſici- 
ons doallo call it Dexs Leoan or Dandelion:it is called in high Dutch Kalkrauts in low Dutch ]Ia- 
pencruit tin French P;/en(;t os couronne de preitre,or Dent de lyon : m Engliſh Dandelion , and of 
divers Piſſeabed, | | 

* % The temperature and Vertues. 


Dandelion is ike it temperature to Succorie,thar is to ſaie to wilde Endiue.Itis colde,bur ic dri- 


 erhmore, and dorh withall.clenſe and open by reaſon ofthe bitternes which it hath joined withit : 
andtherefore iris good for thoſe things for which Succoric is. | 


Of Sowthitle. Chap.zr. 


' * The kinds 
T Here be two kindes of Sowthiſtles one tenderer and ſofter: the other more pricking & wilder, 
whereot there be ſundrie ſorts more founde by the diligence ofthe later writers, ally which ſhal 
be comprehended in this chaprer,andeuery one bediſtinguiſhed with a ſeuerall deſcription. 


| | ' ** Thedeſeription. 

1  Hepricklie Sowthiſtle hath long broadeleaues cut very deepely euen to the middle ribbe, 
full of ſmall prickles rounde abour the edges ſomething harde and ſharpe , with a rough 

and hollowe ſtalke. The flowers ſtande on the toppes of the braunches,conſiſting of many 


ſmall torne w—_—_— and yellow of colour:and when the ſeede is ripe it turneth into downe,and 
c | " | 


is carried away with the winde.The whole plant is full of a white milkie juice, 
2 The talkaf haresleteuce or fnooch Sowthiſtle,js oftentimes a cubire hi d & hollow,of 2 


pale colour and ſomtimes reddiſh. The leaues be greene, broad, ſer round abour with _ cuts or 


AP ETELIDER Gab The flowers ſtande at the top of the braunches yellow of co- 
WV | 


hich are caricd away with the winde when the ſeedeis ripe, 


1 Sonchwu aſþer. 7 2 Sonchu Lewis. 
ickly Sowthiſtl | | Hares Lettuce 
Pri y ©, , | . 
SRP, AH "Dd 
LEON Wc $7 5 or . 
LU; x 2 A, »T. ? 
> \y *T . Fa 4 
Ng b 
. 
: a 
N 
4 
. 
f 


Ne OAPI PIT yn; ry 


_ 2 1 at” \\ YT ” ” 2Þ3 T I 
Lewis cab ds llc FO as g EE CESS ReaEgs 1 4 _ _ 


230. _ THE, SECOND: BOOKE OF [THE 


2 Sonchas Lewis latifoliom 4. 7LEF 4 Sonchus Lexis fore o/be.. 
R Broad leafed Sowthiltle. | 117: White flowred Sowthiſile. 


3 Broadelcafed Sowthiſtle hath/alon g.thicke and milkie roote,as is all thereſt ofthe pang 
many ſtrings or fibres: from the which commerh foorth a hollowe ſtalke braunched or deuidedin- 
co ſundric ſe&tions. Th 


he leaues be great, ſmooth,ſharpe pointed andgreene of colour: the flowers 
be white in ſhape like the former. Ie 


4 White flowred Sowthiſtleis like vnto the laſt before deſcribed, ſauing that the whole plant is 
far greater; the leaues broader,and the rootes with many more tangled ſtrings which eſpecially ſet 
reth foorth the difference. | | , 


5. Snowe white Sowthiſtle hath many large leaues cut to the middle rib,ſharpe pointed:the ſtake 


thicke and hollowe , whereupon do growe flowers ofthe colour of ſnowe,which eſpecially maketh 
the'difference from the laſt deſcribed.. = | 


6 | Thisblew flowred Sowthiltle i thegreateſt of all thereſt ofthe kindes, reſembling the garden 
Endive as well in |! mb 


caues as in. colour of the flowers. The whole plant yeeldeth mulke as all the 
re{t doe. T1 | | 


Tree Sowthiſtle hath a very great, thicke and harde roote,ſetwith a fewe hairie threddes: from 
which rifeth a ſtrong and great Ralke of a wooddie ſubſtaunce, ſer with long leaues.not vnliketo 
Languedebeete, but more deepely cut about the edges : vpon which do growe faire double yellos 
flowers which turneinto downe and are caried away withthe winde. ' whole plantis 


with ſuch milkic juice as are the render and hearby ſowthiſtles, which certainly ſhewerh ito bes 
kinde thereof ,otherwiſc it mighthaue been refetred to the Haukeweedes, whereunto in face and 


ſhew it is like.  . 


8 


$ Thewoode Sowthiſtle hath m3 ny fibrous rogtes, fromthe which ſpring many branched ſtalks: 
the lower leanes arclike vnto the ilde colewoortin ſhewe and faſhion ; the flowers growe at the 
top yellow and downie,as arcthe reſt of ſowthiltles. | | - 

=o 4” 


5 Sorchw 


le, 


F p b—_ - Ars 
\\ 


<Y ; SF 
"YE BXUN 5 . | F/ 
—_— + : \& Z 7 : 
P FS hens? al 
AS JS 
” {4 468 
4 a” 


- 


7. 


ICs. 


— 
4 k 
« 
q 14 * . . 
4 , 
: {5 
1 lcat 


8 Sorchat 


= 
te - 
W = 
Wo 
EH 
RR 
% & 
> 4 
WV = 
- 
_ 
> 
v& 
aq 


Wood Sowthiſtle, 


L 
Ie 
8 

G 

\S 


- 
: 1 
Yd : $4973 
3" - 
St 


% 

{ #} = < * T7, 

VE Wo bn 
5 »s. 


y Fa,” 
: - z 4 
_ gx 
— 


Fo 
[WP 
Z 
< 
<2 
Cy 
[AF 

BW 

2d 
6 
O 
4 
WH) 

wh 


7 Sonchuc arboreſecns, 
Tree Sowthiſtle, 


5 Sonchin flore nineo. 
 -. Snowewhite Sowrhiſtle, 


gs | THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| | * The 
Theſe kinds of Sowthiſtles do growe wilde in Arcs gncdome moot marſhes neere the 
ſea, and among pot hexbes. | | 
The tree SowthiſtleT hae nor as yer rene and may becounted a Pye in Englit gardens or 
elle wherein theſe Northerne and cglde regions, | 
*% The tome, * 
They flower in Tuneyluly, Augu and ſometimes later, GE 4 
| | w% Thewames, © | 
Sowthiſtle is called i in Grecke :in Latine Sonchi:of divers Cicerbite laftucels and Ladterong: 
Apulezus callerh it Lattuca Leporind,-or Hares Thiſtle, of ſome Braſſica leporima , or Hares Cole. 
woort : the Engliſh names are ſufftcjently touched in their ſeucrall titles: in Ducchit is Falled bg: 
ſen L attowwe 3 che French Pays ok licure. mt The temperature. 
The Sowrhiſtles,as Galen writeth;are of a mixt remperaturezfor Facy conliſt of a watt &earthie | 
ſubſtance,colde and likewiſe bindink Pp, | te Thewvertues. | | 
\ Whileſt they are yetyoong and tender they are caten as other potherbes are , bur dhether they 
be eaten or ourwardly applied in maner of a pulrus they euidently coole ; therefore they be good 
for all inflammations or hot ſivellings if they be laide thereon. 
B Sowthiſtlegiueninbroth,raketh way the gnawings of the ſtomack proceeding of an hot: cauſe, 
and increaſe milke in the þreaſts of nurſes, cauſing their children whom they me to haue a 
ood colour,and of the ſame vertue js the broth if it be drunken, 
C Theivice of theſe herbes doth cool and temper the heate of the fundament and prix parts, 


of Hanleweede. (hap. 32. «Þ* 
| | % The kindes, | | 
Aukeweede 2atfo a kinde of ducebrie of which Dzoſcorides maketh two ſorts , Fg thelater 
writers mogthe which ſhall be deſcribed in this chapter following , where they ſhallbediſto- 
_ guiſhed as well wich ſeuerall titles a ſundric delcriptio G 


1 Hieraciuwn mains Dioſcor iqis. 0 2 Hieracium mim Diofeorid, 
Great Haukeweede, | ; | Small qt gal 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, © 233 
*% The deſcription. HE 
' He great Haukeweede hath large and long leanes ſpread vpon the erounde, in ſhape like 
T thole of the milke Thiſtle. The ſtalke groweth to the height of two cubits braunched in- 
to ſundrie armes or diuifions;hollowe within as the y kexe, reddiſh ofcolour:where- 
ypon do grow yellow flowers thicke and double, which turne into that flieth awaic with the 
 winde when the ſeede is ripe. The roote is thicke, tough and threddie, | 
2 The ſimal Haukeweede which of moſt writers hath beene taken for yellow Diuels bir, hath long 
leaues deepely cut abour the edges, with ſome ſharperoughneſſe thereon like vnto Sowthiſtle. The 
ſalkes and flowers are likethe former, the roote is compact of many ſmal ſtrings with a ſmal knob, 
or as it werethe ſtumpe of anolde roote in the middle of thoſe ſtringes,cut orbirten off, whereupon 
it tooke his name Diuels bir, be: | 
2 Hieractum nigrum. SAILS 4 Hitracium Leyorinum. 


 Blacke Haukeweede. Hares Hankeweede. 
JE: BER <7 on aftl Ran” 


' 
F 


.. 


«® 6 7, *% " IP 
[ ”-E= . 


-\v '#, 
* > © 


flowers be like the former, but not ſo double. | | Fg 
5 Succorie Haukeweede hath many long and large leanes f ypon the per y cur 
on both ſides to the middle ribbe, from which riſe vp ſmall ſtalkes and flowers like thoſe of the leſle 
Dandelion, bur leſſer. The roote conſiſteth ofmany Nall threddie ſtrings. 


| 6 Endiues Haukeweede hath many broad leaues , endented abour theedges very Neto gar- 


den Endiue,but narrower: among which riſe vp ſtalkes a foote high lender and brittle. The flowers 
growe yellowe at the top, double and thicke ſer ih a ſcaley huske like the Knap-weede or lacea, ha- 
utng great,thicke and threddie roote, - Far | 


5 Hieracium 


oo Eee nt ef NS. ON RES Can} 4h 


*, 2 : k wo & Fn. 4% 5 ; oe o OT Nas PE tes "TRA 
ED SE Ce dba norco dtuatireo tint. mw 254... 4 = T2 ane —— IE SE III VTRannk; —WAANE .- AY 4 hw WS - ASME 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


5 Hieracium Aphacotdes. | | | 6 Hieracium intybacews. 
Succprie Haukew cede. | | | Ks an90k Haukeweede. 


\> 


—_ 


Id #74 ; , 
; Wy VL ASI » 
(ME LESS 
a JLEXI 
[5 T2 


F} h 4 (6E- / a 
p , = = 
þ\\ H' 4 *% ky - r a / \ + 
* a. &t F, pi <. fo 
< ov > % 4 % L 
> S. K ' ” 2 = i 
0 > G - f Fas 
wx G ,) f p 
a 4 v 4 £/ 
F 


CY 


( L SJ EPR 
' SL ND. 
J 6M WY IR 


7 Hu iu radicatum. i "oy 1h44 Gulf Fes, 
ESong rooted. anfrvopedy. i Shove ar vewnr 


'HISTORIE/OFI PLANTS. {7 x36 


\ 


| * The deſcription. Le dl p 
Long rooted Haukeweedehach mai broade leaues ſpred vpon the gr liphily and con- 
fuſed) So the vnlike to Endive Haukeweede:among we el: ng vp 


ſtrong and tough ſtalkes a foore and ckig fron the top with fairedouble flowers, yellow and 
like vnto Piſſeabed, The roote is very long,whice and tough, | IT -* 
$ Sharpe Haukeweede hath leaues like to thoſe of Languedebeefe or Oxeroong, ſharpe abour the 
and rough inthe middle. The ſtalkes be long and {lenderyſet with the like leaues, burlefſer : 
the flowers grow at the top double, and yellowe of colour:the roote is tough and threddie. 


9g Hier acionn ms L'Obely. | | 8 o Hieracium latifolium, = 
Crooked Haukewcede | Broade leafed Haukeweede, 


* # 
» . 
I; \ 
5 
_ 
- - 
- 
- 
ys 
2 


Wn 


9 Crookedor falked Haukeweede hath leaues like vnto the garden Suecorie, ſlightly endented 
on both ſides, with tender, weake,and crooked ſtalkes; wherupon do grow fooliſh idle flowers of a 
bleake or pale yellowe colour,and the roote ſmall and threddy. YE ny 2D] 
10 Thebroade leafed Haukewcede hath broade long leaues , rough and deepely endenred o- 
wardthe ſtalke,reſembling the leaues of the greateſt Sowtrhiſtle. The ſtalke is hollowe and ſpungj- 
ous, full of a milkie juice as is the reſt of the plant;as alſo all the other of his kinde:the flowers grow 
at thetop of the ſtalkes double and yellowe,. 7 | : 
11 Thegreatrmountaine Haukeweede with broade leaues, groweth vp in forme of leaues and ſta- 
tweto Golden rod or Yirgs avres. The ſtalks be fat,hollowe and full of milke:the flowers growe ar 
| 


the top double andyellowe of colour. The roote is ſmall and threddie. / | 
There is a ſmall mountaine Haukeweede hauing leaues like vnro the former , but more deepely 
_ Eurabout theedges and ſharper pointed) the ſtalkesare tender and weake z the flowers be double 
andyellowelike thoſe of Piloſella or great moulſe>-care; the roote is ſmall and threddic, | _ 


236 THE $ECOND BOOKE OF'THE 


11 Hiericizm montanum latifolium. | 
Great a WP" | ur Haukeweede, &+ Theplace. _ 
>: 4 | | "Theſe kindes of herbes do. growe in vntoileq | 
places neere vnto the borders of corne fieldes, i in 
medowes, high waics, woodes, mountaines and 
hillie places,and neeretothe brinks of ditches, . 
| *% The tne. © 
$ | They flowerfor che moſt part allthe ſommg, - 
long,fome ſooner and others later, 
| ©. % The names. 
| Theſeplants are al conteined vnder the name of 
 Hieracizn ; which is calledin Greeke, alſo ic-/uy; 
| diuers nameit in Latine Accypitrina, which ister- 
med in French Cichoree zanlne : in Engliſh Hauke. 
 weede.. Theſe herbes tooke their name from 2 
 Hauke, which' is calledin Larine ©c:piter, and 
inGreekies?, for they are reported to cleerc their 
ſight by conueying the iuice heercof into their 
cies. Gaza calleth it Poreellia, for itis numbred * 
' among the Succories , they atecalled alſo Lim 


C8. 

Yellowe Haukeweede is called of fome Meorſm 
diaboli, or yellow Diuels bir, for that the roote doth 
very well reſemble the bitren orcroprtroote of the 
common Diuels bit,being like Scabious. 

| + The nature. | 
| The kindes of Haukeweede are  colde anddrie, 
| ah ſomewhat binding, | 
& The vertwes. 
jon like to Sonchwy or Sowthiſtle,and being vicd rt the ſame ma- 
= be as 5 good ro Sally ſes thatit doth ſerue vnto, 


cie ſight, if the ivice of them be droppedinto theeiesglpecially that thatis 
elle Du qare? apr bethe beſt and of Facet force. 


Therefore as Dioſcorides writerb iriygood foran bot ſtomacks, apdfor inflammarions if ite. 
laid ypon them. | 


The berbe nd root fampeddndapplied.icn <li yen: | 
pion,which cffe&t _ ma Haukeweedes, but the leſſer ones alſo, do | 


- [Gf Haukgweeder Chap. e33s 


\* The hides. 


AIP! EPR kindeof Ha eweedes,which Caralu C Ad hr fork 
: in his Pannonicke'ob reſembling the kindes of Scor zonera, o LPs 

unto they are very like ; the which RO EDTA POST (Oo, {f SE 
forme very notablic. | | 


a 


/ 


4 * The deerption 


He firſt of Clu, his Haukeweeds hath reat broad leaues ſpred vpon the nds 
hairie about t c edges,oftenrimes a cele iagged,, allo ſoft as is theleafte | 
raper,and ſomerimes daſhrheere and er ich fomeblacke ſpots ſhape lie the garc 


Endive fl efamilkie nice among which riſeth vp athicke hollowe ſtalke of a cubite high, dew 
dingi ſelfe ar thetop into 8 LIC N helta 0 th grow ſweet {melling a 


' /HISTORIE OF/PLANTS. i: £37 


\nlike to thoſe of yellowe Succorie,, fer or placedin a blacke hoarie and woollie cup or huske,of a 
bleak yellow colpur,which curneth into a downie blowebal that 1s caried away with the winde: 
| theroote cnterethdeepe' into the ground,of the bignes of a finger,full ofmilke,and cover:d with a 
thicke blacke barke, Ko s | 
| 2 Theſecondſortof great Haukewrede according to my compuration, and the 5.0fCluſfw, hath 
leaues like the former, thatis to ſaie, ſoftand hoarie, andas it were couered with a kinde- of woo!- 
lineſſe or hairineſſe, bitter in raſte,of an inche broade, narrowerand longer then the former. 'The 
alkeis a foote high, whereupon do growe yellowe flowers like thoſe of Goates-beard or Trago- 
on, which are caticd away with the winde when the ſcede is ripe. The roote is blacke and full of 
Fic iuice,and hath certaine white ſtrings annexed thereto, | 


I Hieraciam imwn Cluſit. | 2 Hieraciam 5.Cluſt. 
The firſt H of Cluſavs. | Cleſars his ks Haukeweede; 


| Thirkindof Haykeeede ab blake roore finger thickeullof milkie ice, depely thru 
waa — ſome ſmall fibres belonging thereto: from which come vp many long leaues 
Ez aninche or mote broad,coucred with ſoft downie or hairie leaues;of an ouerworne ruſſet co- 


woe amongſt the leaues come vp naked hard ſtalkes wherupon do grow yellow flowers ler in 
__ © cuppeor chalice, which is turned into downe and caried cr ith his ſcede by the 


4 Theſe Haukeweede hath a i itbhechorderpe | TO 
greatthick roptenor deepely thruſt into the ground, bur 1 
— porter omemtarbuchel pee mall, kan rg 


the 


Mpronachs $ bir, hoarie, haitie and ſoft as are/the others prece- 
Wt. The take iphollowe eflowers be yellowe and doiible as the other, oy 


3 Hieraciun 


a; THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
3 Fieracium 6. Claſer. | Y: 4 Hitracinm?7.Cluſit, | 


Claſius is, Harkeweede, i: "oY —_ 


ng | | | 

| PS DLLY | | ; ” V. "8b py, 2 

PE IN IS & PR 

- #* 7 hs . No 7 L; 
- | | 138 Sa «4 | " SY 

i iz» ” | Wi! / - - 7 s NAV} 


JL HG. - he | JIS: 
L611 34 I ; ; 

Sl | ys - . : %4+Þ 5 - 

"_ LEY | i 


L971 L-4 
' 
7 


£ 
Ly 


Theſe kindes of Hankeweede 2 rding to _— of Clefun do growe in Hungarie and Av 
ſtrich,and in the grafſic dric hils, and herbie and barraine Alpith mountaines and ſuch like 
notwithſtanding if my memoriec  faile me not] haue ſcene them in ſundrie places England 


| Imeane God willing| to obſerue heerafter,as oportunitic ſhall ſerue me. 
|  _ w% Thetime. fy 
He faith they flower from Maic to Auguſt,at what timethe ſecede is ripe. 
*% The names. 


The authour himfelfe oct os then heere is ſer downe as touching the names, 
thar it ſhall ſuffice what hath nowy beene lag, referring the handling thereof to —_— conſe 


deration. 
| * The nature and verines. 


I finde not any [hing atall ſer downe either of their naturesGt vertues , and thetefore[for ; 
—beare to faic any thing elſe "dean ASA ching ive necellirie 36 write atfy rnd 


owne conceitand 1 3 chro 
of Df Lettie Chap. 34- 


w The kinds | orc oo 


kt . 


Hemwengega tothe opinion of rhe, amcients, SS on ſorts Ad 
Ti: eertgtoheopnionolit burtime with the i uſtric of laterwriters ha 


[Er alkene ancame teal nbcaltach {papa dont. 


_” 


» 

a 
= V : 
WW F 

o 
i Rs 
A p 
_ 
» \ 
4's 
Co * 
# 
\ K 
—_ Yo 
S271 F 
A, 
% 
*z * 4 ; 
LY 


> 


= 
W 


3 
RING 
Q 


NI 
=» 


J 
<D@C 
INS 


741 
KS 


» 
| 2 


%+ Thedeſeription. 


1 FO ArdenLettuce hath along broade leafe , ſmooth and of alight greene colour: the ſtalke 
| is rounde, thicke ſer with leaues full ofmilkie iuice-buſhed or, braunched at the rop:wher- 
do growe th flowers which turne into downe thar is caried away with the 


$ ; 


winde. The ſeede ſticketh faſt vnto the cortonie downe and fliethaway likewiſe, white of colour & 


* 2s BS» © . 


doyeelde foorth in like maner as the ſtalke ors 8 aj this is the true 
delcription of the narurall Lectuce and nor of the artificial: for by manuring,tranſplanting, and ha- 
o WW uingregarde tothe moone and othercircumſtances ; the leaues of the arrificiall Lettuce be often- 
WF fines transformed into anather :for cither they are curled, or elſe ſo drawne togither,as they 


ſeemeto be like a cabbage or he 
ac ſomthing white tend: mater der tycllowe, 


phine orſmoorh as the former, bur intricately curked andcur into many ſeions; The flowers are 
imal,of a bleake colouc,the which doturne into downe andis caried away with the winde. The ſed 
islike the former, fauing ir changeth ſomrime into blackneſle with a roote like the former. 

and withall curledin ſuch an admirable for, that euery great leafe ſeemeth to bee made of many 
imallleanes ſer ypon one middle ribbe, reſembling a fanne of curled feathers vicd among gentle- 


. WW "2eu-The flowers, rootes,and ſeede agree with the former, 

"S The Sauoic ne very large leaues fpread vpon'the grounde, at the firſt comming vp 

ue broade;cur,or | che edgexripingo curling lightly this or that way, nor vnlike to the 
' WY e5of garden Endiue,with ſtalks, flowers  ndfobdesiike the former as wel in ſhape as yeelding 

ot | 


tatmilkie inice wherewirh they do all abound. * 
| | | +1 3 Lancs 


ſomewhat long. The roote hath hanging on.it many long rough ſtrings, which being cur or broken - 


colewoort, andthe leaues which be within and in the midſt, - 
2 Thecurled Lettuce hath great 97 iedyens PPE Ie galhdag Hoe a Ing, not 
an 


+3 This ſmall fort of curled Lettuce hath many leaues,hacktand orne in peeces very confuſedly,; 


_ POT On noe nr 


s 


OND- BOOKE OF, THE | 
| wn. _ . 4 LaftmaSaubandioacriſa. 
Sauoie Lettuce. , 


SLE 
4 - 


E-- 
' Sa 3 
22 


Y $034 
T 


T4 


— 


—— 
- 


©" Jn 
uca intybaces 
Lumbard Lettuce. 


Ti - - 
»” -&- 
»» on d.> 
- % : 
WY NP 


(EI 
A Idzs ; 
—— CT f " 
T7 Id 3% ICS IJ 
(/ Vl v, Cu D- I 


I 


HISTORIE' OF' PLANTS. 24) 
; Cabbage Lettuce hath many plaine and ſmooth leaves athis firſt growing vp, which forthe 
moſt part lie flar ſtill vpon the grounde; the next that doe appeere are thoſe leanes in the middle; 
which turne themſelucs rogirher mbracing echeother ſocloſcly, tharirts formed into thar globe 
orround heag, whereof the {1mpleſt is nor ignorant. The leedeheereof is black , contraryto all the 
reſtgvhich may be as it were a rule whereby yer may knowethe ſeede of Cabbage Lerruce from the 
r(orts. My % 6 TD; | F oj wad {1 i 
or -Lumbard Lertuce hathwany mT the yr like vnto thoſe of rhe 
n Endiue, bur lefler, 'ſhe ſtalkes riſe vp tothe height of three foote:the lowers be yellowiſh, 
which turne into downe and flic away with the winde:the ſeede is white ag ſnowe. | 
| . wb \ ; The place. * 1 \ \ 350 
Lettuce delighteth to growe,as PalladiwsNith, in a manured, fargmoilt, and dunged grounde:it 
muſt be ſowen in faire weather nplaces where there is plentie of water as Colne | faith, 4nd pro- 
ſpereth belt if it be ſowen very thinhe, 7 - 


? 


ji *% The time. | | | 
* Iris certaine faith Paladiws,that Lettuce may well be fowenat any time of the yeerebut eſpeci- 
allyatcucry firſt ſpring,and ſo loone as winter is done,till former be well ſpent. | 


%* The names, | 
Garden Lettuce is calledin Latin Lancs po Galennameth it9%:w:irathe Pythagorias ivr: hear: 
the apothecaries LaFuca,4 LafFeo fucco, a5 the Latines doe, of the milkie iuicewhich iſſuerh foorth 
of the wounded ſtalkes and rootes : the Germaines name it L attich: the lowe Dutch Lattouwet 
— theSpaniardes Zeehugs and Alface : the Engliſh Lertuce:and the French Zeje7ue.When the leaues 
of this kinde are curled or crompled,itis named of Plinie Zaitueacriſpe, and of Columellt Laitucs 
Cecilians: in Engliſh curld or crompled Lettuce. * | 

The Cabbage Lettuce is commonly called Lancs capitata,and Lattuca feffilis , Plinienameth it 
Lafinca Laconics : Columells Lattuca Betica: Petri Creſeentins,Lattucs Romans: in Engliſh Cabbage 
Lettuce and Loved Lettuce. | | | 

There is another ſort with reddiſh leaues,called of Columelia Lattuca Cypris : in Engliſh red Let- 

| *% The temperature. : 3s 

Lettuce is acolde and moiſt potherbe,yet not in the extreme degree of colde or moiſture;bur al- 
togither moderately,for otherwiſe it were not to be eaten. | 

| * The vertues. 

Lettuce cooleth a hor ſtomacke,called the hart burning ; and helpeth it when itis troubled with A 
choler :ir quencheth thirſt,cauſethfleepe,maketh plentie of milke int nurſes, who through heate & 
drineſſe do you barraine and drie of milke : for itbreedeth milke by tempering the drineſſe and 
heat, Butin bodies that be naturally colde;it doth not ingender milke at all, buc is rather art hinde. 
rancethereunto, | ca 
| Lettucemaketh apleaſant fallade,being eaten rawe with vineger,oile, and alictleſalt : but if it be B 

doiledit is ſooner digeſted,and nouriſhethmore. 
; kisferuedin theſe daics, and in theſe countries atthe beginning of ſupper,and eaten firſt before C 
 anyother meate,which alſo Martialiteſtifierh ro be done m times paſt , marueiling why ſome did 
Vie it for a ſeruice at the ende of ſupper,in theſe verſes: me 

* Cluudere que canes Latiuca ſolebat anorum, 
| | Duc mihi,cur nojftras inchoat illa dapes? | 

. Notwithſtanding it may now and then be catenat both thoſe times to the health of the bodie: D 
for being taken before meate it doth many times ſtir vp appetite : and eaten after ſupper irkeeperh 
waycrunkennes which comineth by the wine z and * is by reaſon thatir ſtaieth the vapors fem 
riling vp into the head. | arg 

- Thewice which is made in the veines by Lettuce is moiſt and apa '5 6 illnor much in quan- Kg 
tte: Galen athrmeth that it doth neither binde the belly nor looſe it, tor it hath init no barſhneſle 
nor ſtiptike qualitie by which the belly is ſtaicd, neither isthere in itany ſharpe or biting facultie, 
Which ſcoureth andprouoketh to the ſtoole; | 

But h>wſocuer Ga/ex writeth this, and howſocuer the ſame wanteth theſe qualities,yet it is found F 
by experience that it maketh the body ſoluble,cſpecially if 4 boiled,for by moiſtning of the belly 

| w 


it 


| 


244 THE SECOND |BOOKE, OF THE 
irraakerh ir the moreſlipperie , which Mertialis very well knewe writing in his 11 booke of Eyj, 
grams in this maner, mu Y: | 
' Primatibidabitur, ventrs LatFuca mouende—-— 

G _Lettucebeing outwardly applied mittigateth all inflammarions: it is good for burnings and 
ſcaldings if itbe laide thereon with ſalt before the bliſters do appeere as Plinie writeth, | 
The iuice of Lettuce cooleth and quencherh:he naturall ſeedeif itbe too much vied, burpio. 
curethſleepe, _ 116 4 "0s | $ 


Of Lambes Lettuce,or Corne ſallade. (hap. 35. 


1 Laituce Arnina. 2 Lattuca Agnina latifolia. 
Lambes Letruce, . Corneſ; 


— 
- : 
- 


| YANN 
SEFARN 
= gw AN WV 
| 5 <6 


| SID 
Le77 


i * The deſcription. MN | 

: He plant which is commonly called 0/us a/bw, or the white potherbe ( which of ſome 
hath beene ſer out for a kinde of Valerian,but vnpropetly, for that it doth verynorabliere- 

ſemble the Lettuce as well in forme as in meate to be eaten, which property is nottobee 

founde in Valerian, and therefore by reaſon andauthoritie I place it as a kinds ol Lettuce with this 

_ name,Lambes Lettuce)hath many {lender weake ſtalkes trailing vpon the grounde, with certain 
edges,a foote high when it growethiin moſt fertill grounde,otherwiſe a hand or two high, with ſun- 
drie ioints or knees: outof eueric one whereof grow a couple of leaues narrowe and long,not valike 
to Lettuce at the firſt comming vp, as wellintendernefle as taſte ineating : and onthe top of the 


ſtalkes ſtande vpon a broade tuft as it were certaine white flowers, that be maruellous little, which 


can ſcarſclie beknowne to be flowers, fauingrhat they growe many togither like a ruft or vmble! . 
 ithath in ſteede of raotes a fewe ſlender threds like vnto haires. 49 Shi 


2 Theotherkinde of Lettuce which Dodonewiin his laſt Edition ſetteth foorth vnder the name 
_Albwm oluze,the lowe countrey men call it UUitmoes , and ve it for their meitecalled Wermoſe, 
and with vs I:oblollie. This plant hath fmall long leaues afinger broade, ofa pale green colout, 

| | YR: among 


F 


among which (hooteth vp a ſmal cornered andflender ſtemme halfe a foore high;iothted with wo 


ISS weS: -ooAS EIS. 


' HIST.ORIE OF 'PLANTS. 243 
orthree joints or knees,out of which proceede two leaues longer then the firſt, bearing at the top * 
ofthe braunches tutrs of very (mall white flowers cloſely compa togither , with aroore like the 
former. : | | | 
- % The place, | 

Theſe herbes do growe wilde in the corne fieldes ; and fince it hath growne in vie amvng the 
French and Durchi ſtrangers,in England it hath beene ſowen in gardens as fallade herbes, 


4 *% The time, | 
They are found greenealmoſt winter and ſommer, 
| | % The namei, Pls | 
The Dutch men do ca!l ir Mptmoes, that is to ſaic MHbwn olwr of ſome it is named Aeltcrop: 
in Greeke aowazary: in Engliſh the White potherbe , ſo called for that there is a blacke pot- 


herbe, which is called Alifander : the Latines Lettuce agnina. | 


| t% The temperature and vertues, \ _ | | 
'This herbe is colde aM ſomthing moiſt,and not vnlike in facultie and temperature to the garden 
Lettuce, in ſteede whereof in winter and in. the firſt monthes of the Lara Oh ſerves for a {allade 
herbe,andis with pleaſure caten with vincger,ſalt,andcile, as other ſallades be, among which it is 
none of the woorſt, - 


Of Colewoorts. (hap.36. 
: ou The kinds, | 


|Dicarkery maketh two kinds of Colewoorts: the tame &the wilde:but Theephreſtwmaketh mo 
kindes heereof, theruſfed or curled Cole ; the ſmooth Cole; and the wilde Cole : Caro imita- 
ting Theophraftws, fetteth downe alſothree Colewoorts : thefirſt he deſeriberh robe ſmoorh,grear, 
broade leafed with abigge ſtalke : the ſeconde ruffed : thethirde with lictleſtalkes;, wletud very 
much biting. The ſame;diſtiniftion alſo P/;zismaketh in his 20,.booke 9.chaprer where he {aith,that 
the moſt auncientRomaines haue deuided it into three kindes :the firſt ruffed; the ſecond ſmooth; 
andthe thirde which is properly called x:4&, or Colewoort: andin his 19. booke he hath alſo ad- 
dedtotheſe other moe kindes,that is to faic, T rit;« num, Cumanam, Pompeianum,Brutianwn,Sabel- 
The Herbariſts ofour time haue likewiſe obſerued many ſorts, differing either in colouror elle in 
forme: other headed with the leaues drawen togither;moſt of them whitezſome of a deepe greenez 
ſome ſmooth leafed; and others curled or rutted , differing likewiſe in their ſtalkes, as ſhall bee ex- 


preſſedin their ſeuerall deſcriptions. 


'% The defeription: 


1 THe Garden Colewoort hath many great broad leaugs,of a derpe blacke greene colour, 
mixed with ribbes and lines of wer ſh. and white colours, The ſtalke groweth our of the 
middeſt from among the leaues, braunched with ſundrie armes , bearing at theroplitcle 

jellowe Rowers: and after they be paſt there do ſucceede long cods full of rounde ſeede like thoſe 

of the Turnep, bur ſmaller, with a woodic rootehauing many frings or threds faſtned thereto, 

2 Therc iSanotherleſſer ſortthen the former with many deepe curs. on both ſides, cuen to the 

middeſt ofthe ribbe, and very much curled and ruffed in the edges; in other things it differerh 

3 Theredkind of Celewoortis likewiſe a Colewoort of the garden, anddiffereth from thecom- 

moni thecolour of his leaues,which rende vnto redneſſe , othewiſe very like. - - OS 


a There is alſo foinde a certaine kinde heereof with the leaues wrapped ropither into a rounde 


or , whoſe head is white of colour eſpecially roward winter when it is ripe. The roote is 
barde: andthe ſtalke ofa woodic ſubſtaunce, | # | | 
| Q 2 1 Fraſocs 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
'S « (ati {4 2 Braſdcaſatinacriſdy. 
| | Curld garden Cole, 


> 7 


_ Re " _ % 
WC AV A _= Ro 
- <5 NN} 
YM 14, \ 
J k __ — od "2 / \\ 
J- 
d —_ AVIS 


YR 


lh. 


- LI s 
Oo ff , ,, SG h o C 
- 1 
4 6.4 , o 
- fS » y 
_ _ —— . / . \ | 0 
"T7 ' ' 6 
Þ ff \F/- 
GY NDSS - of Je 
. <p 4 LL \ © / bY 
l > " i - 4 3 o 
' 4s - A b - 
'M _ i %4. P 4 . 'F 
- , VI w 
- 4 
- 
L < ee uriectgweaetennecopneargndg _—_ 
"TT Pd of i ” "T9 a 


Ee. 
> 
FO 


h___ 
OO 


' bd 
o 
 \ 

” 
TV 
k \ 

»\. F 
wy 

Þ\ 

4 
\ / 
\ 
S%. 


A 
Po 


HISTORIE OR!PLANTS.|''' | 245 
Braffica Capititarnbra, + 6 Brees Patuls, © | 
. Redcabbage Cole. . | Cried Cole. 


—FIGY 0 
- 
% - 


nd wn Ws ; 


_— 


{ 


& 


7 Braſitaprolifera. | Fl Rt j Ks FF 
Double Colewoort, | | Doble eG iſþa. 


C 


gh ns. 6 ATT gr RBC on AERIE LETS 


- 
"<4 SUE ad i 


[ 


—_ 


246. . THE -SECOND BQOKE OF THE 

5 There is another fort of Cabbage or loued Colewoorrt, which hath his leaues wrapped togithet 

into a rounde head or globe, yer lefler then that of the white Cabbage ,and the colour of the leaues 

| of alighter red then thoſe of the former, | : $ ONE! 2 

6 Theopen loued Colewoort hath a very great hard orwoodie ſta]ke, whereupon do grow verie 

large leaues ofa white greene colour,and ſet with rhicke white ribbes,and gathereth the reſt of the 
leaues cloſely togither , which be lefler then thoſe next the grounde; yet when it commerh tothe 
ſhurting vp orcloſing rogither,it rather dilateth it ſe]fe abroade thencloſeth al togither. * 

7 Double Colewoort hath many great & logs leaues, wherupon do grow heere and there other 
ſmall iagged leaues, as it were made of ragg ed threds and iagges ſer vpon the ſmooth leafe, which 
giueth thewe of a plume or fanne of feathers, In ſtalke, roote, and euery other part beſides it doth 
agree with the garden Colewoorr. | | | 

38 Thedoublecriſpe or curled Colewoort agreeth with the laſt before deſcribed in euery bs 
onely it differeth in the leaues,which are ſo inricarely curled,and fo thick ſer over with x2 bm we 
cut leaues,that itis hard to ſee any =o of the leafe it ſelfe , except yee take and pur aſide ſome of | 
thoſe iagges and raggedleaues with your hande, * | 


9 Bra ca florida. ©: j Io Bya 4T hola. 


4 

4 S- 
1: 
4 

o 


9 ColeFlorie, orafter ſome Colieflorie , hath many large leaues fleightly endented about the 
edges, of a whitiſh greenecolour, narrower and ſharper pointedthen age: inthe middeſtof 
which leaues riſeth vp a great white head ofhard flowers cloſely thruſt rogither, with a roote full 
of ſtrings zin other parts like vnto the Colewoorts. | 


10 The ſwolen Colewoort of al other is the ſtrangeſt, which I receiued fr6 a worſhipfull marchant 
. of Lond6 maſter X zcholas Lete,who brought the ſeeds therofout of Frauncezwho is greatly in love 
with rare and faire flowers and plants,for which he doth carefully ſend into Syria, having a ſervant 
thereat Alepo andin many other countries, for the which my ſelfe and likewiſe the whole lande are 
much bound vnto, This goodly Colewoort hath many leaues ofa blewiſh greene, orof the _- 


© 


— - rw - rV- 


top © 


of | 5 4 
4% $- , b 
—_— I 
IP - - ” 


uy 4 


: HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS. Alli 247 


de,bunched.ox fvollen vp about the edges air were a peece of leatherwer and broiledon a 
entre anc teogeo that] cannot with words deſcribe it to the ful, Theflowers grow ar the 
f the ſtalkes of ab 


leake yellowe colour, The roote is thicke and ſtrong like tothe otherkindes 


—Y 4 | 


AY 


11 Braffica Sabavls. 


11 Sauoie Cole is alſo numbred among the headed Colewoorts or Cabb 20s. The leaues are 
great and large verie like to thoſe of the great Cabbage, which turne themſelues vpwardes as 
though they woulde embrace one another to make aloued Cabbage, butwhen they come to the 


ſhutting vp they ſtande ar aſtaie,and rather ſhewe themlelues wider open then ſhur any neerer to- | 


githerzin other reſpe&s it is like vnto the.Cabbage. | 
12 Thecurled Sauoie Cole in euery reſpe&t is like the precedent , ſauing that the leanes heereof 


do ſomwhar curle or criſpe about the middle of the plant: which plant if itbeopened in the fpring- 


time as oftentimes it is, 1t ſendeth foorth braunched ſtalkes with many ſmall white flowers at the 
top, which being paſt there followe long cods and ſeede like the common or firſt kinde deſcribed. 
13 Thiskinde of Colewoort hath verie large leaues deepelyiaggedeuento the middleribbe, in 
face reſembling great and*ranke perſley. Ic hath a great andebacle ſtalke of chree cubites high, 
whereupon do growe flowers, cods andeede like the other Colewoorts, | | 
14 The ſmall cut Colewoort hath very large leaves woonderfully cut, hackt and hewen cuen to 
themidd!eribbe,reſemblitg a kinde of curled Parſley,that ſhall be deſcribed in his place, (which is 
not common nor hath notbeene knowen nor deſcribed vntill this time) very well agreeing with 
thelaſtbefore mentioned , bur differeth in the curious cutting and iagging ofthe leaues,in ſtalke, 
flowers and ſeedenot valike. ET | A 

| Qs 13| Braſdca 


ae Ban 4/7 CUTE RE ky. 
a He tf RIES Gs <aand 


& 


THE-SECOND BOOKE OF 'THE 


Fi m 
- * rl % . . — Py . 
TY 77” "FS Br C0© 
. = y I BY a ”» _ 
P..4 - = 
- - | & W mY 
- « 
© #® ++ 4 "©. .; : > . 
2 oy » TY 7 - p 69 
ed 2 . 
” 
Y i , i 
"3 Is. : 6 : : 
a + #3 oo 
. 


+252 \$,25\.).8 


- 


_—— 


—Y I 
er OS. 4 'h, 


15 Braſſica marine CAnrlica. 


 EngliſhſcaColewoorts, | Wideſes <a 


$ 


7 ! | */ 
1, 4111-1 


_ HISTORIE OF PLANTS. : 246 
;5 Sea Colewoort hath large and broade leaues very thicke and curled, andſobrittle thatthey - 


cannot | 
which riſe vp ſtalkes two.cubirs high;bearing ſmall pale lowers at the top awhich be R 
ai c Slow rounde knobs wherein is conteined one rqund ſeede and no _—_— Ty 
the bigneſle of a rare or fetch. | 


5 Thewilde Colewoart hath long broad leaues nor vnlike tothe tame Colewoort, bur lelſer,as | 


. all thereſt of the planr,and is of his owne nature wilde, andrherefore not ſought after as a meace: 
buris ſowen and husbanded vpon ditch bankes and: ſuch like places for the fake,by which of- 
rentimes great gx 15 gotten. T0 ; "S:0347104 | 
* vikl | * The place. YL: 

The greateſt ſort of Colewoorts do | -- in gardens,&do loue aſoile which.is far and through- 
ly dunged 8 well manured: they dobe po when they be remooued, andeuery of them.grow 
in our Engliſh gardens exceptrhe wilde,which groweth inficldes and newe digged ditch banks. 
'  Theſea Colewoort groweth naturally vpon the bayche and brimmes of the ſea, where there is 

nocarth'to be ſeenc, bur fande and'rowling —_ ſtones, which thoſe that dwell neere the {ea do 
call Bayche.Ifounde it growing betweene Whyrſtable and the Ile of Thanetneere the baincke of 
he ſea, and inmany placesnecreto OI ns tare by tbe fea fade, . +, M 

| + Thetame:” i 


[ 


Petr Creſcentins faith that the Colewobrt may be fowen & remooued at any gime of che yeere, ; 


hoſe opinion Ialrogither miſlike. Iris fowen inthe ſpring, as March, Aprill, and oftentimes in 
Mie an donopeiimes in Auguſt,but the eſpeciall time is bo the beginning of September. 


The Colewoort , faith Colamel{a , muſt be remoued when it hath attained to fixe leaues after it is 


come vp from ſeede ; the which muſt be done in Aprill or Maie, eſpecially thoſe that were ſowen 
in Autumne, which afterwarde flouriſh inthe winter moneths, at what time they are fitreſt for 
meate. | ($2IF) | WL __ 

But the Sauoic Cole , and the Coleflorey muſt be ſowen in Aprill in a bed of hot horſedung, 
and couered with ſtrawe orſuch like, to keepe it from the cold & fraſftie mornings; andwhen ichath 
gotten ſixe leaues aftetthisſorr,then ſhall you remooue him as aforeſaid, otherwiſe if you tarrie for 
temperate weather before you ſowe,the yeere will be ſpent before it cometo ripeneſle. 

| | *% The names. RD BR: 
Every ofthe Colewoorts is called in Greek by D/oſcorides and Gates «e9uf:1t is alſo called 4ui%5x , 
ſonamed,not ovely bicauſe it driueth away drunkenneſle, bur alſo for tharit is like in colourto the 
pretious ſtone called the Amethyſt,which is ment by thefirſt or garden Colewoort. The Apothe- 


caties & the common Herbariſtes do callit Cas/z,of the morn of the ſtalke: in the Germaine 


toong itis called Roole kraut t in French des Cheux : in Engliſh Coleworts. | 


Coleflorey is called in Latine Braſice Cypria, and Cauliflra: intalian Caalifiore: it ſeemerh to *® 


agreewith Braſſica Pompeians of Plinie, whereof he writeth in his 19. booke and 8, chapter, 
| * The temperature. | | 

Allthe Colewoorrs haue a drying and binding faculcie, with a certaine nitrous or ſaltqualitie, 
whereby it mightily clenſerh,ceither 1n the ivice or in the broth therof, The whole ſubſtaunceor bo- 
dic of the Colewoort is of a binding and drieng facultic , bicauſe it leaueth inthe decotion this 
laltqualitic which lieth in the iuice and watcric part thereof: the water wherein ir is firſt boiled 
drawerh to itſelfe all rhat qualitic; for which cauſe the decoCtion thereof looſeth the belly,as doth 
allo the juice of it if it be drunke: bur if the firſt broth in which itwas boiled be caſt away, then doth 
the Colewoort drie and binde the belly. Bur it yeelderh tothe bodie ſmall nouriſhment, and doth 
not ingender good blood, buta grofle and Mclancholicke, The white Cabbage is beſt next vn- 


to the Cole-flourey z yet Cato doth on commend the ruſſed Cole , buthe knewe neither the 


white ones, nor the Colc-flourey: tor if he had,his cenſure had beene otherwiſe, 


*% The wvertmes. | 


Dioſeoridesteacherh tat the Colewoort being caten is good for them thathaue dime cies, A 


andthar are troubled with the ſhaking palſie. 


The ſame author affirmerh, that if it be boiled and eaten with vinegeritis aremedic forthoſe B 


thatbe troubled with the ſpleene. 


It is reported that the rawe Colewoort being eaten before meate, doth preſerue a man from C 


Eunkenneſle, the reaſon is yerlded, for that there is a naturall enmitie between ir and the Fre 
| ay | whic 


be handled without breaking, of a deepe ouerworne greene colour tending to graineſle: « 
lacke of colour,of 


of 


Ps, AE E254 T1008 «1 \ "I'S n 
4 W 7 . P </ F 4 . oY. ard, | wal TY ——- 
Oy h 6-2, 220 4 [. 5 d . 
} y = "WP Ts 7 x - r 
go « 
MALO PAS on OE BLVD re tb Att ac Dafoe SAY AREINS IE k ns MAL 
___COCWe 8 17 I er Re LRRRUgarry ;« SY a Ca BLN ARM MT RA rr ger ee rot, aide ae x. tae ads, 2 —_—— 2 hi 


| 

| 7 
14 
31 

| 

s | 

= 
13 


: 
t 


THE SECOND BO OKE" 


WT, NEE 
NL SN 
$ SYTou WIAIES 4 

| 2G 4 pry FIPS | 
2] wa T 


q v 


I5 Br afica marine Anglia. | 16 Prafiica mayine /olueFiriv 
Engliſh ſea Colewoorts, : | Wildeſea Colewootts, 


£5 


| || 'HESI QRTE OR PLANTS. #1: 5 249 
is SeaColewoort hath large and broade leaues very thicke and curled, and ſobrittle thatthey 
<antior be handled without breaking, of a decpe querworne greene colour tending to graineſle: = 
;mong which riſe vp ſtalkes rwo cubirs high, bearing ſmall pale lowersar the ropqvhich being paſt 
there follow rounde knobs wherein'is conteined one round ſeede and no pmivay «16-4 of colour,of - 
the bigneſſe of arare orferch, | WE wo 
5 The wilde Colewoort hath long br6ad leaues nor vnlike rothe tame Colewoort, bur lefler,as -- 
;. all thereſt ofthe planr,and is of his owne nature wilde, and rherefore not ſought after as a meate: 
buris ſowen and husbanded vpon ditch bankes and ſuch like places for belek fake,by which of. - 
rentumes cart | 15 gotten, | £355 4 
tat 66 | * The place. 


The'greateſt ſort of Colewoorts do / av in gardens,& do loue a foile which.is far and through- 
ly dunged & well manured: they do be proſper when they be remooued, andeuery of them.grow 
in our Engliſh gardensexcepr the wilde,which growerh inficldes-and newe digged ditch banks. =» 

The ſea Colewoort groweth naturally vpon the bayche and brimmes of the ſea, where there is 
noearth'to be ſeene, but fande androwling pebble ſtones , which thoſe that dwell necre the eq do - 
call Bayche. I founde it growing betweene Whyrtable and the Ile of Thanetneere the brincke of 
the ſea,and inmany placesneere to jan Hrny be renm- avg fide: = F, 

Petrws Creſcentizs faith that the mn AY & remoouedat any time of the yeere, 
- whoſcopinion Lalrogither miſlike. Iris ſowen in the ſpring, as March , Apxill, and oftentimes in 

Maie,and ſometimes in Auguſt,but the eſpeciall time ts about the Ieginning of September.” | 
| TheColewoort,, faith Colwmells , muſt be remoued when it hath attained to ſixe leaues after it is * 
come vp from ſeede ; the which muſt be done in Aprill or Maie, eſpecially thoſe that were ſowen 
in Autumne, which afterwarde flouriſh in.the winter moneths, at what time they are fitteſt for 
meate. | RE RC | (REN - 

But the Sauoic Cole, and the Cole florey muſt be ſowen in _ in abedof hot horſedung, 
andcouered with ſtrawe or ſuch like, to keepe it from the cold & froftie mornings; andwhen ichath | 
gotten ſixe leaues aftetthisforr,then ſhall you remooue him as aforeſaid, otherwiſe if you tarrie for 
temperate weather before you ſowe,the yeere will be ſpent before it cometo ripeneſle. 

*% The names. "= | | 

Every ofthe Colewoorts is called in Greek by Dizſcorides and Galem x24En it is alſo called dul%vos , 

ſonamed,not onely bicauſe it driueth away drunkennefle, buralſo for thariris like in colourto the 

pretious ſtone called the Amerhyſt,which is ment by thefirſt or garden Colewgort. The Apothe- 

caries & the common Herbariſtes do call it Cau/#,of the goodnefle of the ſtalke: in the Germaine 
toong it is called Roole kraut t in French des Choux : in Engliſh Coleworts. 

Coleflorey is calledin Latine Braſica Cypria, and Canliflora: in Italian Caalifore: it ſeemerh to 
, agreewith Braſica Pompe ians of Plinie, whereof he writeth in his 19. booke and 8. chapter, 
| * The temperature. | ' BY | 

Allthe Colewoorrs haue a drying and binding faculcie, with a certaine nitrous or ſaltqualitie, 
whereby it mightily clenſerh,either 1n the iuice or in the broth therof, The whole ſubſtaunceor bo- 
dicofthe Colewoort is of a binding and drieng facultic , bicauſe it leaueth inthe decoRion this 
_ Giltqualitie which lieth in the juice and waterie part thereof: the water wherein it is firſt boiled 
drawerh to itſelfe all that qualiric; for which cauſe the decoRtion thereof looſeth the belly,as doth 
allo the juice of it if it be drunke: bur if the firſt broth in which itwas boiled be caſt away, then doth 
the Colewoort drie and binde the belly. Bur it yceldeth to the bodie ſmall nouriſhment, and doth 
not ingender good blood, buta grofle and 'Melancholicke, The white Cabbage is beſt next vn- 
to the Cole-flourey z yet Cato doth chiefly commend the ruſſed Cole , buthe knewe neither the 
white ones, nor the Cole-flourey: for if he had,his cenſure had beene otherwiſe, 

| * The vertues. | | 

Dieſeoridesteacherh that the Colewoort being eaten is good for them that have dimme cies, A 
andthar are troubled with the ſhaking palfie. | | 

The ſame author affirmeth, that if it be boiled and eaten with vineger it is a remedie for thoſe B 
thatbe troubled with the ſpleene. | nin 

It is reported that the rawe Colewoort being eaten before meate, doth preſerue a man from C 


dunkenneſle, the reaſon is yeelded, for that there is a naturall enmitie berweene it and rhe —_ : 
1 | | | | which 


\ 


250 HE SECOND BOOKE OF/THE 


which is ſuch as if 1t growe neere vnto it, foorthwith the vine periſheth and withereth away: yea, 
| _ wine bepoured vnto1rwhileſtir isin boilingyitwillhotbe any more boiled, and the colour thereg; 
©. quitealtere&;as Cot and Dionyſims Vticenſts do write in their bookes of tillage: yet dothnor 4t.. 
' new aſcribe tha vertue of driving away Guakeripelle to the leaues, but to the lecdes of Cole | 
wWoOOorr, , 
D Moreover His leaves of Colewoorts are goodag 
dwith barle meale andlaid ypon them with ſalt, andalſo breake carbuncles.., j| 
E eiviceof Cc , as Dioſcortdes writeth, raken with flower deluce and niter doth 
| make the bellic ſoluble: : and being drunke with wink itis a remedic againlt the biting of vencmous 
| beaſts. 
; F The amebeingapplied with the powder! ofFerngrede rakerh away the panepf ©5-idom : 
_ cureth olde andfoule' vicers, | 
wu) vr mary re noſthrils it purgerhehe head-beingpuryp wit bare mealeir bring | 
Aa flowers.” -* 
Pliny writeth, that the mice mixed with wine and droppedi into the eares is a remedic againſ 
deafeneſie. 
I Theſcedeas Gelefaith, driveth foorth abotnel; taketh away freckles of the Face.funbuming 
and what things ſocuer that neede to be gently ſcoured or clenſed away. 
K They fay that the broth wherein the herbe hath beene ſodden , is tmatucilous good for the 
finewes and ioints,and likewiſe for cankers ini the ejes called in Greeke Cuyents mich Cannot 
be healed by uy Fr ane if _y be waſhed therewith, | 


ainſt all indamarionsandbor Fells hey 


+: 


FE. 
Fe 


Of Ree Cle | as 9 2p 


x Canlor Lakin 
RE Cole. 


Br eaotgthy gore Wo 
_ : = 


3 PS Eat gh pro 


5 
## ASI v, 
FL TH, £0 þ 4 
}, 1{ th, 
VV W/WAN/ 
>> 
\ _ 
y . Av 
*% 
D 


# 
WS; 
,j8 
1, 
C 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. TY 


_taviac: & The deſeription. 5 
I He firſt kinde of Rape Cole hath one (ingle long rote, garniſhed wich many threddie 
T ſtrings : from which riſerh vp a great thicke ſtalke bigger then a great Cucumber or great 
| Turnep: atthe top whereof ſhooterh foorth great broade leaues like vnto thoſe of Cab- 
bage Cole. The flowers growart therop on lender ſtalkes compact of ours foal yellow flowers, 
which being paſt the ſeede followeth incloſedin little long cods like the ſeede of Muſtarde, 
2 Theſecond hatha long fibrous roote like vato the precedent ; the tuberous ſtalke is very great 
andlong,thruſting foorth in ſome fewe places heere and there, ſmall-footeſtalkes; whereupon doc 
growe {mooth leaues, ſlightly indented about the edges; on the topofthe long Turnep ftalk growe 
[cane ſtalkes and flowers like the former. | Pi | | 
* Thep 
They growe in Iraly,Spaine,and ſome places of Germanie, from whence I hauerecciued ſcedes 
for my garden, as alſo from an honeſt and curious friende of mine called maſter Goodmaar the 


Minories neere London. 


*% The time. | | 
They flower and flouriſh when the other Colewoorts do, whereofno doubt they are kinds, and 
muſt be carefully ſer and ſowenas muske Melons and Cucumbers are. 1 
calledin La ps for their ſtalk 

They are called in Latine Caulorapums, 8 Zapocanlis, bearing for their ſtalkes as it were Rapes or 

Turneps,participating of two oa Colewoott and Turnepz whereof they tooke their —_ 
* The temperature and vertues. 

There is nothing ſet downe of the faculties of theſe plants, bur are accounted for daintie meate; 

contending with the Cabbage Cole in goodneſle and pleafantralte. ; 


- Of Beetes. (hap.38. 


* The deſeription. , _. 
t. He common white Beete hath great 
| T broade leaues, ſmooth and plaine :trom 
| ©. which riſe thicke creſted or chamfered 
ſtalks. The flowers grow along the ſtalkes cluſte- 
ring og ſhape like little ſtarres hich be- 
ing paſt, there ſuccedeth rounde and vneeuen 
pricklic ſeede,The roote is thicke,hard and grear. 


In SE WHN 2 There is another fort like in ſhape andpro- 
BRAID =; D MY ZR! Legs _ 
SEV PO GREAT - portion tothe former , ſaving that the leaues-of 
DY Q AN We MAN this be ſtraked hcere and there confuledly, which 
Mp Jp. \ JS NN) ,  - ſetteth foorth the difference. 
WED 5 3 There is likewiſe another ſort heereof thar 


was brought vnto me from beyonde the ſeas by 
that courteous merchantmaſter Z2te before re- 

| - membred, thewhich hath leaues very great and 
_ redofcolour,as is allthereſt of the plant, as well 

| ropteasſtalkes and flowers, full ofa perte& pur- 
ple iuice rending to rednefle : the middle ribbe 

of which leaues are for the molt pact verpboned 

| age 


and thicke , like the middle parrof the Cal 
 leafe,whichis equallin goodnefle with the leaues = 

. of Cabbagebcing boiled. Itgrewwith me 2596. 
tothe height of vuj. cubites,anddid bring foorth 
his rough and vneeuen ſecede very plentifully: 
with which plant nature doth ſcemero uy 5" 
ſport 


252 - THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
ſport hirſelfe : for the ſeedes raken from that planewhich was altogither of one colour and {owen 
. doth bring foorth plants of many and variable colours , as the worthipfull gentleman maſter 7.4, 


Nor den can very well teſtiftie , vnto whom I gaue {di ie of the ſeedes aforeſaid,which in his garden 


« 


brought foorth many other of beautifull colours, | 
= ue Theplare. 
The Beete is ſowen in gardens:itloueth to growe in a moiſt and fertill grounde. Fo 
| % The time. | LL 
The fitreſt rime to ſowe'it is inthe ſpring: it flouriſherh and is greene all fommer long, ahdlike. 
wiſe in the winter,and bringerhfoorth his ſeede the next yeere following. ' 
| Fe | *% The namts. | 
The Grecians hauenamed it S797, 7:57a07 : the Latines Beta: the Germaines Pangoit + the 
Spaniards «A4ſel2as: the French de la Poree, des Totes,and Betes ; Theophraftme ſaith that the white 
Beete is ſurnamed ws, rhar is to faic Szcwle ,” or of Sicilia: heereof commeththe name Sic/a, by 
which the Barbarians and moſt of the apothecarics do call the Beere, the which worde we in Eng. 
- lande do vie, taken from the ſame. [f | | 


| + T he nature. | 5 
The white Beets are in moiſture and heate temperate, bur the other kinds are drie,and al ofthem 
abſterſiue: ſou... ©- 'vhite Beere is a colde & moiſt pothearbe, which hath ioied with it a certain 
falc and nitrous qualitie,by reaſon whereof it clenſeth and draweth flegme our of the noſthrils, 
; | | | % The vertaes. + | 
'A Bcingeaten whewitis boiled,it quickly deſcendeth,!ooſerh the bellie,& prouoketh to the ſtole; 
cl; ans, being taken with the broth wherein it was ſodden, itnouriſherh little or nothing , andis 
not ſo holſome as Lerruce, if | (not 
B Thceiuice conueicd vp inthe noſthrils,doth gently drawefoorth flegme,and purgeth the head, 
C Thegregt and beautifull Beere laſt deſcribed may be vied in winter for a fallade herbe with vine. 
| ger,oile, and falr,and is not onely pleafant tothe taſte, but alſodelightfull ro the cie. f 
80 D Thegreatred Beete or Romaine Beete boiled and eaten with ile , vineger and pepper 1s amoſt 
| excellent and delicate fallade : but what might be made of the red and beautifull roote (whichisto 
| be preferred before the leaues,as well in beautic as goodneflſe)Ireferre vnrothe curious andcun- 
ning cooke, who no doubt when he hath had the view therof, and is aſlured that itis both goodaud 


£ 


" holfomeywill make thercof many and diuers diſhes both faire and good, 


Of Bhtes. Chap.39. 
% The kindes. | R Þ 


T Here be many ſorts of Blires aw in grearneſle andalſo in name , and likewiſe in colour, 
and yer one and of the fclfe ſame kinde fauing in ſheweand habite, and notinnature, | 


% The deſeription. Ws 
E2 2. He preat white Blite groweth threeot fower foote high l with grayiſh or white rounde 
| © ſtalks, The leaues are plaine and ſmooth almoſt like to fo ofthe white Orach,butnot(o 
£ X ſoft nor mealie, The flowers grow thruſt cogither like choſeof Orach: after that commeth 

the ſeed incloſed in hietle rounde flathuskie $kins. 7 | | | 


=} 


There is likewiſe another in our gardens very like the former ſaving that the whole plant _ 


Ne the ground, The ſtalkes, braunches nor leayjes are not reddiſh ar all, The ſecede is-{mall 
cluſtering togither, reene of colourand like ynto thoſe of Rueliizs Coronoprs, or Buckes horne. 
3 There is likewiſe found a thirde ſort very like vnto the other,ſauing that the ſtalkes , branches, 
leanes,and the plantisaltogithet ofa greene colour. | ROE: | 

There is likewiſea fourth fortof Blites veryſmooth and flexible like the reſt , ſauing that the 
leanes are reddiſh , mixed with a darke greene colour, as is the ſtalkes and alſothe reſt of the 


lanr, . 
ans Blu. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. non 


| &* The place. 
| TheBlices grow in gardens forthe moſt part, 
alchough there be founde of them wilde manie 
times, | | 

| | * The time, + 

| They flouriſh all the ſommer long, and growe 
verie greene in winter likewiſe, 2 

| 1 —*£ Thenames. . 

| Itis called in Greeke #477»: in Latine Blitwr : 
in Engliſh Blicte and Blites: in French Z/zes or 
Blitres : quod fex populi ys veſe.\tur, | 

| | _ *% Thenature. 

: TheBlire faith Ga/er in his fixt booke af the 
faculties of ſimple medicines is a potherbe , 
which ſerueth for meate,beingofa colde & moiſt 
remperature, and that chicfely in the ſeconde de- 
giee, It yeeldeth ro the body Gnall nouriſhment, 
as in his ſecond book of the faculties of nouriſh- 
ments he plainely ſheweth: for ic is one of the 
potherbes that be«mie,vnſauory orwithout taſte, 
whoſe ſubſtance is wateriſh. | 

| | *% Thewertaes, : 

; TheBlitedothnourithlirtle,and yeris fit to A 
make the bellie ſoluble though not vehementlic, 
ſccing ithath nonitrousor Rleve qualiry where- 
by the bellie ſhoulde be pronoked. I hauc heard 
many olde wines faic totheir ſeruants, gatherno 
| | Blites topur into my pottage; for they are not 
good for the cie ſight : whence they had thoſe words Lknowenor, icmay beof tome doRtor that ne- 
ver went toſchoole, for that I can finde no ſuch thing vpon record, either among the olde or later 
writers, hoc | 


Of, flower Gentle. Chap 4.0. 


% The kindes. | $- 5408 
TFT Here be divers ſorts of flower Gentle, differing| in many points verynotablie, as jn greatneſle 
* andſmalneſſe;ſome purple,and others of a ſcarlet colour; and one abouerhe reſt wherwith na- 
ture hath ſeemed to delight hirlelfe, eſpeciallic in the leaucs , which ju yariable colours doe ſtriue | 
with the Parrars feathers for beaurie, K-14 AE {1 | 
*% The 7 UE | 


! TN Vrple flower Gentle riſeth vp witha ſtalke acubite high, and ſometime higher, ſtraked or | 
chamfred alongſt the ſame,ottenreddiſh towarde the roote and very ſmooth: which deui- 
dth it ſelfe roward the top into ſmall braunches, about which Rtande long ieaues, broade, 

ſharpepointed,ſoftflipperie, of a greene colour, and ſomrimes tending to areddiſh ; in ſteede of 

flowers come vp cares or-ſpokie tifrs, verie bruac tolooke vpon, but without ſmell; of a ſhining 

| "Yi purple with a glofle like veluer,but farre paflingit,which when they are btuſed do yeeldaivice 

olt of the like colour, & being gathered do keepe their beautie a long time after; infomuch that 

being ſet in water it will reuiue againe as at the titpe of his gathering, and remaineth ſo many 

one » whereupon likewiſe it hath raken his name.; The ſeede ſtanderh in the ripe cares,of colour 
and much glittering;the roote is ſhort and full of "—_ 4 Al 23 

2. The ſecond fort of flower Gentle hath leques like vnto the former: the ſtalke is vprightwirh a 

ewe ſmall {lender (talks ſer vpon itz among which do growe {wall cluſters of ſcaley Rowers, of an 

ouerwsrne ſcarlet colour.The ſeede is like the former, | 
| Fe ard | I Coimnaranthuw 


254 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


1 Aramanthas Pur pur ens. na 2 Arementhuccoccineu, 
Purple flowet Gentle, | En, 


4" 


3 OE. (46 0h ks oh 4 F* heh, Pamicals r/as 


Floramor and {5 ms __. Branched flower e 


b 


O 

 HISTORIE OF FULNN'T SS: | 25% 

It farre exceedeth my skilto deſcribe the beaurieand excellencie of this rare plant called #/-- 
7 aore; andIthinke the penfill ofthemoſt eurious. painter will be at a ſtaie when hethall come to 
ſer him downe in his lively colours: bur tocolour it after my beſt manerthis 1 ſaie, Floramer hath a 
chicke knobbic roote, whereupon do growe many)threddie ſtrings: from which riſeth vp a thicke 
| ſtalke, but render and ſoft,which beginneth ro deuide himfelfe into ſundry branches ar the ground 
and ſo ypwarde, whereupon do growe many leayes wherein doth conſiſt his beautie* forin tewe 
words,cuery leafe doth reſemble.in colours the moſt faireand beaurifull feather of aParrat; efpeci- 
ally choſe feathers that are mixed with moſt ſundrie colours, as a ſtripe of red, and a line of yellow, 
a daſhe of white,and a ribbe of greene colour,which I cannot with words ſer foorth;ſuch is the {un- 
drie mixtures of colours that nature hath beſtowed in hir greateſt iollitie ypon this flower : the 
flowers do growe betweene the fooreſtalkes of thoſe leaues, and the bodice of the ſtalke or trunke 
baſe,and of no momentin reſpe of the leaues being as itwere little chaftie husks of an ouerworn 
rawnie colour : the ſeede is blacke,and ſhining like burniſhed horne. [-" al 
4 This plant hath agreat many of threddes or ſtrings, of which his rootes do conſiſt. From 
which do riſe vp, very thicke , fat, and oileous ſtalkes , creſted and ſtraked, exceeding ſinooth 
andof a ſhining red colour , which beginne at the groundeto diuidethemſelues into braunches : 
whereupon do growe many ont and Jarge leaues of a darke greene colour tending to redneſle, 
inſhewe like thoſe of the red Beete, ſtraked and daſht heere and there withr mixed with greene, 
The flowers growe alongſt theſtalkes, from the middeſt thereof euen to the r$Þþ, in ſhape like 24- 
nicwn, that is,a great number of chaftie confuſed marter thruſt harde wo 1 of a deepe purple co. 
our, Ican conn the ſhape thereof ronothing ſofitly as to the veluet head of a Stagge, com- 


c 
pa&,of ſuch ſofrmarter asis the ſame: wherein is the ſecede, in colour white, rounde, and bored 


through themiddle. F: i 
| * Theplace. | bd EY 
Theſe pleaſant flowers are ſowen in gardens,cſpecially for their greatþtautie. 
© %Thetime. 5 


. 


flowerin Auguſt, and continue flowring cil the froſt doth ouertake them,atwhat time they 
periſh & muſt be ſowen the next yeere again.Bur the Floramor would be ſowen in a bed ofhot hor{: 
dung with ſome carth ſtrowed thereon inthe end of March,and ſocouered with mars or ſuch like in 
the night andlaid rothe ſun in the day timezotherwiſe the winter wilapproch before it commeth to 
perfection, for that itis very impatient ofour colde clymate. The right honorable the Lord Edward 
Zomche gaue me the ſeedes thereof, the which brought foorth their pleaſant leaues , bur periſhed 
defore the ſeede was ripe,which chaunced for want of this inſtruRion. 
| ©, *% Thenwnes. | Sg 
This plantis called in Grecke of Plinje Awiezrnr, bicauſe it doth not wither or waxe olde tin La- 
tine Amar arthis purpurens,that it may differ from Elichryſon,which is allo called d#udezrmr, whereof 
wewill entreat heereafter in his place: in high Dutch Samatbluomen, Daufenſchoon, and Flo- 
tamor,taken from ſome that haue called it F/os amoriz:in Italian Fior veluto: in French Paſſe velours: 
 Rnelmutranſlateth it Paſſexe lwtum:in Engliſh flower Gentleputple Veluet flower, Floramor,and of 
lome flower Yelure, © | = 
HEE ird | *% Thetemperature. RG 
Moſt of the later Phiſirions do attribute to flower gentle, but eſpecially to the firſt a binding fa- 
cultie with a colde and drie temperature. po. | | 
ltis reported they ſtop all kinde A alk wecpten de manifeſt by 
ts | 0 indes of bleeding,which propertie isnot made mani any appa- A 
rantqualitie that Sin ys Prana —— byche Seu only that the red cares haue: for ſome 
eot opinion,thatall red things do ſtaunch bleeding in any part of the bodie: bicauſe ſome thin 
a Bole armoniacke, ſanguis Dr acond, terra Sigillate,and ſuch like things of redcolour do ſtop bloud , 
But Galem in his ſecond and fourth bockes of the faculties of ſimples doth plainly ſhewe, thatthere 
canbeno certaintic gathered from the colours touching the vertues of ſimple and compound me- 
icineswherefore in common ſence they are ill perſwaded thatthinke the lower Gentle to ſtaunch 
cans, ſtop the laske and bloudie flixe bicaue ofthe colour onely, | 


of 


4. 


256 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Py . 


Of Orach. | Chap.41. | 
L is % The kindes. | 


T Here be fnchis ſorts of Orach,ſome white; fame of areddiſh ordeepe purple colour; ſomeef 


the gardenzandothers wilde or of the ficlde,and alſo one of cheſca. 


1 Ariplex ſatins alba, 1 2 Arriplex ſatiue purpurea, 
White Orach., 1 | PupaDncs, -: 


7 
YZ 
A 


> 


* The deſeription. | 

I He Garden white Orach hath/an high and vpright ſtalke, with broade ſharpe pointed 
lcaues like thoſe of Blite,yer ſmoother and ſofter. The flowers are ſmall and yellow grow- 
ing in cluſters : the ſcede rounde and like aJeafe couered with a thinne skin or filme,and 
groweth incluſters.The roote gocth farre into the gtound,vpon which hang many ſmall chreddes. | 
Theleaues and ſtalkes at the firſt are of/a glittering graie colour, and ſprinckled as irwerewith | 
meale or flower. PER ah | 2 © 1 
2 Theſecondis like to the former,ſauing thatthe whole plant tendevh rg an overworne purpliſh | 
colour,in\euery otherreſpeftalike, | if | 


3 Thewilde Orachis like in ſmoothneſle and faſhion of the leaues vnto the garden Orach. The | 
ſtalkes and cuery partthereof allo are veric like, fauing itisaltogither lefler. |  ] 
4 Theieis founde a wilde kinde growing neete the {ca coaft which hath long ſmal narrow leaues, 
flightly cur about the edges,ſharpe pointed, and couered ouerwith a cerraine mealineſſe, fo thit 


the whole plant as well leaues as ſtalkes and flowers,looke of an hoaric or graie colour,as do many 
other lca plants. jo | | | 


y. CAtripht | 


PIT 


fn 3 corn. 


I 


 - war + wr 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 257 


Atriplex ſylueſtris,fiue polyſpermon. 
p Wi Sector Meds 


% The 5 We 
garden Orach doth _—_ in the moſt fruirfbll gardens. 
The wilde Orach gro re vnto path waies byd ditch ſides, and in the binds of fields. 
UMatthiolus reporteth thathe found certaine Orach on the ſea coaſtes,ad Terge#ini /alinas: the 
which Thaue found in our owne countrey neere the ſeaſide betweene Rocheſter & ueenborough 
caſtle, as alſo from Reculuers to Margate in the Ile of Thaner :it groweth by the ockhouſe of 
Tilberic,and the Fort in Kent by Graueſend righragainſt rhe ſame place; + 


* The tame. 
They flower and ſecede from Iunets the end of Auguſt, 
* The names. 
Garden Orach is called in Grecke «eZ :in Latine Cdtriplex,and Anrewn olws : in Dutch 
Weld; in French CArrouches ou bomnes demes : in Engliſh Orach and : in the Bohemian 


toong Lebods : Plinie hath made ſome difference betweene Arriplex att Chryſoluchamun 483. 
they differed one from another, for of Arriplex he writeth inhis 20,.booke* and of C: 
lehinwn in his 28.booke $. chapret; whete he writech thus : Chryſolachanun faich he ove it 
Pinetum like Lettuce tit health cur ſinewes if it be forthwith applied. 

Thewilde Orach hath beene called Polyſpermon Caſſant of L'Obeline,or all ſecede. 

- 1, Thet ature. 
Orach faith Galewis of cemperature moilt i » a w__y degree,and colde in the firſt; 
* The ve q 

Dioſeor ides writeth that the garden Orach is both moif and colde, and chat i itiscaren boiled as A 
Rther{allade herbes arc,and that.it ſoftneth and looſcth the bellic. NGO AY * 

It conſumeth away the brellings of the throategyberher i it be laide on ra or Te - } B 

Thelerde bei drunke with incade or ho vl water,is a remedie oor f C 

Gale thin) that for that cauſe i it hath 2 qualitie, and ſl Fu © rey Ve of D 


R x | b, "of 


THE SECOND BOOKE”OF THE 


| 


Of finking Orach. Chip.42. 


% The a. 4; 2p908 


fl Tinking Orach _ flac yponthe ground, 
loweplant with many weake 


DY andis a bafean 
7 and feeble braunches; naw 50: do prowe 
ſmall leaucs of a grayiſh colour, ſprinckled ouer 
with a certaine kinde of durtie mealineſle,in ſhape 
| like the leaues of Bafill : among which leaues heere 
and there confuſedly diſperſed bee the ſeedes as it 
werenothing burduſt or aſhes. The whole plantis 
of a moſt lothſome ſauour or ſmell, vpon which - 
plant if any ſhould chaunce toreſt and ſleepe, he 
might very well report to his friendes that he had 
repoſed himſelfe amongſt the chiefe of Seggin: 
heires. Cs - 
H * Theplace.. 
: It groweth vpon dung hils andin the moſt filthy 
places that may be founde, as alſo.abour the com- 
mon piſſing placesof great princes, & noblemens 
houſes. Sometime it is founde in placesnecrebrick | 
kils and olde wals, which doth ſomewhat alter his 
ſmell , which.js like toſtedcheeſe: bur that which | 
groweth in his naturall place ſmelleth like ſtinking 
{alt fiſh,whercofir rooke his name Garoſmus. 
i * The time 
Iris an herbe fora yeere,which ſpringeth vp,and 
when the ſcede is ripe it periſheth,, and recouereth 
| | |  Itſelfeagaineofhisowneleede, fothatifirbegor | 
ren mtoa ground,it.cannot be deſtroicd. Ooh aniurs > bra? bt! 1 | ack” | 
obo 3 1oy $30 EIOO ve. * Thenones, 110 d $6 Kok? OOnty; d: 1611 1.32 
Stinking Orachis called of Cordus Garoſmms; bicaule it ſmellerh like ſtinking 6M ,whigh is called 
in Grecke 3»: it is likewiſe calledT; ay. vi Germanicum, and Atriplex fatide, garmm olen Rene 
en the cammiſh male Goate, whereupon ſome by a figue 


REPO VOL 


« #*% 


| 410 1h:140 
hisnature or verrueysnot- 


bledwich the Mother: for as Hip 
are co be applied vnta the noſe as 


\ Oofe-foote is a common hetbe and thoyghtto 
. ( : cubitc high or - 5 er fe 
MN fees dw oy red,fhmi 
- 'ofaGoofe. The 


<& Yo, TD V wu 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ST 259 
* Theplace. | 


| Itgroweth plentifully in obſcure places NECTe|! vnto olde walles andhigh waies , andin deſert | 


yy &* The ire, 
' Trflouriſherh when the Orach doth whereof this is a wilde kinde. 
* The names. 


later Herbariſtes haue called it Pes anſerinm, of the likenefle rhat the leaues haue with the - 


foorc-of 2 Goolc:of ſome Chenopodinm:in Engliſh Goolefoore and wilde Orach. 
* T| ef ature. 
This herbe is colde and moiſt,and tharno leſſer then Orach, bur as it appeererh more colee. 
Þ The vertues. 


| Tris reportedthat it killerh fvine if they do cate thereof: it is not vied in Phyſicke: and much A 


leſſe as a (allade herbe. 
Of Eng iſ Me ercurie. (hap. 44- 


Englih Mere codextit - 1-7 he deſe 
En Curie,or 1C, *%.F, Tipton. 
wm" "M "N Ood Henrie called _ "B fo named of 
R ; I the later Herbariſts ,is accounted of them 
© to be oneof the Docks, butnotpropetlic. 
This bringeth foorth very many /thicke ſtalkes, ſer 
with leaues two foote hi z on the braunches 
whereof towards the top ſtande greene flowers in 


like choſe of the Orach , whereof this isa kinde. 
The leaues be faſtned to long! fooreſtalkes, broad-: 
behinde, and ſharpe pointed, faſhioned like the 
leaues of Aron or VV ake-robin , white or grayiſh 
ofcolour, and as it were couered ouer with a fine 


thicke roote,and parted into many deuiſions, ofa 
Dock: colour within , like the ſharpe pointed 
P 4 
| % The 
Irj is commonly founde in vntilled places, and 
among rubbiſh necre common waies , olde wals, 
and by hedges in ficldes. 
* The time. 
I fouriſherh in June and luly eſpecially. | 
&* The names. 


me: in Engliſh all Good, and Good Henrie, in 
«ſhirciris called Good king Harry : the 
Germaines call it Guter Qeinrick, of a certaine 
food qualitie it hath,as they alſoname acertaine pernicious herbe, ACaiws Henricus,or bad Henry. 
tis taken for a kinde of Mercurie, but vnproperly, for that it hath no participation with Mercurie, 


_ in forme orqualitic,exceptyee wil call ow herbe Mercuric which hath power to looſe the 
ec, 


* The temperature. 
Bows Henricw or good Hentic is moderately or and dric,clenfing and ſcouring with all, 
* The wertwes. 
The leaues boiled with other potherbes andearen,maketh the bodic ſoluble. 


cluſters, thicke rhruſt rogither. The ſeedeis flat 


meale, in handling itis fat &olecous, with a verie 


'Iei is called of fome Pes Anſerinu,and Tota bo- 


A 


Theſamebruſed andlaid vpon green wounds or foul & old vicers,doth 1) ID ORMIIER: ax heale B 


R 3 of 7 


THE SECOND BOOKE”OF THE 


| Of ſtinking Orath. Chap. 42. 


| 


- E | 
W: } 


| *%The ». 8; 19098 

> Tinking Orach —_ flac vypon the ground, 
A andis a bafe and loweplant with many weake 
” and fecble braunches; —_— do growe 
ſmall leaues of a grayiſhcolour, ſprinckled ouer 
with a certaine kinde of durtie mealineſle,in ſhape 
like the leaues of Bafill : among which leaues heere 
and there confuſedly diſperſed bee the ſeedes as it 
werenothing burduſt or aſhes. The whole plantis 
of a moſt lothſome ſauour or ſmell, vpon which 
plant if any ſhould chaunce toreſt and ſleepe, he 
might very wellreport to his friendes thar he had 
repoſed himſelfe amongſt the chiefe of Scoggins 
heires. | | | 

. It groweth vpon dung hils andin the moſt 
hices that may be way; as alſo abourthe = 
mon piſſing places of great princes, & noblemens 
houſes. Sometime it is founde in places neere brick 
kils and olde wals, which doth ſomewhat alter his 
fell , which is like'toſtedcheeſe: bur that which 
rowerh in his natutall place ſmelleth like ſtinking 

Ale fiſh,whercofir rooke his name Garoſmus. 


{ % The time | 
+ Itis an herbe fora yeere,which ſpringeth vp,and 
when the ſcede is ripe it periſheth, and recoueteth | 
=— #7 3 4 it ſcl{c againe of his &wueſeede, fothat if irbegor- 
ren into a ground,it.cannot be deſtroicd. of 2niz73> banc? of 2611 cla} WI ATEF 
; 'B+is * The names, SIMI Þi1'4 HUNG £1! 20022007 $601 19: 
Stinking Orachis called of Cordus Garoſmes, bicaulc it ſmelleth like ſtinking fiſh which is called 
in Grecke ze»: it is likewiſe Talled:T: i. 0nd Germanicum, and Atriplex fetide; garmn olens Pena 
LC 0bely, for it ſmelleth more ſtinking then the cammiſh male Goare, whereupon ſome by a figure 
haue called it Y#{uaris, and may be called in Engliſh ſtinking Motherwoort:)-_! 11% point poll 


ve The natuvt and vertues. | ( 1 ho 
this nature or yertues not = 

ſinell, for ſuch, asbenow 
fer {trangle,fuchthing 


' 


& 


F *3\< 


= 2 
"i. 


Oofe-foote is ac vp with aftakes 
a  cubite high or Bl ſinooth, 


x [7 an > | 


& 


1 
| 


It 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 259 
| * Thepizce. | | | 
| Ir groweth plentifully in obſcure places necre vnto olde walles andhigh waies , andin deſert 
pJACCs. | : 


| + The time, A 
Irflouriſheth when the Orach doth whereof this is a wilde kinde. 
+ The names. 


The later Herbariſtes haue called it Pes anſerinas, of the likenefle that the leaues haue with the 
tote of a Goole:of ſome Chenopodiam:in Engliſh Gooſcfoore and wilde Orach; 
| * Thetemperature. K. 
This herbe is colde and moiſt,and thatno lefſex then Orach, bur as it appeereth more colde. 
| ET Es % The vertues. | 
Itis reported that it killerh Gvine if they do cate thereof: it is not vied in Phyſicke: and much A 
leſſe as a (allade berbe. | FTE, | 


Of Engliſh Mercurie. Chap. 44+ 


Bonus Henricw. f be deſers | 
Engliſh Mercurie,or good Henrie, |  *%Fheaeſcription. | 
q dF es : "N Ood Henrie called 7o#4 bona, fo named of 


| I the later Herbariſts ,is accounted of them 

” to be cneof the Docks , butnotproperlic. 
This bringeth foorth very many thicke ſtalkes, fer 
with leaucs two foote high; on the braunches 
whereof towards the top {tande greene flowers in 
cluſters, thicke thruſt rogither. The ſeedeis flat 
like choſe of the Orach , whereof this is a kinde. 
The leaues be faſtned to long footeſtalkes, broad: 
behinde, and ſharpe pointed, faſhioned !like the 
leaues of Aron or Wake-robin , white or |grayiſh 
of colour, and as it were covered ouer with a fine 
meale, in handling it is fat &oleous, with a verie 
thicke roote,and parted into many deuiſions, of a 
"1 colour within , like the ſhatrpe pointed 

e, | | 

| _ *+Theplace, | | 

Itis commonly founde in vntilled places, and ; 
among rubbiſh necre common waies , olde wals, 
and by hedges in hieldes. 

| &* The time. 

Ir flouriſherh in June and July eſpecially. 

| & The names. | 
{Iris calledoffome Pes Lanſerinuand Tots bo- 
4: in Engliſh all Good, and Good Henrie, in 
Cambridgeſhireir is called Good king Harty: the 
| Germaines call it Outer Þeinrick, of a certaine- 
| good qualitic it hath, as they alſo name a cerraine pernicious herbe, Ada/ue Henricus, or bad Henry, 

tis taken for a kinde of Mercurie, but vnproperly, for that it hath no participation with Mercurie, 
_ in forme orqualitic,exceptyee wil calleuery herbe Mercuric which hath power to looſe the 

i | +: 

| |  * Thetemperature. BEE 
Bonw Henricus or good Henric is modecedrie and drie,clenſing and ſcouring with all, 
* Thewertwes. | 

The leaues boiled with other potherbes andearen,maketh the bodic ſoluble. A 

j Pelamebruſed and laid vpon green wounds or foule & old vicers,doth ſcoure,mundifte & heale B 


"THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
4 Pine Chap. 45. Z 


PF %* 7 The deſcription. | 
Pinach is a kind of Blite after ſome, notyith 
ſtanding Irather take ir for a kind of Orach, 

| It bringeth foorth ſoftand render leaues of 
a darke { ras colour,full of juice, ſha pointed, 
andin the largeſt part, or neather cnd ſquare; 
ted oftentimes with a deepe gaſh oneither Ge, d; 
next to the ſtemme or foote ſtalke; the ſtalke is 
rounde, a foote high, hollowe within: on thetop | 
of the braunches ſtande little flowers in cl | 
whoſe places doth one a prickly ſcede. Therooe 
conſiſterh of all threds. | 
2 Thercis another ſortfoundin our gardens like 
ynto the former in goodnefle, as alſoin ſhape, {x 
ning thattheleaues are notſo great nor fo deepe 
 gaſhtorindented: and the ſeede hath no hs 
at | Rk which cauſe itis mo round Spinach, 
* Thep 
4 | Iris ſowen ingardens omen great labour 
& induſtrie, and forſaketh not any gun _ 
bur indifferent fertill, | 
&+ The time. [8 
' Ir may be ſowen almoſt at any timeof the yeere, 
but being ſowen in the ſpring it quickly Long 
yp;& commeth to perfection within two moneths: 
bur that which is ſowen in the fall oftheleafe 
"weth nor ſo ſoone to perfection, yet _ 
pol and ſcedeth preſently vpon ok 
*T, 

It is called in cheſe daies Spinechia,of ſome Spmachewmn olws: of others Hiſpaxicun olus : Fecha 
nameth it Ee2/«: the Arabians and Serepio call it H1ſpexe : the Germaines Spinet 2 in Engliſh | 
Spinage and Spinach: in French E ſpinas. 

* The Bature. | 

Spinach is euidentlycolde ind moiſt almoſt in the ſeconde arty rather mail Itis oneof | 

chepoterbe whoſe ſubſtance is watcric , and almoſt without therefore epliy dies | 
deth and looſeth the belly. , | 

&* The vertnes. 
A Iriseatenboiled,burir yeeldeth licdle orno nouriſhment at all: itis is ſomething windie,andeally | 
cauſerh a deſire to vomite,itis vſcd in ſallades when it is yoong and tender. | 


This herbeofallocher potherbes andfallde herbes; wakech the greae diverſitic of meates | 
and fallades. | | | 


Of Pelliori ih Fl wall. . Chop 46. 
*% The deſcription | | 


Ellitorie of the wall bath rounde tender ſtalkes ſomewhat VO or reddiſh of colour and 
ſomewhat ſhining:theleaues be rough like to the leaues of Mercurie,nothing ſnipr about the | 
edges. The flowers be ſmall, growingcloſero the ſtemmes,the ſeede blacke _ verie ſmall, 

uered wuh arough huske which hangeth faſt "map garments: the roore ſomewhat reddiſh. 

Parietaris | 


HIST ORTE' OF:PLANTS. 1}:}- 261 
Parietaria. [" oy 
Pellitorie of the wall. ; * The /ace. 

| | It groweth neere to olde' wals in the moilt cor- 
ners of churches and ſtone buildings, amoneg(t rub- 
buh and ſuch like places. 

| * The time. | | 

It commeth vp in Maie: itfeedeth in Ily and Au- 
guſt : the roore onely corthiatth and is co be found 
in winter. *% The names. 

Itis commonly called Parietaria, or by acorrupt.. 
worde Paritaria, bicauſc it groweth neere to wal; : 
&'for the ſame cauſe it is namedof diuers Murals: 
alſo Muralium of Pliny and Celſus:of the Gracians 
©Zir. There is alſo another Helxjne ſurnamed Ci 
ſempe:os : lore call it Perdieiums, of Partriges which 
ſomrimes feed heercof: ſome Yreeolaris, and Vitr a- 
r/4,bicauſcit ſerueth to ſcoure glaſſes, pipkens-and 
ſuch like : it is called in high Durc Tag vnd 
nacht ; in Spaniſh Tere de/muro : in Englith Pelli- 
totic of the wall : in French Partetaire. _ 

34-79 *% The temperature. _ - 

Pellitorie of the wall(as Galen (laith) hath force to 
ſcoure,and is ſomthing coldeand moiſt. _ 

Pellicorie of the wall boiled and the deco@tion of A 
it drunken , helperhYuch as are vexed with an olde 
- cough; the and ſtone; &is good agg the 
ESD,” _  difficultic of making water, &ſtopping of the ſame, 
not onely inwardly,but alſo outwardly applied vpon the region oft c bladder,in maner ofa tomen- | 
tationer warme bathing, with ſpunges or double clouts or ſuch, like, $45 og 

Dioſcorides ſaith that the inice tempered with Ceruſeor white leade, maketh a good ointment B 

inſt Saint Anthonies fire and the ſhingles: & mixed with the cerot of Alcanneor with the male 


Dieſcor ide 5 adde hat the iuice heereof ts 2 remediefor old coughes, and taketh away hor ſwel- D 


Itisathtmed rhatifthree ounces of the iuice be dtimke, ir prouoketh vtineonr ofhande., 
The leaues tempercd withoile of ſweere almonds im maner of a pultus and laide to the pained Þ 


other two wilde ncuer founde in gardens, eſle they be broughe chxher. 


eunnny oils goon ow bick 2) op hedefpriptions': nc.” bug ac: c2parbich, 3 
r He malegarden Mercurie hath tender ſtalks full of ioines and braunches, whereupon.do 
» |} groweblackiſhleaues like Pellicotic of thewall: among which commeth toorth ewo hai- 
rie bullets rounde and ioined togither like thoſe of A as or Cleuers, eche con- 

K3 | 


rcining 


262 THE SECOND, BOOKE or THE 


reining in it ſelfe one ſmall round ſeede with a neodher roote,and full of white haitie ſtrin 
2 Thefemalcis like vnto the former in leaues, ſtalkes, and manero i growings differing buti in the 
: Bowers and ſecede : for this kind hath a greater quanititie of flowers and cede growing tOgither like 


little cluſters of gonna, a —_— colour. The ſecde for the mph partis loſt before it can be gz 
thered, . | 


| 


2 Mercurialis famine. | 
Female Mercurict 


French FRA > eek Linen tion 4 EI b ineyardes, and in moiſt ſb» 
dowie places, I founde it vader the dropping of the biſhops a2; atRocheſter, from whence 
1 brogghs el plant or wwo into my garden,ſince Net time — rid my ahi fromir. 
* The foe. 
They flower and derihgl the former long. 2 eTeP al | 
* Thewames. | | 
Iris called in Grecke riguars, and «47 berry, or Mercurie his babes ; whereupon the Larivrcd 
it Mercuriali : and Theophr aſt ws 2/00) : and in, Djgſcorides P byllon ; es called in Iralian Mercorcls 
in Engliſh French Mercurie :in French Mercuriale » Vignoble, and Foirelle, quia Fluiderw laxman, 
aluwn reddit Gallobelge enim  forze + forzems, ventri Fluor ems yocant. 
Mer hot anderic, pour the fol ——_ act a ane > 
curic is hota nota n thach aclenfing fac as 6+ 
len writeth)a digeſting quabtie alſo. JOEY 7 = } 2 
Iris viedi liſters,and th rhEnk er lene; ndſ he excremens 
tis viedin our age in gliſters,and thou toc can coure away the e 
and other filth jk in the guts. It 72 as. urye the belly being earen uy en taken, 
vojding out of thebelly not onely the excrements,burt alſo phlega'e choler. Dioſcorides repo 
-reth thatrhe decoQion heerof purgeth wakcriſh bgnours. | Fe 1 The 


| 
| 


HISTORTE' I PLANTS. 263, 


The leaues ſtamped with butter and _—_ ro the fuindament prouokethto the ſtoole, and the B 
herbe briſed andmade vpin manerofapeſlarie Jclenſerh t. ie mother,and helpeth conception. | 

Coitaws in his booke of thenature of Yan afits rs ſaith hat the juice of Mercurie,Hollihocks,and Pur- C 
lane mixed togither,and the handsb 7-5 ms —_ if they be thruſt 
into xo boiling lenge. | 


of wilde Son ercurie. -"S 48. ed 


*T7 


b I *\ 


Phyllon Thelygonon. 
* Childrens Mercurie, 


# XN No EF) 
nn 
JS A A PN 


SY 


0 > oY 
AF \X =; 4 
za f- ' TY, - 
RW LET 2 w If: a 5 
Fan —” — m— 
. _ 4. * ; " { L 
- : 


F; mr 
s I 
Fa %.. 
» - . ” v 
_ p AMT T- we "Y 
ECLEC I 
ow ub 44h 


ps SS. "y 


EU 


+ i fritin 


Ogs Mercurie is ſomewhar like vnto the garden meals; fing the"leaues heereof 
are greater, and the ſtalke not ſo tender, and yet very brittle, growing tothe height of a 
foore,withourt any braunches at all, wich {mall yellowe flowers. The ſcede is like the fe- 
male Mercurie, 
2 Childrens Mercuric hath three or fower ſtalkes or mo: the leaues be ſomewhat long,notmuch 
vnlike the Icaues of the Oliue tree,coueredouer with aſoft downe or wooll, graic of ATE Koa 
kede allo like thoſe of female Mercurie. 
*% The pl 
| They grow in woods andcopſes,in the borders of Geldes and among buſhes and hedge 
The dogs Mercurie I haue founde in many places about Greene-Hith, Qeradhedges, village, 
Graueſgnde, and South-fleete in Kent; in Hampreſtonne woode , and all the Hen thereabour, 
tower miles trom London: | 
+ The time. | 
Theſe flouriſh allthe ſommer long ——— — w pull —_ downe. Y 
4 * T 


c 


264 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Dogs Mercuric is called in Grecke «1ez;4ut:in Latine Canine, and Brafice canine,and Mercars. 
«lj; ſjlue#ris: in Engliſh Dogs/Colc,and Dogs Mercurie, | F4 
Chuldrens Mercurie is called Phyllon theligonon, and P hyllon Arrhenogonon. \ 
1 we The temperatureandverines. F 
Theſe wilde kinds of Mercutie are not vſedin Phiſicke,notwithſtanding it is thought they agree 
as well in nature as qualitic with the other kinds of Mercure. | | 


Of Torneſole. Chap.49. 
y + The kindes | OS. 
4 + Tere be fine ſorts of T ornſole,differing one from another in many notable} F ,aingrew: 


\ 


+ 
EF Y ' 


nefſe and ſmalneſle,in colour of owers,in forme and ſhape, 


1 Helictro prum ming. | 24 2 Hel F608 ER INS, 


Great Lomſole, | | | Small Tornſole. 


| =3 *% The de eript ion. | 
I He great Torneſole bath ſtraight rounde ſtalkes couered with a white hairie cotton,eſpeck 
Tl ally about the top whitiſh leaues,ſoft and hairie in handling, in ſhape like the leaues ofBz 
| fill : the flowers growe at the top of the braunches, in colour white, thicke togither in 
rowes vpon one {ide of the ſtalke,which ſtalke doth bende orturne backward like the taile of a ſcor- 
pion: the roote is {mall and hard, 6 244 | 1.7. 

2 Theſwall Torneſole hath many little and weake braunches trailing vpon the grounde, where 
upon do growe finall leaues like thoſe of the leſſer Baſill. The flowers dd growe at the endes of the 
terider braunches,graic of colour,with a little ſpot ef yellow in the middeſt,thewhich turneth into 
crooked tailes like thoſe of the precedent. 1 i 1 


y 3 Hehotropio 


_ ©» HISTORIE"OF/PLANTS. 
3 Heliotrepiums pi Cluſi + L Obely. - 4 Heliotrops 


Hairie 


ACE 
-v, 
Y; 


MS 
_ 
: 


- WW 
ANA 


5 Heliotropium Tr icoccum. 
Widowe wailc Tornſole. 


(7 
L 


W 
<DEL 
\ 


No 

MN ,/ 

WH YE 
——<—Q\\" a” ff <S 


4 "1 ,, 
dYVLZ/J Io 3, LS; 
\ A 


LACED 


. . 265 


nn 


| * Thedeſeription. 

2 Hairie Torneſole hath likewiſe manie feeble 
and weake braunches trailing vpon the crounde, 
ſerwith ſmall leaues leſſer thenthe ſmall Tornſole:; 
among which groweth the ſeede inſmall chaftie 
huskes which do notturne backe like the taile of a 
ſcorpion; which mooueth me to thinke ir akinde 
of ſmall water Chickweede, | _ 

4 The vpright Tornſole hath a ſtalk of rwo foote 
high , ſet with rough hairie leaues,couered with a 
cottonie downe, not vnliketo the leaues of vipers 
Buploſſe. The ſtalke deuideth it ſelfe into fundrie 
ſinall braunches towards the top; the flowers ſmal 
and idle. The ſeede is inclofed in little rounde vel- 
ſelslike thoſe of dogs Mercurie. 

5 | This kinde of Torneſole hath leaues verie like 
to thoſe of the great Tornſole, bur of a blacker 
greene colour : the flowers be yellow, after which 
commeth out the fruite hanging vpon ſinall foote- 


ſtalkes three ſquare, and in every corner there is a 
ſmall ſeede like thoſe of the Tyrhimales ;the roote 
{ſmall and threddie. | 

| * The place, : 


Tornſole,as Dieorides faith,doth growein fen- | 
nie grounds &neere vnto pooles and lakes. They 
are ſtraungers in Englande as yer: It doth growe 


about 


with through Europe meate is coloured. 


266 THE SECOND *BOOKE) OF THE 
about Montpelier in Languedock,where it is hag ingreatvſc to {tine and dic cjouts witha Whet- 


*% T he time. | 


17 They gouriſh eſpecially in'the ſommer ſolſtice, or about the time when the ſunne entreth into 
Cancer. _ TG *s | 


The Grzcians call it Helotropium: the Latines keepe theſenames Heliotropinmſagma, an 
Scorpiurwn : of Raellius Herba Cancyt: itis named wap cect not bicauſe it is turned abour ar 
the daily motion of the funne, bur by reaſon it lowreth in.the ſommer ſolſtice, at which time the 
ſunne being fartheſt gone from the —_—— circle, returneth tothe ſame; & Scropiarwn of the 
twiggie tops that bowe backewarde like a ſcorpions taile : of the Italians Forneſol bobs :in-French 
Tournſel: itis alſo called Herba Clitie, whereot the poct hath thele verſes : wi 

| Herba velut Clitie ſemper petit obuja ſolem, | 


Sic pra mens Chriſftum quo prece ſjectet haber. 'Sr 
| 1 +Thinature; | | 
Tornſole as Paulus AEgrneta writeth,is hot arid drie,and of a binding facultie. 
| | % The wertues. | | 


A good handfull of the great Tornſole boiled in wine and drunke,doth ently purge the bodyof 


hot cholericke humours and tough clammie or flimie flegme, 


The ſame boiled in wine and drunke is good againſt the itinging of Scorpions or othet venemous 


| beaſts,andis verygood to be applied outwardly vpon the griefe or wounde. 


Thelſccde ſtamped andlaide ypon warts and ſuch like excreſcens or ſuperfluous 6utgrowings, 
cauſeth them to fall away. | ] | & 
The ſmall Tornfole and his ſcede boiled with Hyſope,Crefles, and ſalrpeter and drunke, driueth 
foorth flat and round wormes. 34 | 
With the ſmall 'ſornſole they in Fraunce doe die linnen rags and clouts into a perfe@ purple 
colour;wherewith cookes and confeftionaries do colour iellies, wines,meates, and fundric com- 
fectures : which clouts in ſhops be called Torneſole after the name of the herbe. 


A , 


| Of Scorpion graſſe. Chap.50. | 


% The deſeription. | 
Corpion graſle hath many ſmooth , plaine , cuen leaves, of a darke greene colour; ſtalkes 
ſmall,tecble, and weake, railing vpon the grounde and occupying a great circuit in reſpeRot 


the plant. The lowers growe vpon long and lender footeſtalkes, of colour yellowe, in ſhape 
like tothe flowers of broome; after which ſucccede long crooked rough cods, in ſhape and colour 


| like vnto a caterpiller,wherein is contcined yellowiſh ſeede like vnto a kidney in forme, The roots 


is ſmall and render,the whole plant periſheth whenthe ſecede is ripe. ' 

There is another ſort of Scorpion grafle found among corne,peaſe,and tares, and therupon ca 
Iced Scorpicides Legwninoſa,which hath ſmall and render rootes like ſmall threds: braunches manic, | 
weake and tender, trailing pon the grounde if there be nothing to rake holde ypon with hiscla- 
ſping and crooked ſeed veſlels,otherwiſeth it rampeth vpon whatſoeuer is neere vnto it, The leaues 
be fewe and ſmall:the flowers very little & white of colour: the ſeede followerh: little and blackilh, 
contceined in crooked cods like vnto the taile of a ſcorpion, | | . 

Thercis alſo another ſort almoſtin cuery ſhallowe grauely running ſtreame, hauing leaueslike 
to Becabunga or Brokleme. 'The flowers growe it the top, of tender fat greene ſtalkes, blewe of co 
lour, andottentimes with a ſpot of yellowe among the blewe; the whole braunch of flowers doc 
rurne themſelues likewiſe round like the ſcorpions taile. | 

There is alſo another growing in waterie places with leaues like ynto _AHnagalls aquatioa, OW 
ter Chickweede, hauing like {lender ſtalkes atid braunches as the former, and the flowers not W- 
like, fauing that the flowers of this arc of a light blewe or watched colour , fornewhat bigger, and 
laide more open,whereby the yellowe potis dtielicene. | I 


0 oP: 


HISTORIE OF. PLANTS. 267 


Scorpioides Bupleuri folio, Pena + L Obely, | © ” 
| Ceotplan ow; = i | 7 | * 7 he deſeription. 
| There is likewiſe anotherfort growing vpon the | 
| moſt drie grauely and barren ditch bankes, with 
leaues likerhoſe of _Hurrenuts Muris or Mouſeare, 
called Atyoſotis ſcorproidet with rough and haitie 
leanes,of an onerworne rafter colour: the flawers” 
do grow vpon weake,fzeble, & rough braunches, 
as is all che reſt of the plant; [They likewiſe growe | 
for the moſt part vpon oneſide of theſtalke;blewe 
of colour, with alike lictle ſpot of yellowe as the 
others,tumingic ſelfe backe againe like the raile of 
a ſcorpion, £4 
| There is another of the lande called Moyoſetis 
$ w—_ repens, like the former : but the flowers | 
are thicker thruſt rogither , and donor growe all 
vpon one fide as the other,and part of the Kowers 
blewe and part purple, confuledly mixt togither. 
 * * Theplace, | 
| The Scotpion grafle deſcribed groweth not 
wilde in Englande, notwithſtanding Ihauerecei- | 
ned ſcedesrherof from beyond the {eas,and hauc 
diſperſed them through England which are eſtec- 
med of gentlewomen forthe beautic & ſtraunge- 
neſle of the crooked coddes , notwithanding it is | 
the beſt feeding for cattell tharmay be. | 
| Theothers dogrowe in waters and ſtreames,as 
alſo in the drie and barrainebankes, 
. *% The time. | b-3 
Thefirſt Aowreth from Maic to the end of Auguſt; the others Thaue foundall the ſommer long. 
| | *% Thenanes. | | 
There is not any thing remembred as touching thenames more then hath beene ſet downe in + 
their deſcriptions: onely our Engliſh gentlewomen and others docallit Caterpillers, of the ſuni- 
litudeit hath with the ſhape of that canker worme called a caterpiller, 
4 FOR ar © qu neg f* els > a 
ereisnot any thing remembred of the temperature , yet Dzeſcor?aes laith that the leaues of 
Scorpion | aſſe applied to the place is a vreſenit incaſe againſt the ſtinging of Scorpions : &like | 
iſ ode Finwein> ah dropke preuaileth againſt the ſaid bitings as alſo of adderF, ſnakes,and fuctr 
like veciemains beaſts: Being madein an viguen of algewith offe,waxe, and alittle gum Elempni, 
6profitable againſtſuch hures as require a healing medicine. lt! 


Of Neghrſhade. s Chap.51. 


where EE ago 4 1rd oO Oo ey 6 
T Herebe diners Nighthades, whereof ſome arc of the gardenz and ſome thar love theffieldes, | 
© .andyetcuery of them found wilde; whereof fome cafe fleepineſſe. euen vntodeath; others 
caulefleepineſle, and yet Philicallz andothers very: profitable'vnto the health of man, as ſhall be 
&Cared in ehcir.ſeverallyertues,. >| nr nd vibes | 


' 


ne *+ The deſeription. ts 
tC Arden Nightſbade hathrounde ſtalks a foote high and full ofbraunches,whereonare ſer | 
leaues of a blackiſh colour, ſoft & ful of iuice,in like to the leaucs of Baſill,burmuch 
greater: among which do growe {mall white flowers withyellowe pointcls in the pres 3 

| =. = m WIC 


v= 


268 THE SECOND BOOKE OF: THE 


which being paſt,there do ſucceede rounde berries,greene at the firſt, and black when they be ripe 

like thoſe of Jus : the rgote is white and full of hairie ſtrings. | AP 
2 Sleeping Nightſhade hath for his roote a - 6996 err of threddic rootes, from which riſech 
vp afarſtalke of a blackiſh greene colour as is the reſt of the plant; whereon do growe ſharpepoin. 
red leaues like vntothole of the Docke, The flowers are white with a certaine yellowe aglet in the 
middle after which come forth berries, greene at the firſt and aftewards of a faint yellowiſh green, 
The whole plant periſheth at the farſt approch of winter, | 


1 Solanum Horten(+. 2 Solanum Pomife _ 


' SkeepieNightſhade. 


, 


. 


W 


4 \ 


W WEE 
N WA 
SS 4 B/a--- 1 T8, 
(nas, Po 
f XIE CS 
ES 
W_ 


: | | | -— * The place- A 02 pabeins 
This Nighrſhade commech vp in many placgs.ynd novonely.in ganken, ofrbickedovulifit 


: 
= 


ding it hath taken his ſurname, andin which it is often founde growing with other herbes: bur alſo 
necre common high waies,the borders of Nel, by oldewals and ruinous places.  :; »'d/x 
| * The time. | ; 

I flowrerh in former, and oftentimes till autumne be well ſpent; and then the fruite commeth | 

toripeneſlc, | T7 > 8; bg 
| . | | *% The names. nz [es 

Triscalled of the Gracians 5/2 :of the Latins Solanwm,& Solanum hoytenſe:in ſhops Solatrwn: 
of ſome Morells,Yus png nnd Vat Vulpi: in Spaniſh likewiſe Aforell & yerus Mora: Marccluan = 
olde Philicke writer,& diuers others of his timecalled it S/ywmnum: Phe m bis +7 book 8chapy, 
ſheweth rhar it iscalled Cuc#balus + both theſe wordes are likewiſe exrantitvi Houle among the | 
confuſed names of Nightſhade: whohathgathered togither in one chapterfoihany ;thathe hath 
as it were confounded the name thereof: in Engliſh ir is called Garden Nightſhade; Mordl, and 
perie Morel]: in French Moyell, Gallobelgit: fen ardent : quia medetur igni ſacro. | 

| | | > Thetemperature. FE Ef a” ow 

Nightſhade as Ga» faith in his booke 'of' the faculties of ſimple medicines is vied' fot thoſe in- 
firmities that haue neede of cooling and binding: for theſe wwo qualities it hath in the ſeconde de- 


gree: which thing allo he affirmethin his booke of the faciflties ofnoutiſhmenrs , where hc _ 
+ >» | i at 


I'S as . >, i. Ret. 


| RY 
HISTORIE |\OF PLANTS. 269 


tatthere isno potherbe which wee vic to carethat hath ſo great aſtriCtion or binding as Night- 
ſhade bath , and therefore phiſitions do woorthely vicit , and that ſe:domeas 2 nouriſhment, 
bur alwaics asSa medicine. | *%* The Vertnes. | 


 Dioſcorides writeth,that Nightſhade is good againlt Saint Anthonies fire;the ſhingles, paine of A 
the head, the hart burning or heate of the ſtomacke, and other like accidents proceeding of ſharpe * 


and biting humours : notwithſtanding thar ir hath theſe vertues, yetitis not alwajes good that it 


ſhoulde be applicd vnto thoſe infirminies, for that many times there hapneth more dangers by ap- 
plying of theſe remedics,therfof the diſeaſe it ſelfe. For as Hjppocrates writeth in the 6, booke of his | 
horiſmes,rhe 25.particular,thatir is not good, that Saint Anthonies fire ſhould be driven from 
the ourward parts to the inward : and likewite in his prognoſtickes he ſaith, that itis neceſfarie thar 
Saint Anthonies fire ſhoulde breake foorth,and thar it is death ro haue it drinen'ing which is tobe 
vnderſtoode nor onely of Saint Anthonies fire , but alſo of other like burſtings out procured by 
nature.For by vſing of theſe kind of cooling & repelling medicines,the bac, corruptandſharp hu- 


| morsaredriuen back mn the chicte & principall parts,which cannot be done without great 


danger and hazarde of life. cherefore we muſt not vnaduiſedly,lightly,or raſhly miniſter ſuch 
nk of medicines vpon the comming out of Saint Anthonies fire,the ſhingles , or ſuch hot pim- 
ples and blemiſhes of the skin.. | : = 
The iuice of the greene leaues of 'garden Nightſhade mixed with barley meale,is veryprofita- B 
blic applied vato Saint Anthonies fireandto all hot inflammations, & 
The iuice mixed with oile ofroſeserulc,and licrarge ot golde,and applied,is more proper and C 
effectuall ro the purpoſes before ſer downe. 
Neither the iuice heercof nor any other part is to be giuen py 
po 


. 


The leaues ſtampedare profitablic pur intothe ointment of popler buds, called / »gventar po- 
pulean, good and allotherointments, | x 
Of ſleeping Nighthade. Chap. 51. 
Solanum Lethae. | | 
Dwalc,ordeadly Nightſhade. | %* Thedeſeription. 


% 


Wale orſleepingNightſhade hath round 

| blackiſh ſtalks ſixe foote high, whereupon | 
| doe growe great broade leaues of a darke 
yore colourz among which doe growe ſmall 

| hollowe flowers bell faſhion of an oucrworne | 
9 colourz in the place whereof come 
oorth greatrounde berries of the bigneſſe of the 
blacke cherrie, greeneat thefirſt, but when they 
be ripe of the colour of blacke ictte or burniſhed 
horne, ſofrand full ofpurple iuice; among which 
juicclie the ſeeds like the berries of Iuic: theroore 
15 very great,thicke and long laſting. 

| % Theplace. 


| Tr groweth in vntoiled places necre vhto | 
high waiesand the ſea marſhes and ſuch like pla- 
[a | | 

| Itgroweth very plentifully in Hollande in Lin- 
cblaibire, and in the Ile of Elie ata. place called 
Walſoken,neere vnto Wigbitch. Tas] 

| T foundeit growing wicthoutthe gate of High- 
gate necre vntoa pound or pinfold on the left hid = 

Fo _w%Thetime. 

| This flouriſherh al che ſommer and ſpring,bea- 
reth his ſeede and flower in Iuly and Aug 

4 _ *%*Thenames. rk 

Iris called of Dioſeorides 543,555 imromus : of The- 
ophraftic 5pu,;yes v7redys : of the Latines Solamon 


C_ 


270 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
ſomniferum or _—_— Nightſhade; and So/awn /zthale, or deadly Nightſhade ; and Solanun my. 
r:cumaging Nightthade; of fome Apollinaris miner witicane , & Herba Opſago: in Engliſh Dwle 
, ortleeping Nightſhade : the Venerians and Italians call it Bella dons : the Germaines Oollwurtz: 
the lowe Dutch Oulle beſien: in French Moree morrelie : it commerh very neere vnto 7 heophre 
ſtu his Mandragoras, (which differcth from Dzoſcorrdes his Mandrageras) ifthere be adiffcrence, 
| 5s | v%T henatury. | 
. It is colde cuen in the fourth degree, | | bs 
| | % The wertues. | 


N This kinde of Nightſhadecauſcth ſleepetroubleth the minde,bringeth madnes if a fewe of the 
berries be —_— taken, but if mo be giuen they alſo kill and bring preſent death. Theophraiim 
in his 6,booke doth likewiſe write of Mandrake inthis maner; Mandrake caufeth fleepe, and if alfs 
much of it be taken it bringeth death. | IE. | __ 

B Thegreenelcauesofdeadly Nig 


heſhade may with great adviſe be vicd in ſuch caſes ar Perti. 
morrell: butif you will follow my counſell, deale notwiththe fame in any caſe, and baniſh ir from 
your gardens andthe yſec of italſo,being a plant ſ&furious and deadly : for it bringeth fuch as have 
caten thereof into a dead ſlgepe wherein many haue died , as hath becne often ſcene —_— | 
by experience both in England and elſe where. But to giue you an example heereof it ſhall not be 
amiſle: Ir came to paſſe that three boies of Wisbich in the le of Ely,did cate of the pleaſantand 
beautifull fruite heerof, two whereof diced inlefle then 8, howers after they had caten of them. The 
thirde childehad a quantitic of honie and water mixed togither giuen him to drinke , cauſing him 
ro yvomite often: God bleſſed this meanes and thehilde recouered, Banifh therefore theſe pernick | 
ous plantsour of your gardens ,and all places neere to your houſes, where children or womenwith  : 

. childedorefort,which Jo oftentimes long and luſt after things moſt vile and filthie z & much more 

| afteraberric of a bright ſhining black colour, and of ſuch great beaurie,as itwere able to allure any 
{uch ro cate thereof. | = = | 

C Theleaues heerof laid vnto the temples cauſe ſleep,efpecially if they be imbibed or moiſtenedin 
wine vineger, Itcaſeththe intollerable paines ofthe headach proceeding of heart in furious agues, 


cauſing reſt being applied as aforeſaid. 


Of winter Cherries. Chap.52. 


;*Þ The deſeription. 


I He red winter Cherric bringeth foorth ſtalkes acubite long , rounde, ſlender,ſmooth, | 
- ard ſomewhat reddiſh,recling this way and that way by reaſon ofhis weakenes , notable 
to ſtande vprighe without a ſupparte : whereupon do growe leaues nor vnlike to thoſe of | 
common Nightſhade,bur greater;among which leaues come foorth white flowers, conſiſting of 
five ſmall leaues : in the middle of which leaucs ſtandeth out aberrie, greene at the firſt , andred | 
when itis ripe, in colour of our common Cherrie and of the ſame bigneſfe , which is incloſed in a | 
thinne huske or little bladder of a pale reddiſh colour, in which berrie is conteined many finall flat | 
ſeedes of a pale colour, The rootes be = 4 2 fre. to the rootes of Couch erafſe,ramping and 
creeping within the vypper cruſt of the earth farre abroade, whereby it encreaſcth greatly. | 
2 Thc blacke winter Cherric hath weake and flender ſtakes ſomewharcreſted, andlike vatothe | 
rendrels of the Vine, caſting it ſelfe all about and taking holde of ſich things as are next vito | 
it : wherupon are ſer iagged leaues deepely indented or cut about the edgesalmoſtro the middle | 
ribbe. The flowers bee veric finall and white ſtanding vpon long foore ſtalkes or ſtemmes. The 
skinnic bladders ſucccede the lowets , parted into three celles or chambers ,cuery of the which 
conteineth one ſecede and nomore, of the bigneſle of a ſmall peaſe, and blacke of colour , hx | 
uing amarkgof white colour vpon (cch bertic, i proportion of a bart, The root is very ſmall 
threddic, | | | Fs T 
TE [= : Pex. 55 I Solanws 


_—© at a MS. 1.» Eb ER. 


 'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 271 
1 Solanum Halicacabum. | 2 Halicacabums Peregrinum. 
| Redwinter Cherries. | Blacke wintct Cherries, 


| re: Ban * The place.\ ' | | 
The redde winter Cherrie ———— wals about the borders of fieldes, and in 

moiſt ſhadowie places, andin moſt gatdens, where ſome conſerue it for the beautie of the berries, 

and others for the great and woorthy vertwes thereof. [Re 3, | 

2 Theblacke winter Cherric is brought out of Spaine &lraly,or other hot regions, from whence 

{ haue had of thoſe blacke ſeedes markedivith the ſhape of a mans hart white , as aforeſaide: and 

have platted them'in my,garden where they hewabir howers, but haue periſhed before the fruite 

could growe to maturige,by reaſon of thaſe vnſeaſdnable yeeres 1594. 95. and 96. \ 

N, [46d ON vil 26 $57 * The time. EM b; 3 

: Theredwinter Cherzjebeareth his owers and fruite in Anguſt. | 

 Theblacke bearcth themaat the ſame time, where it doth naturally growe.. -.._. - 

| $099 75563? 5 r1aÞst l *%* The names > FOR 

- Theredwinter Cherrieis called in Greeke =2rv'yps : in Latine Yeſicariazand Solanum Veſicarium : 

inſhops Alkekengi: Phe in his 21. booke nameth it. Haliearabwoand:Yefcaria,of, the little; blad- 

cers: orastheſgme authorwriteth bicaule it is goodforthe bladdes and. theſtane;;iris calledin 

and Ceres dowtre mer oil Boglith 


Spaniſh /exigy de porro: in French Alquegwengesy\Bagenanides, 
mn Vohtihage, N! meer Chemics nd Akan, 2 2s" Roms. [5153765 bo doraryt 
- The blacke winter Cherie. is ' Halicacdhns Feregrinus, Yeſicaria Peregrina, ot fitarge 
water Cherriez of Peng and L'Obelit is called Cor judwm; Cor Indica of others: Pifun Corditum: 


_ WEnglih the Indian hatt, orhart Peaſe: ſome hattexaken it to want qui; woven 4/ are-hreatly 


deceaued, beingin truch notany ofthe;Nigheſhadeszirrather ſeemerh ro agree-withthe graumna- 


» iedof Serapes;Abrong, or « brugi, of which be writeth-in his 153: chapter intheſe words: Iris a | 
Intl graine ſported with blacke and white roundejandike the graine Mair, withwhich notes this 


dothagree,. .. uk 
"+ nd | + The 


w_ THE SECOND BOOKE OFTHE 
* Thetemperature. 


The red winter Cherie is thought ro be colde anddrie and of ſubcile parts. | 


| The leaves differ not from the temperature ot the garden Nighrſhade as Gale faith 
| | $f EY IO *% 7 hevertws. | 
The fruice bruſed and put to infuſe or ſtiepe in white wine two or; three howers , and after boi. 
led rwo or three bublings, ſtraining ir and porringeo the decoction a little ſugar and cinamome, | 
and dronke; preuaileth very mightily againſt the ſtopping of vnine;, the ſtone and grauell, the diff. 
c 


cultic aud ſharpenes of making water and ſuch like diteaſes : ifthe grecete be olde the greater quan. 


titie muſt be raken, ifnewe andnot great, the leſle : it ſcoureth away theyellowe iaundiſe ally az | 


Of the maruaile of the World. Chap.53- 


{ome write. | 


Mirabilia Peruniang. | 0 | 

| Themarnaile of Peru. | | * The deſcription. 
£ ;  Hg*His admirable plant called the maruell of 
Peru,or the maruel of the World,ſpri | 

"* foorth of the grounde like vnto Baſil in 

leaues; among whichit ſendeth outa ſtalke two 
cubirs and a halfe high , of the thickneſſe of afin- 
ger, full of iuice , very firme , and of ayellowiſh | 
greene colour, knotted or kneed with joints ſom» | 
what bunching foorth, of purpliſh colour, as in 
the female Balſamina : which ſtalke diuiderh it | 
fe into ſundrie braunches or boughes , &thole 
allo knottie like the ſtalke : his braunches are | 
bedecked with leaues growing by couples , atthe | 
iointes like the leaues of wilde Peaſcods, greene, 
61 fleſhic,and full ofjuice, which being rubbed doe 
(63.8 yeelderhe like vnpleafant ſmell as wilde Peaſcods 
 dolandarcin raſte alſo veric vnſauorie,yetinthe 
NY latterendthey leauea taſte and ſharpe ſmacke of 
/ |.» Fabaco.' The ſtalkes rowards the top are ou 
| pet hollow ſingle as, fould «x 
it were into arts before they be opened, but | 
being fully mera urges wee the-flowers of | 
Tabaco/;-not ending; mto ſharpe corners, but | 
--bluntand rounde as the flowers of Bindweeds, | 
'... andlarger thentheflowers of Tabaco, glitreting | 
oftenrimes with a fine purpleor.crimfon colour; 
many times of an horſefle(h; ſomerime yellows; - 
up 2D +» fometimepalez and ſometime reſemblingan-old | 
redoryellowe colour z ſometime whiriſhz/and moſt commonly two colours occupying-halfethe | 
flower, or intercourſing the whole flower with ſtreakes and orderly ſtreames, noweyellowe, nowe 
purple diuidedrhrovgh the whole; haningfſamerime grear;ſomerime litele fpors of a purple colout, 
ſprinckled and ſcattered in a moſt variable order ahd brave mixture,” The grounde or'fielde of the | 
whole floweriseicher palezred, yellowe ,/ or white, containing in|the middle of thehollowneſſe 2 | 
pricke vr poineel{ ſer roundeabour with ſixeſmall firingsor chines. The flowers arcveric fweete | 
and pleafant,roſembling theNarcifſe or white Daffodill, and are very ſodainly fading zfor arnight | 
they are flowred wide open; and'ſo continue vnrill eight of the clocke the next raorning: at which | 
time they begitvrocloſe or ſhut vp ( after the maneroftheBindweede) eſpecially if che weatherde | 
very hor; butif the aire be more temperatetheyremaine open the's ay, &are cloſedonely® | 
night,& ſo periſh,one flower laſting but onely one day, like the true Ephemerum or H _ | 


BB, 


[ 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS. 1 


This iparuellous varietie dorhnot withour great tauſe bring into admiration all thoſe that obſerve 
- For ifthe towers be gathered andrefſernedin ſeucrall papers, and compared with thoſe lowers 
thac will ſpring and Aourith the nexrdaic, youſhall cafily perceiue thatone is mot like anorher jn 
colour, thougi2 you ſhoulde compare one hundreth ,whnch flower one day, and ancther hundred 
whichyou gathered the next day z and fo from daje ro day during the time of! their floiring. The 
cups and huskes which containe and embrace the flowers, are diuided into fiae pointed feRions, 
which are greene, and as it were conſiſting of skins, whereinis conteined one ſeede and no more, 
coucred with a blackiſh skin, hauing a blunt point whereon the flower groweth;"but on the ence 
; nextthe cup or huske;itis adorned with a little fiyge cornered crowne. The feed is as bigge as a pep- 

per corne,which ofi ſelfe faderh with anylight motion; within this ſcede is conteined a white 
kerhell,which being bruſed, reſolueth into a veric white pulpe like arch. 'The roote is thicke and 
like vnto 2 great radiſh, outwardly blacke,and within white,ſhatpe in taſte, wherewith is mingled 
a ſuperficial fiveetenes. Ir bringeth newe flowers from Iuly vnto October ininfinite number, yea 
even vntil the froſts do cauſe the whole plant to periſh:notwithſtanding itmay be reſerued in pors, 
and ſet in chambers andcellers thar are warme, and fo defended from the iniurie of our colde cli- 
mate: prouided alwaies that there benot any water caſt vpon the pot,or ſer foorth to rake atry moi- 
tire in the aire vntill March following; at whichtime it mult be caken foorth of the por & replan- 
tedinthe garden. By this means Thane preſeruied many (though to ſmall purpoſe) blcanls Hee 
ſowen Gees that haucborne flowers in as atnple maner & in as goodtime as thoſercſerued plan::, 

Ofthis woonderfultherbe there be'other ſorts, but not ſo amiable or ſo full of varierie , and for 
the moſt part their flowers ate all of onecolour.But I haue ſince b praQtite founde out another way 
tokeepe the rootes for the yeere following with very little difficult , which neuer faileth. At the 
firſt froſt I digge vp che rootes & pur vp or rather hidetheroores in a butter ferkiny or ſuch like vef- 
ſell,filled wich the ſandeof a rv. r, the which ſuffer ſtill ro ſtande in ſome comer of ahouſewhere 
itneuerreceiueth moiſture vntill Aprill or the middeſt of March,ifthe weather bewarme;arwhich 
time I take it fromrhe ſande andplantitin the garden, where ir doth flouriſh exceeding well and 
ncreaſeth by rootes 3 which that doth not which was cither ſowen of ſeede the ſane yeere,, nor 
thoſe plants that were preſeruedafter the other maner. * | | | 

IJ -  % The place. < k 

Theſeed of this ſtrange plant was brovght firſt into Spaine,fromPeru,wherof it tooke his name 

Mirabilia Peruani , Or Peruuians: and ice diſperſed into all the parts of Europe: the which my 
ſelfe haue planted many yeeres, and have ini ſome temperate yeeres receiuedboth flowers andripe 
keede, | - 


* Thetime. © ol 

Itis ſowenin the middeſt of Aprill, and bringeth foorth his variable flowers in September, and 
periſheth with thefirſt froſt, except itbe kepras aforeſaide. | 

| * The ngmes. 

Itis called in Peru of thoſe Indians there Hachal: of others after their name Hachal Indz: of 
the high and lowe Datch So/anwn odoriferum: of ſome Irſminum mexicanwn: and of Carolme Clu- 
ſm puirebilia Peranians : in Engliſh, rather the maruell of rhe World,then of Peruatone, 

(7.0: | © ve Thenatureandvertnes. 

We haue not as yet any inſtrutions from the people of India concerning thenature or verrues 
«this plarit : the which is eſtcemed as yet rather for his rareneike, beaurie, and ſweeteneſſe of his 
flowers, then for any vertues knowne; bur itis a pleaſant plant to decke the gardens of the curious, 
Howbeit-1zrobus Antonius Cortuſice of Padua hack by experience found our, that two drams of the 
roote thereof taken inwardly doth very notably purge wateriſh kumours, + " | 


| 


Of madde Apples. (hap.54- 


The deſeriptiow. 
Aging bs 190 hath arounde ſtalke of two foote high , deuided into ſundric braunches, ſer 
with broade lcaues ſomewhat indented about the edges, not vnlike the leaues of white Hen- 
bane, of adarke browne greene colour ſomewhat cough: among the which come the flowers 


CONTINENT > In Tere ne nn, 


? 
id i 


j | | | FF | 


274 THE SECOND| BOOKE OF THE 
of a white colour , and ſometimes changing into-purple, made of fixe parts, wide open like a itarre 
| with certaine yellowechiues or thrunis 1 the middle; which being paſt the fruite commeth jn 
place,ſet in a cornered cup or huske after the maner of the great Nighſhade, greatandſomwhat 
long,ofthe bigneſle of a ſwans egge, and ſometimes much greater, of a white colour, ſometime, 
yellowe, and often browne, wherein is conteined ſmall flat ſeede of a yellowe colour,” The root 
- is thicke,with many threds faſtned thereto, \ | | | + es 
Malainſans, | 1599 ci 
Madde or raging Apples. IE. | * The place. 
kD. 4 . This plant groweth in Egypt almoſt eve 
4 7 L ' where in fandie x Fe of felis : bringing 
fs foorth fruite of the bignes of a $7545 Gora, 
| as Petruws Belloniuereporteth in the ſecond booke 
' | of his ſingular obſeruations, P Os. 
|.  Wehauc hadtheſamein our London gardens, 
N] WY TSNTWZA — where ih bone OyErs, but the winter ap- 
>>I R4 A 2 TT P7 4 Mes". 599 it came to bo truite of the 
Bec WS LORA ED bignespf a goole <oge one cxtraotdinarie tem- 
(1,8 Gee Og) 1275 | perateyeere, as Ididſecin the garden ofa wor: 
AN OIR/AAN | g* | $ | / 47  Mhipfull merchant, Maſter Harsic in Limeſtreete, 
3 \, EE |  burneuer tothe full ripeneſſe, | | 
WEL = '* Thetime, 
VV > | This herbe muſtbe ſowen in Aprill ina bedof 
'/ th - , hothorſedung, asmuske Melons are, and flow- 
. rethin Auguſt. | Jes 
L... # de <1. TI ener. :;; | 
|. Petrus Bellonim bath indged it tobe: Maline 
| thalls Theophraſti, In'the Dukedome of Milan 
it is called of the \[nſubres <Meklongens : and of 
ſome Melanzana; in Latine Mals m/ans: inEn- 
gliſh Madde Apples: in the Germaine toong 
Oolloyfſel tin Spaniſh Yerangenes, | 
| * The nature. | 
NJ, | | This habe is coldealmoſt inthe fourth & 
LS | 
* The vſcand danger. | 
The people of Tolledo do eate them with great denotion being boiled with fat fleſh , putting | 
—_ ſome ſcraped cheeſe,which they do keepe in vineger,honie,or ſalt pickell,all winter topro- 
cure luſt, | . oY oe | T4 
Petri Bellninsand Hermolaw Bar bar ws report,that in Egypt and Barbarie, they vſe to cate the 
frulte of Mala *nſans boiled or roſted vnderaſhes with oile,vineger, and pepper, as people vic to 
eate Muſhroms, Bur I rather wiſhe Engliſhmen to content themſclues with the meate and ſauce 
of our owne countrey,then with fruire and ſauce eaten with ſuch perill ; for doubtleſſe theſe apples 
# haue a miſcheeuous qualitic,the vie whereof is vtterly to be forſaken, And as weſee and know that 


many haue caten and do cate Muſhroms mare for wantonnefle then for neede: ſo there are two 
kindes heereof venemous and deadly , which being in the handling of an vnskilfull cooke, ma 
procure vntimely death. Therefore' it is better to eſteeme this plant and baue him in the gar 
den for your pleaſure and the rareneſle thereof, then for avy vertue or good qualities yer knowns. 


of 


by 


P 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. i” 275. 
Of apples of Lone. Chap.55. 


I 

7 

| 
« © #% 
ky 4&2 


: Poms Amoris. £ | , | od; | XG: 
| Apples of Loue, The deſcription. 
Wo | qt Heappleof Loue bringeth foorth verie 

a | longround ſtalkes or braunches, far and 

| full of juice, rrailingypon the grounde, 


not able to ſuſtaine himſelfe vpright by reaſon of 
the tendemeſſe of the rat Nh great | 
: Fin hr of Ow and fruite RY itis | 
1.4  ſurcharged. Theleaues are and ly cut 
*y IE KD " 5 aged about the od —_ oy © th 
OS. _ Jeauesof Agrymony, bir grerer a whurer 
L | Tos greene colour: among which come foorth yellow 
A flowers growing vpon ſhortſtems or foot 5 
cluſtering rogither in biiches : which being falne, 
theredocome in place faire $f. pda, apples, 
chamfered, vneeven, and bunched out inmanie 
ny -_ ; of a bright ſhining redde colour and | 
. thebignes ofa Gooſe egge or a large pepin, The 
 pulpeormearis verv ful of moiſture, ſoft,reddiſh, 
and of the ſubſtaunce of a wheate plumme. The 
ſeede is ſmall, flat and rough:the roote ſmall and 
threddie : the whole plant is of aranke and ſtink- 
ing ſauour. | "208 
| Therehath happened vnto my handes ano- 
ther ſort, agreeing very notablic with the for- 
mer,as well in lcaues and ſtalkesas alſo in flowers 
and rootes, onely the fruite hcereof was yellow of 
colous, whercin conſiſted the difference, 


- *% The place. | | 
Apples of Loue do growe in Spaine, Iralic, andſuch hot countries, from whence my ſelfe haue 


' receiued ſeedes for my garden, whete they do increaſe and proſper, 


* The tme. | 
Itis ſowen in the beginning of Aprill in a bed of hot horſe dung after the maner of muske Me- 
lons and ſuch like colde fruits. pe | | | 
The apple of Loue is called in Latine Pomum Aurenm, Pome CAmoris, and Lycopertium, of ſome 
Glancixn :in Engliſh apples of Louc , and golden apples : in French Pommes damenys: howbeir 
there be other golden apples whereof the pocrs do! fable growing inthe gardens of the daughrers 
of Heſperus, which a dragon was appointed tokeepe, who, as they fable; was killed by Hereules, 
+ The temperature. = 
The golden Apple with the whole herbe ir ſelfe iscolde, yet not fullyſocolde as Mandrake, 
aker the opinion of Dodor.exs : but in my iudgement it is very colde, yea perhaps in the higheſt de- 
gree of c9ldnefſe ; my reaſon is, bicauſe I haue in the hotteſt time of former cut away the ſuper- 


 fuous braunches from the mother roote,, and caſt them away careleſly in the allies of my garden, 


the which(notwithſtanding the extreme heate of the ſunne, the hardneſle 9f the rroden allies, and = 

athat time when no raine at all did fall) hauc growen as freſhwhere1 caſt them,as before Idid cur 

themoff z which arguerh the great coldneſle conteined therein. Trueiris thatir doth argue alſo | 

agreat moiſture wherewith the plant is poſſeſſed,but as Thausſaide not without great cold , which 
ue to\cucry mans cenſure, Told 


S's I *% The 


276 THE SECOND BOOKE oF THE 


A InS drhoſc h Lend 4 tbe ied db 
In paine an c hot regi vie tocare the ap ared and boiled with er,ſale, 
and oile: but they yeelde very little nouriſhment to the oy the ſame naught and ng 
B Likewiſetheydocate the apples with oile, yineger and Pepe's mixed _—_ for fauce to their 
MEALE,EUen AS WE I theſe cold countries do muſtarde. 


WW the fine aol Cy 56. 


* os deſcription. 


He gle of AEthiopia hath ha cleass 
' | of awhitiſhgreenecolour,deepely inden. 
| "> red about the edges, cuen-to the middle 
ribbe;rhe which middle ribbe i is armed with a few 
ſharpeprickles. The flowers bewhite conſiſting 
of ſixe {wall leaues, with a certaine yellowe poit- 
tellin the middle. The fruite is rounde, and bun. 
ched with vneuen lobes or bankes leſſer thenthe 
golden apple, of colour red,and of afirme and{o- 
Jide ſubſtaunce, wherein are contcined ſmallflat 
eedes The roote is ſmall and threddic. | 
| t** The place, 
| This planthath been brought vnto vs fromour 
that part of Spainwhich is called Andaluſia, and | 
from other parts of the ſame counntrey alſofen 
into Fraunce andFlaunders ; but ro what perfec- 
tion it hath come vntoin thoſe parts I amigno- 
raunt, But mine periſhed at the firſt approchof 
'winter, But his firſt originall was PRI 
pia whereof it tooke his name, = 
| *% Thetime. 
| This plant muſt be ſowenas muske Melons, 
and atthe ſame'time; they flower in ia , and the 
fruire is ripe in Seprember. 
| '*% The names. 
| InEngliſhwee have —_ good tocallit 
_ : =. | - jthe __ apple, for the reaſon before 
|  alledged:in Latine als AEthioptea: of ſome it 
hath been ihough tobe Aalinat Lala: no apple of Loue uu ny with the deſcripti fit, 
- * T he nature. 
The ngaratny agrecth with the apple of Loue. 
* The vertues. 
Theſe apples arenot vſedin Phiſicke tharTI can reade of , in they are vſed for a ſauce andfer- 
| uicevnro rich menstables to beeaten , being firſt boiled in the broth of fat fleſh with pepper and 
falr,and haue a lefſehurrfull i iuice then either madde apples or golden apples. 


of Thorne apples. Chap-s7 


| * The deſcription 
I - He ſtalks of thorne Apples are oftentimes a 2 cubite and a halfehigh, ſeldom higher 
| an inch thicke, ypright and ſtraight,haning very fewe braunches , ſometimes none at 
bur one vpright ſtemme ; whereupon do growe leaues ſinooth and even , lirtle or 00 
thing indented "= the cages longer and b roader chen the euves of ON or of the w 
apP 


\ 


upples.The fdowers come foorth of long toothed cups rea, 
the gowers of the great VWirhwinde that rampethiin h 


arthc biggelt,in which are the ſeeds of the bignes 
roote is {mall and threddie. | | 


2 There is another kinde heereof altogither greater then the former, whoſe ſeedes I received 
ofthe right Honorable the Lord Edward Zoach,whichhe brought from Conſtantinople;and of his | 
lideralitic did beſtowe them vpon me,as alſo many other rare and ſtrangeſeeds,and is that Thorn 
appletharT haue diſperſed through this lande,whercofatthis preſent Thavegrear vie in Chirur- | 
perie,as well in burnings and ſcaldings,as allo in virulent and maligne vicers,apoſtemes,and ſuch | 
like, The which planthath a very great ſtalke in fercill ground, bigger thena mans arme, ſmoorh | 
&preeneof colour,which alittle aboue the ground deuideth it ſelte into ſundrie boughs or armes 
inmanerof an hedge tree3 whereupon are placed'many great leaues cut and indented deepely | 
2bout the edges,wirh many vneuen ſharpe _— among theſe leaues comewhite round low- 
ing it ſelte- vp cloſe rowarde night as doe the | 
flowers of the great Bindeweede whereunto it is very like,of a {weete ſimcll,butſo ſtrongrthatir of- | 
fendeth che ſences. The fruite followerh rounde ſomerimes or of the faſhion of an egge, ſer 
zbout on euery part with moſt ſharþeprickles ; whercin is conteined very much ſeede, of he big- | 
neſſe of tares and of theſame faſhion, The roore is thicke , made of great and ſmall ſtrings, The | 


ers made of Se peece inmannerof a bel}, thurr 


whole plantis ſowen, bearerh his fruite, and periſheth the ſame yeere, * 


I Stramonium Peregrinus. 9 2 Stramonius ſpinoſun. 


The apple of Peru, {| Thornic apples of Peru, 


{HISTORIE) OF PLANTS. |: php* 
white, of the forme of a bell, or like | 
ON ' alrogither greater and wider at 
the mouth, ſharpe cornered ar the brims with cerfaine whitechinesor threds in the middeft, of a | 
ſtrong ponticke fauor, offending the head when itis ſmelled vnto : in the place of the lower com- | 
meth vp ound fruite tull of ſhort and blunt picking of the bignes of a greene Valunt when it is 

of tares, or of mandrakes,& of the ſame forme. 
The herbe it ſelfe is of a ſtrong ſauour , and doth ſtutke the heade, and caufeth drowſineſle. The | 


273— _ THE SECOND BOOKECOF [THE | 
1 Fi | 3: Theptice, © 110 f 


This plant is rare and ſtrange as yer nE plande, I have receincd ſcedes thereof from 1jahy p,, 


bnof Paris, anexcellent Herbariſt ; which didgrowe and beate flowers, -bur perithed beforethe | 


{ruite came to ripeneſle. (7 of or} 930 
The Thorue apple laſt deſcribed was broughtin ſeede from Conſtantinople, by the righthg. 
norable the Lorde Edwarde Zouch and giuen — me,andbearcth fruite andripe ſeede, = 
The firſt is to be fowen in a bed ofhorſedun ,as we do Cucumbers andMuzke Melons, 
Theorher may be fowen in March or Aptill as other ſcedes are. | 
Thefirlt of theſe Thotne apples may becalled in Latine Stramonia, & Panum or Malum ſpiny. 
of foni& Corona regis 8&Meloſpiniizthe Grecians dfonr time name it merninegacryor rather bayweriug, 
as though they ſhould fate a nur tufhng and cauſing drowſineficand troubleſome leepe : the Ital. 
ans Paz .acoculr; it ſeemerh to Valcrins Cordutto be Hyoſeyamns Peramanus , or Henbane of Pery. 
Cardanu doubreth whether it ſhould be inſerted among the Nightſhades as a kind thereof: of 5. 
rapio &others it is thought to be Aux merhe{: Serapioin his 375,chapter faith,that Nux metheli 
like vnto N ax vormra : the ſeede whereof is bke that of Mandrake, the huske is rough or full of 
- prickles: hich deſcription agreeth heerewith except in the forme or ſhape it ſhoe haue with 
XN ux vomits: Anguiiars fuſpeRterh it ro be Hiypamanes which Theeeritas mentioneth, wherewith | 
in his Eglog of charmes heſhewerh that hotſes are made madde: for Cratewas whom Theeriny 
tranſlatordorhcite, writeth that the plant of Hippomanes, hath a fruite full of prickles as hath the 
fruite of wilde Cucumbers : in Englith it may be called Thorne apple orthe apple of Peru, 


The whole plant is coldein the foorth degree,and of a drowſie and numming qualitie,not ink- 
' riour to Mandrake, tf: | | | 
| a % The vertmes. 


| A Theiuliceof Thorne apples boiled with hogges greaſe to the forme of an vnguent or ſalue,cureth 

_ - ali inflammations whatſocuer,allmaner of burnings or ſcaldings,as wel of fire,water,boiling lead, 
gunpowder, as that which comes by lightning,and that in very ſhort time, as my ſelfe haue fond 
by myCGaily practiſe ro my great credite and profire, The firſt experience came from Colcheſter, 
where miſtrefle ZObel, a marchants wife there, being moſt greeuouſly burned with lightning, and 
not finding eate or cure 1m -Aany other thing by this ftounde helpe when all hope was paſt , by the 
report of maſter !/i{zam Kamme,publike notarie of the ſaide towne was perfectly cured. 

B Thelecaues ſtamped ſmall and boiled with oile oliue vnrill the herbcs be as it were burnt, then 
ſtrained and ſer to the fire againe with ſome waxegroſih,and a little turpentine,& made into aſalue, 
doth-moit fpecdily cure olde vicers,neweandfreſh wounds, vicers vpon the glandulous part of the 
yarde,and other ſores of hard curation. | len. | 


3 
{ 


1 "Of Bitter fweete,or woode Nogbrſhade. (hap. 58. 


= 3 i 0 OS *% Thedeſeription. | 

Irter ſwee:e bringeth foorth wooddie ſtalks as doth the Vine , parted into many flender cree- 
B ping braunches, by which it climeth ang raketh holde of hedges and ſhrubbes next vnto it. 
The barke of the oldeſt ſtalkes are rough and whitiſh, ofthe colour of aſhes, with the out- | 
warde rinde of a bright greene colour; but the yoonger braunches are greene as are the leaues: the 
wood brittle, having in it a ſpungie pith; it is clad with long leaues,{moorh ſharp pointed,leſſer the 
thoſe of the Binderyeede, Arthe lower patt of the fame leaues doth growe on either ſide onewall 
er lefſer leafc like v9 wwocares, The flowers be ſmall and ſomewhar cluſtered togithergconfiſting 
of fine little leanes a pecce,of apertet blewe colotr with a cerraing pricke or yellow pointellintic 
middle : which being paſt there do come in place faire berries, more long then rounde, ar the fil 
greenc, bur very red when they be ripe, of a fiweere taſte atthe firſt, bur after very vnpleaſant, of 
ſtrong fauour ; growing rogither in cluſters like butniſhed corall, The roote is of a mcane bignelle 

and full of ſtrings. | | if 1 EE | 
I haue found anqther ſoit which bringeth foorth moſt pleaſant white flowers with yellowe point 
tcls in the middle,in other xeſpeRs agreeing with the former, | R 
| | [ Amari 


SYS Ld _—_— WW ww 


toſmallpeeces , w 
droplie and iaundiſe, 


 b Theirune 


HISTORIE. 0B PLANTS. 279 


W7 Duteis. | 
Birter ſwetc. | at RR Theplare. | 
| Biteer fete doth grow in moiſt places about dies 
iches ,riuers,and hedges,almoſt euery where, 
| The other ſort with, whire flowers I found in a 
ditch (ide againſt the garden wall of rhe right ho- 
norable che Earle of Suſſex his houſe in — 498 
ſey ſtreere by London , as you go from the co 
whuch is full of trees, vnto a hee houſe wie 
 thereunto. % "The tre. | 
' The leaves come foorchinthe ſpring : the fo- 
wer in Iulyz the berries areripein Auguſt, 
| * 7 he names. 
The ater Herbariſts haue named this plant 
 Dulcamara, CAmarodulcis, and Amaradaicis : the 
| Greckes 99uwmey ,Solanum lignoſam and Siliquaſ* - 
frum. Plinie calleth it Melortwn : Theophraftts 
"Virh Aru : in Engliſh we call it Bitter ſweete, 
”-tind Woodnightſha e; buteuery auchormuſlt for 
his credite ſa ſomthing, although to ſmall pur- 
=: for YV its fMHuettris is thatwhich we call our 
adies ſcale, which is nokinde of Nightſhade: for 
"ow and Fati ſplneftris are both one, as likewiſe 
olanun lignoſwn,or Fruticoſum : and alſo Solamus | 
: whereas indeede itisno ſuch plant, nor 
hoy theNightſhades ; although Ihaue follo- 
wed others inplacing irheere, Therefore thoſe 
 thatvſe romixe theburrks thereof in compotiti- | 
wx *\ns of divers cooling ointments in ſteede of the | 
$148 of Ni oheſhade, Ws collate dos ater errour: for the fruite ofthis is not colde at all, 
Sis the Nightſhace, birt hor,as foorthwith (hall be ſhewed. Dioſcorides ſaith it is Cyclam inmu ike | 
fu erm it by, the de{criptionc ofthoſe with white ny Es LE it doth = | 


The tipiper att. 
-Theline and fine of x Bice or in ut arure og i ainig and waſting away. 


fr | Tadeca@icaothelemerivteponedtotemogurd the ſtop p ofrhefiver and all: :ah4robe A 
erunke with good ſucceſle againſt the ye RE. P ingsof ga 


The iuice is good for thoſe that pe fallen from high places, and thereby bruſed ,ordry bea-B 


ten: for it is thought to difſolue bloud raledor Caen ay where in the entrailes, and to 
heale the hurt places. In Wn 


Hyeronimus Trages teacherh to acks a decoction of wine with the woode finely ſliced & cur in- c | 
phich he reporteth to purge geady boch.by woe and ſiege, thoſe thar haue the 


- Dioſearidex dothralcribe vatoCye(omiow alrers,oxBirter with whize flowers,as by D 
t;the like faculties. fic ol&q 4037 001 Ky on 


35134 


lach he, being druakeinthewaightofonc dram ounces ofmhine wi wine foro. E ] 
helperhthe ſpleene,, - wh c 
tie ofbreatingirtroughty | 


women mod _ brought F 


THE SECOND: BOOKE OF THE 
ne A pope Chap: 59. 


bf *T he defeription n 

i= Nchaunters Migpotoode | hath leaues like vnto 

Perimorell, ſharpe at tlike vnto 
. The ſtake is Nai an vpright A 

A | brite, of halfe a foote high, The flowers are 
| | white tending tocarnation , with certaine ſmall 
"8 brobnechiuesin the avidele, The ſecede is contei- 
Lo |  nedinfmallroundebullers rough and very hairie, 
,,2 The roote is rough and very manyin number, 
| x, thruſting ir ſelfe deepe into the grounde and & 
; , ſperſingfar abroad, whereby it doth greatly in- 


| | creaſe, inſomuch that when it hath once taken 

\N > it can hardly with great labour be: 
F | %* The 

| wethinobſcure anddatke places , abou 

| | gon and in vntoiled groundes, by pathwaies 

| f andſuchlike, 

| | * The time 

| |, Tr flouriſheth from Iune to the ende of Sep- 

JF: rem ber. 

| *% The names. 

bt Iei is called in Latine of ZObelim Circes ts | 

a4: in Engliſh Inchaunters $620 


| , ,weedeNi 


; *T he  Patwre and VEerimes. 
"There .is no vie of this hetbecither in Phiſicke 
[ | orchirurgeric thatI can read of, which hath hap- 
ned by the corruption of time, andthe errqur of ſome who haue taken Mandragoras for Circea, 
Fil; wk Frrour haue Rill perſiſted ynto this daie, attributing vnto Circa, the vertues of Man- 
by which meanes Wore hath nor anything becne ideof the true Crces, by reaſons | 
as. Fre t Mandragoras hath beenecalled Cerge« : bur doubrleſle it hath the vertue of g_ 
Nighrſhade, and may ſcrue ip ſteede OP Cs exrour, . :, 4... 


of eM, andre Chap. 6 0. 


1% Theft 


Hemale Mandrake hath great, broadlo ng.ſmoothleaues ;ofdepeimeanc cilode, gat pred 
| ypontheground: among which come vp the flowers of a pale whiriſh colour, ſtanding every | 
© one vponaſingleſmal8& weak foorftalk,of a whitiſhpreen colobr: inrhcir places grow-ro! 

apples of a yellowiſh colour, ſmooth. ſoft & glittering,of a ftrong ſmel: in which areconteined fiat 
and ſmooth ſeedes,in faſhion of alicrle kidney like: thoſe of che Thorne apple. The roote islong, 
thick vhitiſh,dinided many times into two or three parts,reſembling the legs ofa man,wi 
parts ofhis bodic adioining thereto, as the priuic parts,as it hath beene he rs in truth 
iris no otherwiſe thenin the rootes of carrots, parineps, and ſuch like, forked or deuided into 199 
or more parts,which nature rakethno accoffint of. There haue been many ridiculous tales b 
vp of this Froagh or of olde wives or ſome runnagate chat or phiſickmongers,[ know 0% 


(a title bad inough for them: :) bur ſure rag © one or moe tha "_ ro make themiclues famous jr 


- 


NJ. ] 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS. 281 


gillfull aboue others were the firſt brochers of thaterrour Iſpake of. They adde further, that iris 
never or verie ſeldome to be founde growing naturally: bur vader a gallows, where the matter that 
hath fallen from the dead bodie,harh giuen it the ſhape of a man: and the matter of awoman,the 
{bſtaunce of a feniale plant ; with many other ſuch doltiſh dreames. They fablefurther andathem, 
thar he who woulde take vp a plant thereof mult tie a dogge thereunto ro pull irvp,which will giue 


agreat ſhrike at the digging vp; otherwiſe if a man ſhould doit, heſhouldcerrainlydic in-ſhort 
ſpace after : beſides many fables of louing watters,xo0 full of ſcurrilitie toſet foorth in printwhich 
[ ſorbeareto ſpeake of «all which dreames and olde:wiues tales,you ſhall fromhencefoorthcaſt our 
of your bookes and memorie ;knowing this that theyare all an ' part of them falſe and moſt 
vntrue, For I my ſelfe and my ſeruaunts alſo have digged vp, pl , andreplanted veriemany: 
&yet neuer could either perceiue ſhape of man or woman, but ſomerimes gne{traight rootegſome- 
times two , atidofren fixe or feauen braunches comming from the maine greatroote ; euen'as na- 
cure liſt ro beſtowe'vpon it as to other plants. Bur the/ idle drones that haue little or nothing to do 
but cate and drinke, haue beſtowed ſome of their time in caruing the rootesof Brionic, formin 

them tothe ſhape of men & women; which falſifying praQtiſe hath confirmed theerrour among 


the fimple and vnlearned*people , who haue taken them vpon' their report to be the true Man- 


drakes. | 


' The female Mandrakeis like vnto the male, auing that the leaues heereof be of amore Grate | 


or darke greene colour; and the fruite is long like a peare,and the other is rounde like an apple... - 
179 | { *:Vte) 
 CMandragor us mas & ſaming. | 63:4 13 
The male and female Mandrake. | 6 The place, | 
fn | Mandrake growerhin hor regions , in woodes 


d mountaines., as in mount Garganus in A 
lia,and ſuch like places; we haue them onely plan- 


land, 


» | *% The time. L 
| Theyſpring vpwith theirleaues in March, and 
flower m the ende of Aprill: the fruite is ripe in 
** "An "The names.” - 
S _ \|Mandrakeis called of the Grzcians «ar#exveer, 
of divers age: and Circes of Circe the Witch, 


\ 
13 


% vi * 4 of a T2 n 
A \ 1. - P/ 
6 - ”" - - . , . 
u , ; VY 4 4 
544.4 a (\ p 4 1.4 0 
: - : 
: WV *, Ku p 4 \} z - -» - g —_ = WF 
=; NCA 4.4 \ Sn. 
> %. , 


- 


= 
— 


- 3141 | of 
"/,- USSR RT CO procure loue : for it hath beene 
i Ko NG. 


| thoyght that the roote htereof ſeruethto winne 
' ove: of forme dh6ibbr,”  Cinthropomorphes, and 
Adorion : ſome of the Latines haue called it 7 er- 
7.4 malum,andFerreftre malum , and Canima ma- 
{ua: ſhoppes and other nations alſo do receiue 
the Grocke name. Dyoſcorides faith that the 
met is called of diuers wer:and deſcriberh alſo 
other Mandrake by ans of Morion: which 

is generallyholderit be Sol onion Hortenſe, but of 
ſome Cirees lateriana bu hor properly: in Engliſh 
 weeallitMandrake, Mandrage, and Mz n, 
TI ET. 
| Mandrake hith a predoinin coldeſaluie 
as \Galen faith; that is toſaie/colde'itrthe thirde 
"perry ocet beter grunt 
No petf it "7 


asf vx 
» C93% FE 
s 5 # * : 4 


þ 4 3513 £19: | 

1G 116d 9! | 

, [+71 x? «4 T | 7 TS. acebals a 

. HOOW 5" x +:  $oxyv*7 ' 
- 


Dioſcor ides doth particularly ſex. downe many faculties 
vponthe 


denone proper vnto it, ſauing thoſe that depende 


TN Id Y-4 2. ug andare notelſewhere to be found 


OT "I - EY a 


of |- - THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 


which qualitic vonliſterhqnore intheroote thenin any other part. | 
B Theapplesaremilder, any arc reported thar they may be caten being boiled with Pepper and 
other hox ſpices; | 
C Galen faith, thatthe apples arc ſomething hot and moiſt, and chat the bake of the toote isof 
| greateſt ſtrengrizandeoth notonely coole, bytallo drie. 
1) Theiuice of the leaues is very profitablic put into the ointment called Pepulcon', and all cooling 
ointments, ' /” /') 
E | Thewice hawentaarnh of the rootes, died. uber in Gnall quantite, purgerh thebelyer. 
ceedingly from flegine and melancholicke bumours. 
F lIrisgoodtobepur into medicines and collirics, that domirigate the paine of the cies : andpur 
vnder as ape Ciried drayveth foorth the dead childe and ſecondine. | - -- - 
 G The = leaues ſtamped with barrowes greace/and barley meale, coole allhot ſwellingsand 
inflanmations:and they haue VErie to conſugie apyomne and hot; vicers abcing "EY verbal 
thereon, , :. 1) | ; 
H_ A ſuppoſitoric rnade withihe ſame juice bn pur into the Condanaden cauſerh fleepes; - 
I The wine whetem the xoote hath beene boiled orinfuſcd,, propriety ſleepe,, and aſa 
aine. 
K - The fmell of the apples moouerh to leepe likewiſe G but the iuice worketh mote effeual f 
you take itinfmall quantitie.*2:/- 

Great and ſtrangeeffets are ſuppoſed to bei in Mandrakes, ro cauſe women tobe fruicfulland 
beate children if they ſhall but carie the ſame neer vnto theirbodies. Some dofromhence ground 
it, for that Rehel deſired to hauc hirfiſters Mandrakes(asthetext is tranſlated) burifwe looke well 
into the circumſtaunces which there we ſhall finde, we mayrather deeme otherwiſe. Yoong Zubes 
broughrhome a amiable and fweete ſmelling flowers ( for ſo ſi om» the Hebrewe word, which is 
vied Cantic. 7: 13; / in the ſameſence:) and the lad broughr them home rather for their beaurie & 
imell then for ek vercue. Now in the floyersof Mandrake there is no ſuch dele able or amiable 

finell;as was ir theſCaniiable flowers which” zgbex brought home. Beſides we readnot that Rebel 
TT heereupon,for Leah Ixcobs wite ha#fower children before God edthat bleſſing of 
fruicfulneſle vnto Rahcl.. And laſt of all (which is my chiefeſt reaſon) A ra ang with Rabel 
when ſhe ſaid; Giueme.childrenelſe 1 die: and demaunded of hir whethicr hewerein as, 97th 

| Godorno, who had withhelde txom luc the tire of hir bodie. And we know that the prophetD# 
»;d(aith,Childrenagd thefruite of the womhe are the inheritauncegthat. commeth from rhe Lord, 
Plalel37.....:..-. 1.y 
"M jp eee 25. Paulus AEginets, + write, thatthe ſeedeand fru teof Mendragerats 
ken in drinke,do.clenſe [ack matrix or mother,and Dzeſcoridegwrote the ſame long before them, 
He that wouldekyow, more heereof ma read-that fa do&tor Turner his booke concer: 
ainge this Rs Meh ApEry largely: aotl leame of om a | 


FTTNS F- : 's} &- 
bY Henbare, ws, 61. 
49 | ©; 
5 Say X $A hes, SY | 
"Theres chreſunecrkiniafticnbare whi ite,the blacke andy the {OY Henbane. 


ont wn $46; 1 hy 
* The deſeript 107. 


cath n; . bs 62Y: lathe 


He compmpn blac 4 back Henhanch wh Ireat 2p ſoft ſtalks; leaks AO-YS\ and wool 

eo Sith tiagged ythoſethatgrowe neere to theground,and thoſe that gro# 

SYHHA3 9011 ' mpothe ſtgiknarpwer;maller 8 ſharper, The flowers are bel faſhion,of a faint yellowiſh 

white, and-btownewvichin tawardsthe borggaes when the flowers are gone,there commeth harde 
knobbie huskes , hike ſmall cups or boxes wherein are {mall browne (cedes. | 

2 The white Henbanei is not much vnlike to the blacke , rye that his leaues are much ſmaller, 

whiter and more woollie,& the flowers alſo-why 2 os the other, but whuoue pricksz 

none teh edneacech irig the next ny 

4 © SIIYC? +c$<dv >babcob 3503 S)ctl] vimuet 3: our 3bUL 


"HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


283 
114 4 4 het i] | #1 44 | \n0at Fun 
1 Hyoſe y 15218 niger. | 2 Hyoſe yamm ulbus, TI - MOa(47 O51 
Blacke Henbane. - | £2 $8igelt White Henbane: 11 7 
I! 219 [3 144) node”  01R2 


| CID ; 
BYUAFKV wi 34 = V 
ES: Hoa 1 
\ | 4444 a. * 
PALE | 


K {| +( p o OLE PA” , 


ENESD. 
* {WS} 


- = %.. bs | wi - . mn 
hf W570) ns, Eh 
» Lu Ww af - > | % 


Fr % The lace. | 
The blacke Henbane groweth almoſt euery hcke by high waies,in the borders of dunghils and 
vntoiled places; but the white Henbane is not found bur in the gardens of thoſe that loue phiſicall 
plants :the which growerh in my garden and doth ſowe ir ſelfe tromyeere to yeere. 


% The Fq ime. 'R 
Theyſpringourt of the grounge in Maic, bring foorth their lowers in Augult, and the ſecede is 
ripe in October. —_— | | 
% The names. 


Henbane is called of the Grecians 12724246: of the Latines Apollinaris, and Faba feill : of the 
Arabians as Pliny faith <Aitercwm, of forme Fabs Joxts , or Iupiters beane : of Pyt/ agor45, Zoroates, 
and Apuleins Inſane Alterculun, fymphoniaca , andCalreularis: of the Phrygians Zemenia : of the 
Tuſcanes Fabulonia and Fabs lupina : of Mathens Syluaticus,Dens Caballinus Milimandrum Ca,*la- 
go: of Jacobus 4 Manlys Herba Pinnuls: m (hops itis called 1#/quiamuwand Hyoſeyamm: inEnglith 
Henbane : in Italian Hyoſquiame : in Spaniſh Yeleano: in high Dutch Bllſen kraut ; in French 
Hunnel ane, Endormie: ſome other Latiniſts Hyoſcyamms albwrs, or white Henbane, 

| C27 *% The temperature. 
Theſe kinds of Henbane are colde in the foutth degree. 


% The wertues. 


"0. FE" 


Gſtil}ations of the cies and orher parts ; it ſtaicth bleeding and the diſcaſe jn women : it is applied 
Wwinflammations ofthe ſtones and other ſecret parts. | 


fp The leaues ſtamped with the ointment Populcon, made of popler buds, alſyagerh the paine of the B 


gout, 


Henbane cauſeth drowſinefſe,and mitigateth allkinde of paine, Iris good againſt hot & ſharpe A 


7.7 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
gout and the ſwellings of the ſtones,and the tumours of womens breſts ; and are good ro be put in. 
to theſame ointment,burt in ſmall quantitie, | = [4,08 as 
C Towaſhthefeeteinthedecottion of Henbane cauſerh{leepe : or giuenin a gliſter it doth the 
ſamezand alſo the often ſmelling to the flowers, | | | | 


, » 


Lf 


D -Theleaues,ſecd,and jviceaken inwardly cauſeth an vnquier ileepe;like vnto the ſleepe of drun. 
kennefle, which continueth long,and is deadly to the partie, , | 
| E Thefecdeofwhite Henhane is good againſt the cough, the fallingof wateric humours into the 
cies orbreſt , againſt the inOxdinate fluxe of womens iſſues, andall other iſſues of blood, raken in 
the weight often graines with water wherein honic hath beene ſodden. | | 
F Theroote boiled in vineger andthe ſame holden hotinthe mouth, caſerh the paine ofthe teeth, 
The fſeede is vied of mountibancke roothdrawers whichrunne about the countrey , tor to cauſe 
woormes come foorth of mens teeth by burning itinachafing diſh with coles, rhe partic holding 
his mouth ouer the fume thereof : bur ſome craftic companions to gaine money conuey ſmall lute 
ſtrings into the water , perſivading the patient that thoſe ſmall creeping beaſts came out of his 


mouth'or other parts, which he intended tg eaſe, | 


Of yellow Henbane,or Engl Tabaco. Chap.62. 


Hoſeyamus lutews. 3þ-1 | = 
Yellow Henbane. LEES * Thedeſeription. 

; | | YM 7 Ellow Henbanegroweth tothe height of 
ewo cubits , [The ſtalke is thicke , fat and 
 greeneof colour, full of a ſpungjous pith; 
and is deuided into ſundrie braunches , ſet with 
ſmooth and euen leaues, thicke, and full of juice, 
The flowers growe at the tops of the braunches 
orderly placed, of a pale yellowe colour, ſome- 
ching lefler then thoſe of the blacke Henbane. 
The _ wherein the flowers do ſtande arelike, 
bur leſſer, tenderer and without ſharpe pointes, 
wherein is ſet the huske or cod ſomwhart rounde, 
full of very ſmall ſecde like the. ſeede of Mar- 

jerome, The roote is ſmall and threddie. 

|  # Theplace. S7 
Yellow Henbane is ſowen in gardens whereit 
doth proſper exceedingly, infomuch that itcar- 
not be deſttoied where it hath once ſowen itſelf, 
and is diſperſed into the moſt parts of Englande. 
| *% The tame. 

It lowreth in the fommer moneths, and of- 
rentimes till Autumne be farre ſpent, in which 
time the ſeede commerth to perfeCtion. 

*% The names. | 
' Yellow Henbane is called Hyoſeyamm lutem, | 
of ſome Petam, and Perun: of others N 0 | 
of Nicot a French man that aw the feeces 
from the Indies; as alſo the ſeedes of the true | 
Tabaco, whereof this hath beene taken for 2 
68: |  Rinde, infomuch'that ZObelias hath calledit 
Dubins Hyoſeyamus , or doubrfull Henbane, as a plant participating of Henbane and Tabaco: 
is ved of divers in ſteede of Tabaco, and called by che fame name, for that it hath becne brought 
from Trinidada,a place ſo called in the Indies ; as alſo from Virginia or Norembega for Tabaco, 
which doubrlefle taken in ſmoke worketh the fame kind of drunkennes that the right Tabaco __ 


HISTORIE. OF PLANTS. 285 
* The nuture. | 

This kinde of Henbane ts thought of ſome to be colde and moiſt ; but after 70Zelzus it rather 
keaterh then coolerh ar all, bicauſe ofthe biting taſte, as allo that roſennes or gumminetle it is pot- 
ſeſſed of, which is euicently perceiucd both in handling andchewing it inthe mouth, T 

| | & T hevertu-s. "os FI 

This herbe preuailerh againſt all apoſtemes, rumours, inueterate vicers, botches and ſuch like, A 
being made into an vnguent or ſalue as followeth.| Take of the greene leaues threepounde and a 
halfe, ſtampe them very ſmall in a ſtone morter; ofpile olive one quart ; ſer them to boile in abraſle 
panor ſuch like, vpon a gentlefire, continually ſtirring it vntill rhe herbes ſeeme blacke , and will 
notbubble nor boile any more; then ſhall you haue an excellent greene oile, which being {trained 
from the feces or droflie , ts the clcere and ſtrained oile to the fire againe , adding theieto of 
waxe halfe a pounde, of roſen fower ounces,and of good turpentine two ounces; melt them alto- 
gither and keepe it in pots for your vie to cure. inuererate vicers, apoſtemes, burnings, grecne 
wounds,and all curs and hurts in the head,wherewith I haue gotten bd: owned hd credit. . 

ltis vied of ſome in ſteede of Tabaco, but to ſmall purpoſe or profite , Trough doſtupific. or B 
dullthe ſences, and cauſe that kinde of giddinefle that Tabaco doth, and likewile {; picting, which 
any other herbe of hot temperature will do,as roſetnarie, time, winter ſauorie, ſivecte marierome, 


1 


andſuch like,any of che which I like better to be taken in ſmoke then this kinde of doubtfull Hen- 
Of Tabacoor Henbane of Peru. Chap.6z. 


| Tg *% The kindes. ; y 
Here be two ſorts or kindes of Tabaco, one greater, the other leſſer; thegreater was bronghe 
*. into Europe our of the prouinces of America, which we call the weſt Indies: the other from 
Trinicada an Ilandeneere vnto the continent of the ſame Indies ; ſome haue added athirde fort , 
andothers making the yellowe Henbane for a kinde thereof, although not properly. 
| 2 Sana Santi Indoyins. 
| Tabaco of Trinidada. 


424 * 
=. 
” 


+7 khe - 


+» 


286 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


% The deſcription. «1 
= + Abaco or Henbane of Peru, hath very great ſtalkes of the bigneſle of a childes arme, 
growing in fertill andwell dunged ground, of ſeauen or eight foote high, deuiding it ſelfe 
into ſundric braunches of great length , whereon are placed in moſt comely order verie 
faire long leaues,broade,{mooth,and ſharpe pointed, ſoft, and ofalight greene colour,ſo faſtne 
about the ſtalks, that they ſeeme to embrace and compaſle it about. The flowers grow art the top of 
the ſtalks in ſhape like a bel lower, ſumwharlong and cornered, hollow within, of a light carnation 
colour,tending to whitneflle roward the brims, The ſecede is conteined in long ſharpe pointed codg 
or ſeede veſſels,like'vnto the ſeede of yellow Henbane, bur ſomewhat ſmaller and browner of co- 
lour. The roote is great, thicke,and of a wooddie ſubſtaunce, with ſome rhreddie ſtrings annexed 
thereto. Fl þ LIE." | Tj 
2 Trinidada Tabaco hath a thicke,rough and fibrous roote,from which immediately riſe vp long 
broadeleaues,and finooth,of a greeniſh colour, leſſer then thoſe of Peru, among which riſethyp a 
| ſtalke diuiding it Flfe at the grounde into divers braunches, whereon are ſet confuſedly the lhe 
leaues, but leffer: at the top of the ſtalks,ſtande vp long necked hollow flowers of a pale purple,ten- 
ding to a bluſh colour; frer which ſucceede the cods or ſeede veſſels, including many ſmall ſeeds 


like vnto the ſecede of Marierom. The whole plant periſheth at the firſt approch of winter. 


n | l! %* T he place. | | 
It was firſt brought into Europe out of the proutnces of America,which is called the weſt Indies, 
in which is the province or countrey of Peru: but being now plantedin the gardens of Europe, ic 
proſpereth very well,and conuneth from ſeede in. one yeere to beare borh flowers and ſecede, The 
which I take to be better for the conſtitution. of our bodies, then thatwhich is brought from Indiz; 
and that growing,inthe Indies better for the people of the ſame countrey; notwithſtandingitis 
not ſo thought norreceiued of our Tabackians; for according tothe Englith prouerbe; Farferche 
and deere bought is beſt for Ladies. ; | ** 
| t-1 10  _wThetme. 2 | 
Tabaco muſt beſowen in the moſt fruirefu!l grounde that may be founde, carelefly caſt abroade 
in the ſowing,withour raking it into the grounde or any ſuch paine or induſtrie raken, as is requiſite 
in the ſowing of other ſeedes as my ſelfe haue found by proofe,, who haue experimentede 
ro cauſe itquickly togrowe: forI haue committed ſome tothe earth in the ende of March, ſome in 
 Aprill and ſome in the beginning of Maie, bicauſeI durſt not hazard all my ſecede at onetime {eſt 
ſome vnkindly blaſt ſhould happen afterthe ſowing,which mightbe a great enimie thercunto. 
\ - £36 11-10 | % The names. | | 
The people of America call it Petun ; others Sacra Herba, fſantts Herba, and ſana ſanits Inds 
do; um, L'Obely and Pena, and ſome Hyeſcyamus Feruntanus, or Henbane of Peru : If jcolans Me 
»:rdis nameth it Tabaco: that itis Hyeſty.:m ſpecies,or akinde of Henbane, not onely the formebe- 
ing like to yellowe Henbane, bur the qualitic alſo doth declare: for it bringeth drowſineſſe, trov- 
blerh the fences, and maketh a man as it were drunke by taking of the fume onely ;;as andres 
Thenctas teſtifierh,(and common experience ſheweth:) of ſome it is called Nicotians: the which] 
refer tothe yellowe Henbane for diſtinQton ſake, | | 
| | EY 1H ** Thetemperature. ik LS 
Itis hot and drie,and that in the ſecond degree,as A{onardithinketh : and is withall of powerto 
diſcuſſe orreſolue,and toclenſe away filthic humours, hauing alſo acerraine ſmall aſtriftion and 2 
ſtupifieng or benumming qualicie, and purgeth by the ſtoole : and CMonardis writerh hat it hath 
a ccrtaine power to reliſt poiſon, And to prooue it tobee ofa hot temperature the biting quality 
| of the leaues doth ſhewewhich is eaſily perceaued by taſte: alſo the greene leaves laid vpon vicers 
in ſinewie parts may ſerue for aproofe of heare inthis plant; bicauſe they do draw ourfilth & cor- 
rupted marter, which a cold ſimple would neuer do. The leaues likewiſe being chewed draw foorth 
flegme and watergas doth alſo the fume taken when the leaucs are dried: which things declare that 
this isnot a little hot: for whatthings ſoeuer being chewed or helde in the mouth bring foorth 
flegmie andwater,, the fame be all counted hot, as the roote of Pellitorie of Spaine , of Saxifrage, 
and other things of like power. Morcouer the benumming qualitie heereof is nothard to be pet- 
ceiued, for vpon the taking of the fume ar the mouth there followerh an infirmitie like _ drun- 
| | ct 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 2S7 


Lnnefſe,and many times ſleepe :as after the taking of Opie, which allo ſheweth inthe taſtea by- 
"oqualitic, and therefore 1s not without heatez which when it is chewedand inwardly taken, it 
2th foorthwith ſhewe,cauſing a certaine heare inthe cheſt,and yer withall troubling the wits: as 
perus Belonins in his thirde booke of ſingularities coth declare; where alſohe ſheweth that the 
Turkes do oftentimes vie Opium, and take one dramand a halfe thereof atonetime; without anic 
other hurt followin FR they are thereupon taken with a certaine light drunke.ciefle as it 
were, So alſo this Tabacobeing in raſte biting, ahd in tewperaturehor, huchnorwirhſtanding a 
benumming qualitie. Heereupon it ſeemerh ro follow, that not onely this Henbane of Peru, bur al- 
{the iuice 0 ru 2g er called Opium, confiſteth of diuers parts, ſome biting and hot, and 
others extreme colde,that is to ſaie,ſtupifieng or benumming: if fobe that this benumming qualitie 
proceede of extreme colde (a5 Gales and all rhe olde phiſitions holde opinion: ) but if the benum- 

ng facu!tie doth not dependeof an extreme colde qualitie,and that in the fourth degree,bur pro- 
cedech of the eſſence of the ſubſtance; then may Tabaco bebothcolde andalſo benamming; of 
temperature hot and bemumming, not by reaſon of his temperature, butthrongh the properrie of 
his ſubſtaunce;otherwiſe then a purging medicine, which hath his force not fromthe temperature, 
hutfrom the eſſence of thewhole ſubſtance,” - | ot (2 = | 

Ts 9:17 DIULI 9 % The wertues. eat. 

Nicolaus Monardis ſaith that the leaves hereof are a remediefor the paine in the head called the A 
Megram or Migraime that hath beene of long continuance + and allo tor a colde ſtomacke,eſpeci- 
= children; and that it is good againſt the paines in the kidneies. | | 

tis apreſent remedie for the fits of the mother: ir mitigateth the paine of the gour if they bee B 
roſtedin hor embers and applied ro the greeued part. HOT ;>3 | 

[tis likewiſe a remedie for the toothach , if the teeth and gummes bee rubbed with a linnen C 
cloth dipped in the iuicezand afterward a rounde ball of the leaues laid vnto the place. 

The 1wce boiled with ſugarin forme of a ſirupe and inwardly taken, driuveth foorth woormes of D 
the bellie 3 if withall a leafe be laide tothenauell. | . | | 

The ſame doth likewiſe-\covre andclenſe oldeandrotten vicers , and bringeth them to perfe&t E 
digeſtion as the ſame author affirmeth. "1 : | 

In the low countries it is vſed againſt ſcabs and filthineſſe of the skin,& for the cure of wounds : F 
but ſome holde opinion that ics to be vſedbur onely to hot and ſtrong bodies: for they ſay that the 
vieis not ſafe in weake and olde folke : and for this cauſe, as it feemeth, the women in America ( as 
Thewetus ſaith)abſtaine from the herbePerun or Tabaco,and do in no wile vicit. 

The weight of fower ounces of the juice heercof drunke purgeth both vpwards and downwards, G 
andprocureth after along & ſound ſleepe,as we haue learned of a friend by obſeruation, affirming 
that a ſtrong countrieman of a middle age,hauing adropſie, tooke ofir , and being wakened out of 
his {leepe;called for meate and drinke,and after that became perfectly whole. | 

Morcouer the fame man reported, that he had cured many countriemen of agues with the deſtil- H 
ledwater of the leaues drunke a little while before the fir. | 
bi ono there is an oile to be taken outof the leaues that healerh merrie galles kibed heeles and I 

IKE, | gs 

Itis goad againſt poiſon, and taketh away the malignicie thereof, ifthe iuice be giuen to drinke 
orthe dew adaliows beaſts be ds yg 7 | . , y 
| Thedrie leaues are vſed tobe taken ina pipe ſet on fire and ſackr into the ſtomacke, and thruſt 

| Pepe | 3 L 
foorth again at the noſthrils againſt the paines of the head, rheumes,aches in any part of the bodie, 
whereof loeuer the originall doth proceed, whether from Fraunce, Italy, Spaine,[ndies,or from our 

familiar and beſt knowne diſcaſes:choſe leaues do pl liate or eaſe for a time,but neuer performe any 
ce abſolutely : for although they emptic the bodie of huinours, yerthe cauſe of the griefe cannor 
beſotaken away, Bur ſome haue leatned this principle,thar replerion requireth euacuarion;thatis, 
tulneſſecraverh emprineſſe, and by euacuarion aſſure themſclues of health: bur this doth not rake 
Way fo much with ir this day, but the next bringeth with ic more; as for example, a Well 
corhneuer ycelde ſuch ſtore of water aswhen itis moſt drawne and emptied. My ſelfe ſpeake by 
Proote, who haue cured of that infeRious diſeaſe a great manyzdiuers of which had coueredor kept 
viderthe ſickneſle bythehelpe of Tabaco as they r, yet in the ende haue beene conſtrained 


thaue vnto ſuch an hard knor,a crabbed wedge,orelſe had vererly periſhed. 


Some vſe to drinke it (as it is tearmed) for wantonneſle or rather cuſiome, 2nd cannot forbeare M 


it 


2-33 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
ir,no,notin the middeſt of their dinnery which kinde of taking is ynholſome and very daungeroy. 
airhough rv take it ſeldotre and that Phiſically is to be tolerated and may do ſome good. but pou 
mendethe ſyrupe aboue this fume or ſmokie megicine, | | 


'N Itgstakenoffome phitically in a pipe for that purpoſe once in aday at themoſt, and that inthe 


q 
Sz 


morning faſting againſt paines in the head, ſtomacke, and griefe in the breſtand lungs : againf 
catarrhes Md rheumes,and ſuch as hauc gotren.colde and hoarſeneſle, | 
O Somchauereportedtharirlirtle preuaileth/againſt an hor diſcaſe, and that it profiterh an hu 
complexion nothing atall: but experience hath.not ſhewed it robe injurious tocither, 
P Theythathaue ſcene the proofe heereof, haugcrediblie reported, that whenthe\Moores andhn. 
_ dianshane faintedeither for want of foode or reſt, this hath beene a preſent remedie vnto themty 
ſupplic the one,and|rohelpe them to the other, | 13% 93 " | 
The prieſts andinchaunters ofthe hot countries do take the fume therof vnrill they be d 
thar after they have lien for dead three or fawer howers, they may tell the people what woonger, 
viſions or illuſions chey haue ſeene,and ſo giuerhem a prophetical}direCion or forerelling ( if __ 
may truſt the diwe)!)ot the ſucceſle of their buſineſle, ifs 6 emns "bole 
R Theiviceordiltilled water of the firſt kinde, is very good Againſt catarrhes., the dizzineſ; 
of the heade and rheumes that fall 'downe the cies; againſt the paine called the migram, if 
cicher you apple it vnto'the temples or rake ane or two. greetie leaues , or adric leafe moiltned 
in wine, and dried hoping vpon'the embers and laid thereto, | tht 
S Ircleereth theight,and taketh away the webs and ſpots thereof, being annointedwith the iuice 
blood warme, | bo. | þ:-: | | 3 other: 1 * 
T Theoileoriuicedropped into the cares ts gopdagainſtdeafcneſle; a cloth dipped in theſave 
and laide ypon the face, taketh away the lentils, redneſle,and ſpots thereof. | 


7 


. 


o 
of : 


i 


V Manynotable medicines aremade heereof againſt the olde and invererate.cough,/ againſt aſth- 
maticall or pecorall grietes , which if Iihoulde ſer downe atlarge ,'woulde require a peculiar vo 


i 


lume. LE-#t = | FAN | 
X Irisgiuentoſuch as are accuſtomed tg {woune, and aretroubled with the collicke &windineſſ, 
agaivſt rhe droplie,the woormes in children,thepiles and the ſciatica. F _, 
Y Iris viedin outward medicines either the herbe boiled with oile, waxe, rofinand turpentine, as 
before is ſet downe in yellowe Heabane, or the extraction thereof with ſalt, oile, balſame , thed-' 
{tilled water and ſuch like, againſt rumours,apoſtemes,olde vicers,ofhard curation,borches, ſcabs, 
ſtinging with nettlcs, carbuancles, poitoned arrowes, and woundes made with guns or any other 
WCa . Top SE s "s { | 
Z. link excellent goqd in burnings and ſcaldings with fire,water,oile,lightning,or ſuch like, boikd 
with hogs greace in forme of an ointinentzwhichIhaue often prooued and found molt true,adding 
alictle of the iwwice of thorne apple leaues, ſpreading ir vpon acloth and ſo applying ir, | 
I do make heereof an excellent balfame to cure deepe wounds and punturesgmade by ſome nar- 
rowe ſharpe pointed weapon : whichbalfame doth bring vp the fleſh fromthe borrome very ſpee- 
dily,and alſo heale {imple curs in the fleſh according to the firſt intention, that is, toglewe or loder 
the lips of the wound togither,nat procuring matter or corruption vnto it,as is commonly ſeenein 
| 2. A the healingof woinds.| The receiris this, rake olle of roſes,oile of Saint Iohns woort;of cithet one 
' 7 pint,theleaues of Tabacoſtamped ſmallina ſtoge morrer two pound , boile them rogithertothe 
comſumprtion of tie kuce,ſtraine it and put ittothe fue againe, adding rher&oof Venice Turpen- 
tine two ounces, of olibanum & waſticke of cithex halſe an ounce,jn moſkſme & ſubrill powder,uae » 
which you may atall times wake into an vnguentpr ſalue by putting thefeto waxe and rofinto giue 
vnto ita ſtitfe bodie, which worketh exceeding well in maligne nl virulenr vicers , as in w 
and punctures : I ſende this iewell vatoyou women of all ſorts, clpecially to ſuch as cure and helpe 
the poore and impotent of your countrie withqut rewarde. But vnto the-beggerly rabblc of 
an #4 charmers, & ſuch like couſeners, that regarde more to get moneythen to helpetor chati- 
' tie, [wiſh theſe fewe medicines tar fromtheir vngerſtanding , and from thoſe deceiuers whoml 
wiſh tobce ignoraunte heerein , But curteous gentlewomen, I may nor for the malice chat ] doe 
. beare vnto ſuch, hide anything from you of FS. importaunce : and therefore rake one more that 
followerh, wherewich Ihaue cone very many and good cures,although of ſmall colt, bur regardet 
* * Bnotthelefſeforthatcauſe, Take the leaues of Tabaco two-pounde, hogges greaſe onex 
” |  . ſtalnpethchcbelinalin aſtonemorter,purting rtherto a ſinal cupfulof red orclarer wine,ſtirthem 


well 


HISTORIE, OF PLANTS. 239 


well togither,couct the morter from filth and ſplerirreſt vnrill morning ; then put ir to the fire and 
lt it boilc gently,continuall ſtirring it vntill the conſumption of che wine;ſtraine itandſ:tirto the 
fre againe,purting rherctothe mice of the herbe one pounde,of Venice Turpentine fower ounces; 
boilerhem togither tothe conſumption of the tuice,then adde thereto of the rootes of round (_Ai- 
4 orbirth woort in moſt fine powder two ounces, ſufficient waxe to giue it a body , the which 
forthy wounded poore nei; z a alſothe olde and filthie vicersof the legges and other 


parts offuch as hauc neede pc. 


Of tree Moghtbade Chap.64. - 


| Amonum Pliny. ts 
Tree Nightſhade. edt % The deſcription. 


His rare and pleaſaunt plant, called tree 
Nightſhade, is taken of ſome to be a kinde 
'* of Ginnie pepper, but notrightly; of others 
for a kinde of Nightthade; whoſe iudgement and 
cenſure I gladly admit; for that it doth more fit] 
anſwer it both inthe forme andnature. Ir grovet 
vppe like vnto a ſmall ſhrubbe or wooddic hedge 
buſh, rwo or three cubits high , covered with a 
greeniſh barke ſer with many ſmall rwiggie braun- 
ches, and garniſhed with many long leaues veric 
green, like vnto thoſe of the peach tree. The 
flowers are white , with a certaine yelldwe 
pricke or pointell in the middle, like vrto the- 
flowers of garden Nightſhade. After which fuc- 
ceede ſmall rounde berries verie red of colour, and 
of the ſame {ubſtance with winter cherries, wher- 
in are conteined litrle flat yellow ſeedes. The roote 
is compaQ of many ſmall hairic yellow {tringes, 


*% The place. 


It groweth notwilde in theſe colde regions, but 
we haue themin our gardens, rather for pleaſure 
rhen profite, or any good qualitic as yer knowne, 

* Thetime. 
Itis kept in pots and tubs with earth and ſich 
| | like in houſes during the extremitie of winter, hi- 
cauſe it cannot endure the coldneſſe of our colde clymare, and is fr abroadc into the garden in 
March or Aprill:it lowreth in Maic,and the fruite is ripe in September. 
*% The names. ; 

Tree Nightſhade is called in Latine Solanum arboreſcens , of ſome Stickrodendron, ard Strich- 

dendron: _Amomum of Plinie : and P ſeudocapſicum of Dodon eu. 

| *&T he nature and vertues. 

| Wehauenotas yer any thing ſer downe as touching the temperature or vertues of this plant, 
butis referred of ſome to the kind? of Ginnie pepper, but without any reaſon at all ; for Ginny pep? 
per though it bring foorth fruite verie like in hy vntothis plant, yer intaſte moſt vnlike , for that 
Cepſewm or Ginny pepper is more ſharpe in taſte then our common pepper; andthe other hathno 
taite ofbiting at all, bur is like vnto the berries of garden Nightſhade in taſte, although they differ 
n colour : which hath mooued ſome to call this plant red Nightſhade,of the colout of the berries: 

ndtree Nightſhade,of the wooddy ſubſtance which doth continue and grow from yeere to yeerc: 


andGinnie pepper dicthat the firſt approch of winter. 


T4 Fo” . - Of 


| 
| $i 
| it 
x [i 


29 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE | 
Of Balme apple,or apple of 'Hieruſalem. Chap.65. 


I Balſamins as. HR I ES 2 Balſarmina fawmin . 
The malc Ballam apple. = | The female Balfamapple, 


| 


% T, he deſeription. 


21 He male Balme applchath long,ſmall,and tender braunches, ſetwith leaues like thoſeof 
the vine; and the like ſmal claſping tendreals wherewith it catcheth holde of ſuch thingsas 
do growe neere vnto it, notable by reaſoh of his weakeneſle to ſtande vpright without 

ſome pole or other thing to ſupport it. The fipwers conſiſt.of fiue ſmall leaues of a meane 
bignes, andare of a o_ 1amgris colour: which being paſt, there docomein place long apples, 
ſomething ſharpe toward the point almoſt like an egge, rough all oner as it were with ſmall ham- 
lefle prickels,red both within and without when they be ripe,and cleaue in ſunder of them{clues:in 
the apple lieth great broade flat ſeedelike thoſe of Pompion or Citrull; bur ſomething blackewhen 
theybe withered, The rooteis threddie,and diſperfeth it ſelfe farre abroad in the ground. 

2 The female Balme/apple doth nor alittle differfrom the former : ir bringeth foorth ſtalkesnot 

running orclyming like the.other, bur a moſt thicke and fat truncke or ſtocke full of ivice, in ſub- 

ſtance like the ſtalkes of Purſlane,ofa reddiſh colour and ſomwhat ſhining, The leaues belong 
narrowe, in ſhape like thoſe of willowe or the peach tree, ſomewhat toothed or notched about the 
cdges: among which grow the flowers ofan incarnate colour rending 19 blewneſſe, hauing a ſmall 
ſpur or taile annexed thertg as hath the Larkes heele, of a faire light crimſon colour :intheir places 
come ypthe fruite or apples rough and hairie, burleſſer then thoſe of the former, yellow when they 
be ripe, which likewiſe cleauea ſunder of themſelyes and caſt abroad their ſeedes much like vnto 

Lentils feeces faith mine author. Bur thoſe which|l haue from yeete ro yeere inmy garden , brivg 

foorth ſeede like the Coleflorey or Muſtardg ſeede ; whether they bee of two kindes,, orthe 

mate do alter the ſhape,irreſterh diſpurable, | 


+ The 


| 


| 
| 
| 
i 
| 


LS — - — ”— >. cad 


[2bour.and induſtric growe in rhelc colde comntries. 


' apple 3n Italian Caranze: inthe Germaine toong l 


 HISTORIEO OMPEANTS. ' ': 7 291 
*T #26 ET en 
Theſe plants do proſper befÞin hot regions: Thoyareſtraungers inEnglahd, and do with great 


1 


* The time. © YEE: GL 
They :mriſtbe ſoiwerffri the begining of Aprill in a bed of Hat horſe dugg? even as mucke Me- 
lonsChicumb*rs;andfihlike colde fruites arc ; and replanted:abroad from the Taide bed ivto the 
moſt hot and fertill place of the gardenar ſuch time,as they haue gotten three leaues a peece, 
LE \ &% The names, wo | 
' Dinerſly hath this plant beene named, ſome calling iz by onename, and ſome byanother,everie 
one as it ſeemed good to his fancie. Baptiſfa Sarius callerh it Bilſimina Cucunerima: others YV itt 
cellaand Charantia,as allo Pomun Hieroſolymt1nwme ot apples of Hicrufalem ; in Engliſh Balme 
"EI opffel; in French 2ferwerle : lome of 
the Larines haue calledir Pomn mirabjle, or maruclous apples. It is thoughrto be named. 2. /- 
mins bicaule the oile wherein the ripe apples be 7196 I orinfuſed , is takento be profitable for ma- 
nic things,as iS Carpobalſammum,or the liquor of the plant Bul/ammm. OY es \ 
"Thefemale Balſam apple is likewiſe called Za/ſamr: : and oftentimes in the Neuter gender Ba/- 
ſawinn: Geſner choſeth rather toname it "Fc am 1 amvedatcides: V aleries Cordus Batſamelliz:ochers 
Blaming farmma : in Engliſh the female Balme apples. LE 
RI | | *% Therature. | | - 
Thefruite or apples heercof;as alſo the leaues, do notablie drie,having withall a cettaine mode- 
rare coldneſſe very neere to a meane temperature,that is,after ſome hot in the firſt, and dric in the 
ſecond degree. | 
| *% The tertwes. #4 Gh 
Thelcaues are reported to heale greene wounds if they be bruſed and laide thereon; and raken a 
with wine they are faide to bea remedie for the collicke ; and an effeftuall medicine for burſtings 
and conuulfions or crampes. | 
Theleaues of the male Balſiming dtied in the ſhadowe , and beaten into powder and giuen in p 
winevnto thoſe that are mortally wounded in the bodice, doth cure them inwardly, and helpeth alſo 
the collicke. | | 
Theoile which is drawen foorth of the fruite doth cure all greene and freſh woundes as the true 
naturall Balſam ; it helpeth the crampes and conuulſions and the ſhrinking of finewes , being au- 
nointed therewith, = = | 
leproficeth women that are in great extremitie of childbirth in taking away the paine of the ma- 
rrix.cauſing eafte deliverance being applied to theplace, and anointed vpon their bellies , or caſt 
ntothe matrix with aſyring, and eaſerh the dolour of the inward parts, 
Itcureth the Hemorrhoices and all other paines of the tundamear , being thereto applied with FE 
lint of 01d clouts, | "IÞ 
Theleaues drunkenin wine, heale ruptures. : | | | | E 
I find little or nothing written of the property ot vertues of the female kind,bur that itis thought G 


to drawe neere vnto-the-farſt in temperament and vertue. E 

Oyle oliue in which the fruite(the ſecede taken foorrh)is either ſet in the ſunne as we do when we 1 
make oile of rofes , or boiled in a double glafle ſer inhor warer, or clſe buried-in hot horſe dung; 
taketh away inflammations that are in wounds, It dothalfocafily andin ſhort time conſolidate or 
glew them togither,and perſc&ly cure chem. @ | | 

 Iecureth the vicers of thedugges or paps, the head of the yarde or matrix, as alſothe inflamma- ] 

tion thercof being injected or conucied into the place with a fyringe or mother peſfarie; | 

Tins apples with good ſucceſſe applied vnto wounds,prickes, and hurts of the finewes.:It hath K 
great force to cure ſcaldings andburnings: it taketh away ſcarres and blemiſhes, if in the meane 
ume the powder of the leaues be taken for certainedaies rogither, »= 

tis reported that ſuch as be barren are made fruitfull heerewith, if the woman firſt be bathedin T, 
afitandconuenientbath for the purpoſe, 8& the parts about the ſhare and matrix annointed heer- 
with.and the woman preſently haue the companie of hir husbande. 


| T2 Of ; 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF /THE 


Of Ginnie or Fndian Pepper. Chap.66. 


I Cepſicmmlongioribus fuliquin. | | 3 Capficum minimit ſil _ 
> "44 codded Ginnic Pepper. | Small codded 2:47; WE 


| ER. * The deſeription. | 
I He firſt of theſe plants haue ſquare ſtalkes a foote high or ſomewhat more,ſet with may 
thicke and fat leaues,not vnlike to thoſe of garden Nightſhade, but narrower & ſharper 
pointed,of a dark greene colour, The flgwers grow alongft the ſtalks out of the wings of 

the leaues ofa white colour ,hauing for the moſt part fiue ſmall leaues blaſing our like a ſtar,witha 
greene buttoh in the middle. After them growe the cods, greene at the firſt, and when they be ripe 


of a braue colour glittering like red corall,in which is conteined lirtle flat ſeedes of a light yellowe = 
colour, of a hot bicing taſte like common pepper , as is alſothe codirſelfe : which is long, and 
as bigge as a finger arid ſharpepointed, = | 


'2 Theſfecondkinde of Ginnic pevperis like vnto the precedent in leaues , flowers, and ſtakes. 
The cods heercofare ſmall, rounde,and redde, veric like vnto the berries of Dulcamays ot wood: 
Nigheſhade , both in bigneſſe, colour,and ſubſtaunce, wherein conſiſteth the difference: norwit- 


ſtanding the ſeede and cods are veric ſharpe and biting,as are thoſe of the firſt kinde. 


Theſeplants are brought from forren| countries , as Ginnie, India, and thoſe parts , 0? 
S>aine and Italy : from whence wee haue received ſeede for our Engliſh gardens , where tht) 


'q 


come to fruite bearing: bur the cod doth nar come to thar _ red colour which naturally it 
poſleſſed with, which hath hapned by reaſon of theſe vnkindely yeeres that are paſt: but we 
better when God ſhall feride vs a hot and temperate yeerc, 

Þ | | 


4 Th 


Ez. | 
HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 7 293 


*% The time, | | 

The ſeedes heereofmuſt be ſowen in a bed of hot horſedung, as muske Melons are, and remoo- 
xedinto a pot when it hath gotten three or fower leaues, that it may the more;conueniently be ca- 
ried from place to place to receme the heate of the ſunne : and are towarde Aurtumne to be caried 
into ſome houſe, to auoide the iniurie of the colde nights of that time of the yeere when it is ro 
beare his fruite. | : 

| ; &* The names. | 
Aﬀuarizscalleth itin Greeke as, in Latin C a ic 1018:8 itts thought to be that which Auicenne 
nameth Z inziber caninum, or dogs Ginger: and Pliny Sliquaſtrum, which is more like in taſte to 
epper then is Panax ,andit is therefore called PJperitis , as hee hath written in his r9.booke 12, 
chapter: Panax(faith he)hath the taſte of pepper and Sigua firumtorwhich cauſe it is called Pipe- 
ritis. The later Herbariſtes do oftentimes call ic Pyper Indiamn,ot Indicwn, ſometimes Piper Cale- 
cathium,or Piper Hiſpanicum:in Engliſh it is called Ginnie pepper, and Indian pepper :inthe Ger- 
maine roong {ndianiſcher JIfeficr : in lowe Dutch Byeſflie YZeper 2 in French Poiure a Inde, ve- 
rie well knowne in the ſhoppes at Billingſgate by the name of Ginnie pepper, where itis viually ro 
bebought. 
| * The temperature. 4 

Ginnie pepper is extreme hot and drie cucn in the fourth degree : that is toſaie, farre hotrer and 

drierthen Awicen ſheweth dogs ginger tobe. | 
* The wvertnes; | 

Ginnie pepper hath the taſte of pepper, but notthe power or vertue, notwithſtanding in Spaine 
and ſundrie parts of the Indies they do vic todrefle their meate therewith, as we do with Calecute 
pepper: but(faith my author)it hath init a malitious qualitic, whereby ir is an enimic to the liuer & 
other of the entrails 5 _Hurcen writeth that it killeth dogs. ap 

Itisſaide to die or colour like ſaffron, and being receiued in ſuch ſort as faffron is vſually raken, B 
 ttwarmeththe ſtomacke,and helpeth greatly the Foeltion ofmeares, . 

It diſſoluerh the ſwellings about the throte called the Kings Euill, as kernels and cold fiwellings; C 
andraketh away ſpots and lentiles from the face, being applied therto with honie, 


Of horned Poppie. Chap.67. 


*% The kindes. 


Here be ſundric ſorts of horned Poppies,differing in ſoile , ſtature, andproportion , colour of 
flowers and leaues. The figures of two of the chiefeſt ſhall be ſer downe : the reſt we intende 
toleauecither ynto a ſecond Edition, or a further conſideration. 


* The deſcription, 


1 He o_ey horned Poppie hath whitiſh leaues very much cut or lagged , ſomewhat like 
| theleaues of garden Poppie,but rougher and more hairie. The ſtalks be long, rounde, and 
brittle. The flowers be large and ales Lookin of fower leaues;which being paſt,there 

come long huskes or cods , crooked like an horne or cornet, wherein is conteined ſmall blacke 

ſeede. The roote is great, thicke,ſcalic and rough,continuing long. - | 

2 Theſecond kinde ofhorned poppie is much ſlenderer and leffer then theprecedenr, and hath 
leaueslike deepe curs as Rocket hath,and ſomething hairie. The ſtalkes be verie {lender,brittle,and 
braunched into diuers armes or wings; the flowers {mall , made of fower littleleaues, of ared co- 
lour with a ſmall ſtrake of blacke towarde the bottome.,after which commeth the ſecede, incloſed in 
_ long, crooked cods full of blackiſh ſecde, The roore is ſmall and fingle, and dicth euery 
Wi: | 
| T ; I Papaxer 


Red horned Poppie. 
4 Papany cormutuon luteum minu 
Small yellowe horned Poppie. 


2 Papazer cornurun flore rubro. 


bl 
an 
bs 
16S 
© 
1 
= 
O 
O 
- 
O 
© 
[£3 
GG 
mM 
>& 
= 


I Papaxer cornatwn fbre latco. 
Yellowe horned Poppic 


294 


_<41, HISTORIBIONIPLANTS. 295 


% The deſcription. 
3 Thereis anotherſortofhorned Poppic near 696” lefler then the laſt deſcribed,hauing tenderer 
ſeaues, cut into fine little parcels: the lower is likewiſe lefler, of a blew purple colour like the dou- 
le Violer. | 
; There is founde another ſort hauing leaues like Rewe, with ſmall and lowe ſtalkes , and little 
yellowe flowers compadt of fixe ſmall leaues,three bigger,the reſt leſſer, A 
| { * The place. ' 

The yellowe horned Poppie groweth vpon the ſandes and bankes of the ſea: I foundit growing 
'neerevntoRiein Kent: inthe lles of Shepey and Thanet: at Lee in Eſſex: atHarwich, at Whitc- 
ſtable,and niany other places alongſt the Engliſh coaſt, Wy | = 

The ſeconde groweth not wilde in England, Angelus Palea, and Bartholomeus ab rbe-veterun, 
who have commented vpon Meſye , write that they founde this red horned Poppic in the king- 
domes of Arragon and Caſtile in Spaine,and in fieldes neexe vato common paths, They do growe 
in my garden very plentitully. *% The time. 

They flower from Maie to the ende of Auguſt, 

| | *% The names. 
Moſt writers hauc taken horned Poppie, eſpecially that with red flowers tobe Glancrwm, neither 


xethey in their opinion deceiued: for as Dzoſcor;des (aith , Glaucrum hath leaues like thoſe of hor- 
ned Poppey, but umpeines., that is to faie fatter yeuiln, lowe,or lying onthe grounde, of a ſtrong 
ſmell and ofa bitter raſte: the juice alſo is much like in colour to ſaffron. Moreouer i Obelizes doth 
witneſſe that this horned Poppichath the ſame kind of iuice; as my ſelfe likewiſe can teſtifie. Dioſes- 
rides ſaith that Glawcixm groweth about Hierapolis , a citic in Sia : but what hindreth thar it 
ſhould not be found alſo ſome where elfe : ſo that by the concordance of all authors foc the moſt 
,itisthetrueand _— Glaucium of Disſcorides: of ſome it is called Mecon Ceratites: in 
iſh ſea Poppic , and horned Poppie : in Dutch Gcelheul and Þomne Þeule 2 in the Germaine 
toong Gelbomag ; in French Paxet Corrs : in Spaniſh Dormideramarin a. | 
*% 7 henature. | 
Horned Poppies are har and drie in the thirdedegree. a.” 
FM \ * 1 hevertwes. | ' 
Theroote of horned Poppie boiled in water vnto the conſumption of the one halfe, and drunke, A 
prouoketh vrine,and openeth the ſtopping of the lier, | 
The ſeede raken in the quantitie of a ſpookcfull, looſerh the bellic gently. BR 
On mixed with meale and ap dictt olderorten and filthie vicers, C 
ues and flowers putinto Vnguents or ſalues appropriate for greene woundes, digeſte D - 
them,thatis,bringe them - white bans. or perfect Xo ot ſanies, , 


Of garden Poppie. Chap.68. 

*+ The kings. | | 
Keas there be ſundry ſorts of horned Poppies, ſo are there of tame, or of the garden. The which 
ſhall be diſtinguiſhed into rwo kinds, that is to faie, the ſingle fowred Poppie of the garden, 
and the double flowred Poppic: andſccingthe difference of hols double ones, conſiſterh onely in 
_ thecolour of the flowers: it ſhall ſuffice to deſcribe ſome twoof them, and giue you the figures of 
tiereſt with their ſcuerall colours in their titles,which ſhall ſufficiently ſet foorth their deſcription, 

SCRY - *% Thedeſcription. l 


1 "T* Heleaues of white Poppie are long,broad,ſmooth,longer then the leaues of Lettuce,whi- 

' F rer,andcutinthe edges: the ſtamor ſtalke is ſtraight and brittle, oftentimes a yarde and a 
{© halfehigh: onthe top wherof grow white flowers, in whichat gong appec- 

rech aſmalhead,accompanied with anumber ofthreds or chiues,which being full growen1s round, 

and yet omthing long withall, and hath a coueror crownet vpon the ropz iris with many filmes or 

thinne $kins diuided into coffers or ſeuerall artitions, in which is conteined abundaunce of ſmall 

tounc and whitiſh ſeede. The roote groweth deepe,and is of no eſtimation nor continuance. 

- 2 Likeyntothis is the blacke garden Poppie, ſauing that the flowers are more white and ſhining, 
ſpotted or ſtraked with ſome lines of purple. The leaucs are greater, more iagged,and ſharper poin- 

ted. The cede is likewiſe blacker which maketh the difference, | : 


Sa - E 1 Papauer 


% 


1 Pa pan [anus albwn. 


WwW 


Xi 
: if 


THE SECOND! 


hite garden Poppic. 


EY 
het 
%} 

x 
< 


BOOKE OP THE 
| 2 Papaner /atiman nior an. 
Blicke Krer Poppin: | 


- Za» 


RS v6 
6 £5 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. > nd 
5 Papautr ptrpur en polyanthon, 6 Papaner w—19 
| panes” 


' Double purple Poppie. Scarlet 


hes enfanong Min, 
Small perfor oops, 


jp ' THE SECOND |BOOKE OF THE 


| | | # Theplace, | 

' Theſe kindes of Poppies are ſowen in gardens; which do afterwarde come of the fallings of the 

ſcede. | ll | | | 
El ' %* The $ame. | 
They flower moſt commonly in Tune. The ſeede is perfected in Tuly and Auguſt, 

- Poppic is called ofthe Gracians wix-rt of the Latines Papaxey : the ſhoppes keepe the Latine 
name+itis called in high Dutch Pagſamen t inlowe Dutch url and Mancop tin Engliſh Pop- 
pic, and Cheeſebowles :in French P aver,and Olierte Gallobelgis. 

The garden Poppie which hath blacke ſeedes, is ſurnamed of Droſcorides 3gvov, ot wilde, and is a; 
hefſaith, called j*ids, bicauſe Opinmis gathered from it : of Plinze and of the Latines Papazer nw. 
gran: andof moſtof ourage ofthe red colout gf the flowers Papaner rubrum , or redde Poppie, 
whercof there bee many variable colours and of great beautie, although ofcuill ſmell, whercupon 
our gentlewomen docall it Ione filuerpin. | | » 

[5 % The temperature. 
All the Poppies are colde, as Galen teſtificth/in his booke of the faculties of ſimple medicines, 
A Theſcede,as Galen faith in his booke of the faculties of nouriſhments, is good to ſeaſon breade 
with;butthe white is berter thenthe blacke. Hee alſo adderh thar the fame is colde and cauſeth 
| ſleepezand yeeldeth no commendable nouriſhment co the bodie ;'it is often vied in combis, orfer- 


ued atthe table with other iunkerring diſhes, | || 


B Theoilewhichis preſſed om of ttis pleaſant and delightful ro be eaten, and is taken with bread 


or any other waies in meate,withour any ſence of cooling. 


C Agrearter forceis inthe knobs or heads which do ſpecially pretaile ro mooue ſleepe,and toſtay 


and repreſle diſtillations or rheumes,and come neere in forceto Opiurs, but more genele.Opium,or 
the harde iuice of Poppic heads is ſtrongeſt of all ; Mcconimm (which is the iuice of the heads and 
leaues)is weaker. Both of them any waies taken either inwardly, or outwardly applied ro the heade, 
P_—_ ſleepe. Opium lomewharroo plentifully taken doch allo bring death, as Plinje truelic wi- 
cecn, . ; 1 

D Ir mitigateth all kindes of paines: but ir leauteth behinde it oftentames a miſchiefe woorſe then 

the diſcaſc it ſelfe, and that hard to be cuted,asa dead palſic and ſuch like, x 

E Thevſcotit,as Galex inhis 11.booke of medicines according to the places affected ſaith,is ſoof- 
fenſiue to the firme and ſolide partes of the bodie , as that they hadneede afterwardes 'to bee re- 
ſtored, : li | | 

F Soalfocollijies or cie medicines made with\Opiamy haue beene hurtfull to manyzinſomuch that 
they haue weaknedthe eics, & dulled the ſight of thoſe that haue vied it:it bringeth hardnes of he 
ring whatſocuer is 170r” 4 of Opium to mitigate the extreme paines of the eares, Vherfore 
all thoſe medicines andcompoundes ateto be ſhunned that are made of Opin, and are nottobe 
vied bur in extremeneceſitie; and tharis, whetino other mirigater or aſſwager of paine doth any 
ring pat as Galen in his thirde booke of medicines according to the places affeRed,dotheur 
(Gently GEclare,.. © | 'Y | 

G Theleaues of Poppie boiledin watcrwith alittle ſugar &drunke,cauſeth ſleepe:or if ic be bot. 
led without ſugar, and the head , feete, and temples bathed therewith,it doth effeRt the ſame. 

H The heads of Poppie boiled in water with ſugar in manner of a ſirupe cauſerh ſleepe, andis good 
gap theanes catarrhes that diſtill and falldowne from the braine into the lungs,and cafſcth 
rc c . =P: || | | 

I WIE ops Poppic ſtamped with barly meale, & a little barrowes greaſe, helperh Saint 
Anthonies fier,called 7gwis ſacer. .. 'S lank.ow: 5 | | 

K Theleaves,knops,and ſeede,ſtamped with vineger,womans milke, and ſaffron,cureth Eryſpels, 
(nn of 09 Gn fire:)and caſerhithe gout mighrily,and put into the fundament3s 
acliſter,cauſet 19-0 'F P3= 4h | 

L . Theſccde ofblacke Poppie drunkein wine ſtopperh the fluxe of the bellie , and the overnuct 
flowing of womens fickneſl. | 4 | F 
M : A caudle made of the ſecede of white Poppie or made into almonde milke,and fo giuen, cauſeth 
CCPc. | Il | ; i ; 4 / 


* - 


z 


s 


We £ of 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 299 
Of corne Roge,or wilde Poppie. (hap. 69. 
r Rhea. P 4duco multi mn 
; Wilde Popprd, ; Double wilde wing FE 


* The deſcription. 


I He ſtalkes of wilde Poppie be blacke , tender ,and brittle, ſomewhat hairie. The leaues 
are.cut rounde*about with deepe gaſhes like thoſe of Succorie , or of Rocker. The 
flowers grow foorth arthe tops of the ſtalks, being of a beautifull and gallant red colour, 

with blackiſh threddes compaſling abour the middle part of thehead : which being fully growen, 

is leſſer than that of the garden Poppie. The ſecede is ſmall and blacke. | 

2 Theteis alſo a lefler kinde heercof,with ſmaller leaues,not ſo ſnipt abour the edges,bur 

alittle nickt or roothed, in other points agrecing with the former , ſauing that the flowers of this 

ae ſomewhat doubled. | 
* The place, RE. = 
Theygrowe in earable grounds amongwheart, ſpelt, ric, barley,otes,and other graine, andin 
the borders of fieldes. © : 


| * Thetime. 
The fieldes are garniſhed and ouerfpred with theſe wilde Poppies in Iune and Auguſt. 
* The nones. ? L.. 

Wilde Poppies called in Grecke of Dioſcorides winws poias : in Latine Þapiuty erraticum: Gaza nas 
merh ir —_ fluid: in ſhops Papazer rubrjzof I Obelins pepaner Rhesbicaule the Bower ther- 
o{oon falleth away ; which name xh@s may for the ſame cauſe be common, not only to theſe, but 

lotothe others, if it beſo called of the 


ſpcedic falling ofthe flowers : bur if it he ſurnamed Rhes 


_ Mthefalling away of the ſeed (as itappecrerh)rhenſhall ir be proper toallthe reſt, whoſe flowers 


ow onely quickly fall awaic,but rheſeede alſo:in French Cocquelicot,Confatons, Panot ſaunege, 


ſen, 


) Collenbloemen,Cozenroſen; ia bigliDucch Klapper Ro _ 


/Z0 


z00 THE SECOND' BOOKE OF THE 
| _* Thenature. | 
The facultie of the wilde Poppies is like to that of the other Poppies: that is to faie colde, ang 
canſing fleepe, 2 | 
* The vertues. | 
Moſt men being led rather by falſe experiments then reaſon , commende the flowers againg 
** thepleuriſic,giuing rodrinke afloone as the paine commeth, citherthe diſtilled water, or 
ns | by often infuſing the leaues. And yer many times it hapneth that the paine ceaſeth by tha 
meanes, though hardly ſomrimes,by reaſon rhat the ſpitcle commeth vp ts fs with moredif. 
ficulrie,cſpecially in thoſe that are weake and haut not a ſtrong conſtitution of bodie. BapriFa $49. 
dws might be counted the author of this erroury who hath written that moſt men haue giuen the 
| flowers of this Poppic againſt the paine of the ſides: and thatit is good againſt the Pintn of 
| blood. ll 8 | | | 
n> Itis manifeſtrhatthis wilde Poppie is that of which the compoſition Dzacodjwm is to be made; 
as Galex hath at large entreated in his ſeuenth hooke of medicines according to the places affec. 
red. Crito alſo,and after him T hemjſo,and Demycrates do appoint#pe, or the wilde Poppiegobee * 
in the ſame compoſition; and cuen that fame Democrates addeth, that it ſhoulde bee that which is 
not ſowen: and ſuch an one is this, which growerh withour ſowing. 


Of baſtarde wilde Poppie. (hap, 70- 


1 CArgemone capitals torule. ll- 2. Argemone capitulo longiore, 
Baſtard wilde Poppie. | | Long codded wilde Poppie. 


A 


: * 
2 5 
Sa 


$ _— 
» 


I He firſt of theſe baſtard wilde Poppies, h Þ lender weake ſtems afoore high, rough 30d 
- | Þarie, ſetwith leaues not vnlike to thoſe of rocket , made of many NC deepe- 
[7 y curoriaggedabourthe edges, The lowers growarthetop of the ſtalks of aredcolos 


. A ad bo 


HISTORIE. OFCPLANTS. |: 301 
wh ſome ſmall blackne(fleroward rhe bortome. The feede is ſmall corarived iþ little round knobs. 


The roote is ſmall andthreddie. le: 
| 2 Theſecondis like the firſt faving that the <dds becreof be long, and the Tikes mate rounde, 
wherein the difference doth coal; - | =) ann 5 SY 


* The place, 
_ hs plants do pron we inthe corne fieldes in meſithiee gd | by the hedges and high waics, 
yee travel! [t from onto Bathe. L'Obeliaus founde it growing in the he wntoa village 
in x called Sourhflecte, my ſelfe being in his companie', of ld to diſCoucr ſome ſtrange 


planes,not hitherto written of. 
*% The time. = 
They owerin the beginning of Auguſt and their ſeede is ripe at the;ende thereof, 
) w%Thenames. 


The baſtardwilde Poppie is called i in Greeke Aprawwn: in Latine Argemone,Argemonia, Concor- 
 dir,Concordalia, and Herbs libarnies/: of ſome Pergalium, <ſ{t0 Sax cocolls Herbs: 11 Engliſh 
' winde Roſc,and baſtarde wilde Poppic. 

*% The temperature. © 


They are hot and driein the third degree. 
*% The vertnes. 

The leaues ſtamped and theiuice dropped into the cies eaſeth the inflammation therofzand cu- A 
reth the diſeaſe in w > cie called CArgems , whereof it tooke his name : which diſeaſe iy it hap- w 
nethon the blacke of the eie ic apparces) white zand contrariwiſe when itis in thewhite, then ic | 
appeereth blacke of colour. 

Theleaues ſtamped and bound vnto the cies or face that are blacke or bleneby meanes of ſome B 
m_ or {tripe,do 7a perfeQly take it away. Thedric herbe ſteepedi in warme water, worketh the like 

& 

| Theleaues and rootes ſtamped,and the iuice giuen in drinke,helperh the wiin s Or ngs C 
' cfthebelly, The drie herbe infuſed; in warme a. doth the ſame cffeQtually. td in 

The herbe ſtamped,cureth any wounde,vicer, canker,or fiſtula , being made vpi into an vnguent D 
orfalue, with ole, waxe,and alirtle rurpentine. 

Eo luice taken in the waight of two drammes with many expelleth poiſon or any ve- 


"Thei vice taketh awaic warts if they bee rubbed therewith; and being taken | in meatc it helpeth 
themile or ſplcene if it be waſted. 


Of Winde flowers. - Chap. 71. 
|  % Thekindes, | 


If þ He ſtock or kinred of the Anemones or Winde flowers, are without number, or at the leaſt nor 
known vnto any one that hath written of plants. For Dodonews hath ſer forth 5. ſorts:L' Obelrus 
eight: Taber Montanm,ten: my felfc haue in my garden twelue ditferentſorrs ; and yer I do heare 
of divers more,differing verie notably from any of theſe, which I hauebriefely touched, though 
not figured; euery newe yeere bringeth with it newe and ſtrange kindes. And every countrey his 
peculiar plants.of this ſort, which are ſent vnto vs from barre countries: in hope to receive from vs 
> {uchasout countrie yeeldcth, 


* The PEN 


Heffirſtkinde of An:mone ot Winde flower, hath ſmallleaues _—_ {nipt oriagged , 
almoſt like vnto Camomill,or Adonis flower: among which riſeth vp a ſtalke bare or na- 
ked almoſt vnto the top,at which place is ſer two or three leaues like the other: and atthe 

top of the ſtalke commeth frond a faire and beautifull Aower,compadt of ſeauen leaues, and ſome- 
times eight,of a violet colour tending, to purple. It is impoſſible to deſcribe the colour in his ful! 
pp Lonlidering the variable mixtures. The roote is tuberous or knobbic,and very _—_ 
| 2 The 


302 THE SECOND/BOOKE OF THE 

2 Theſecondekinde of Awemonec hath leaues like veto the precedent , infomuchthatit is hard ty 

Ciſtinguiſh the one from the other but by the flowers onely: for thoſe of this plancare of amoſi 

bright and faire ſcatler colour,and as double as the Marigolde ; and the oth er-not ſo; The toote is 

knobbie and verie brittle, as is the former. lp Tih(4034230Þ 920345 [Hh dll | 
: Anemone teberaſu padize. {| | 1 2 Anemone eoceiweamuleites,. 
Pagle Wind were, | ©} |. © DoubleſcarerWinde loner. 


34 


ks 


NOYVZ 


| | | % The deſeription. 
The great Anemone with double flowers, viit 


farre from Bithinia; hath great broade leaues decfiely 
fielde Crowefoote,of an ouerworne rope colour : among which riſeth vp a naked ſtalke barea- 


called the Anemone of Coopers not" 
cut in the edges, not vnlike to thoſe of the 


moſt vnto the top, where there ſtande rwo or three leaues , in ſhape like the others, bur leſſer; 
ſometimes changing into reddiſh ſtrippes,confuſedly mixed heere and there in the ſaid leaues. On 

© the top of the ſtalke ſtandeth a moſt gallant flower verie double, of aperfe&redde colour ſtripped, 
and ſometimes among the red with alittle line or two of yellowe in the middle; from which mid 
dle commeth foorth many blackiſh chrums. The'ſeedeis nottobee founde that I coulde cucr ob> 
ſerue,but is caried awaie with the winde.The roote is thicke and knobbie. 
4 Thefourth agreethwiththe firſt kinde of Anemone , in rootes, leaues , ſtalkes , and ſhaped 
flowers,and do differ in that, that this plant bringeth foorth faire ſingle red flowers , and the otha 
of a violet colour as aforelaid. jo Me | 


3 Anemone 


—_— 


HISTORTE' OF PLANTS. | 303 


3 Anemone maxima Chalcedonica dolyanthos. : 4 Anemone Chalcedanica farplict flore. 
The great double VVinde flower of Bithinia. Thefingle Winde flower of Bithinia. 


- 


Z 


% 
2 
= 


- 5 Anemone Bolbocaftan; radice. 
Cheſtnut Winde flower, 


AS TS Ec.T#S Sz 


104 * THE SECOND BOOKE OFTHE 
| *% The deſcription. =w KO IK: | 

5 Thefiftſortof Anemor? hath many ſmall jagged leaues like thoſe of / Coriander , _rocceding 
from a knobby roore,refenibling the roote of Bolbaraſtanwn or carth cheſtnur, The ſtalke riſeth \ 
amongſt the leaues of two handes high, bearing atthe top a ſingle flower , conſiſting of a pale or 
border of little purple leaves, ſometimes red, andoficn of a white colour fer aboura blackith poin- 
tell, chruimed ouer with many ſmall blackiſh haires. 
6 The fixthath-very broade leaues in reſpect of all the reſt of the Anemones, nor vnlike to thoſe of 
the common Mallowe, but greene on.the ypper part and tending to rednefſe vnderneath, like the 
leaues of Sowe breade.Ir hath vpon very little footeſtalkes ſmall yellowe flowers : bur my ſelfe can 
giue youno certaine knowledge of the plant; bicauſe I did neuerfee it: yet haue I inmy garden 
growing all the other ſorrs, of which Ecan more certainly write. Theroote(ſaith my autho)is a fin- 
ver long,thicke,and knobby, 5Y (i-46 


> Amemone Geranifolia. [ '  $ AnemoneOMathiolk 
Storkes bill Winde flower. _ b Mathiolus white Winde flower, 


7 The ſeuenth hath many large leaucs deepelycut or iagged, in ſhape like thoſe of the Storks bil 
or Pinckneedle: among which riſeth vp a naked ſtalke,ſer about toward the top with the like leaues, 
bur ſmaller and mare Finely cut,bearingat the top of the ſtalke a ſingle flower, confiſting of many 
{mall blewe leaues,which do change ſomtimes into pnrple,and oftentimes into white, fer about 4 
blackiſh pointell with ſome fmall threds like vatoapale or border. The roore is thicke and knod- 


bie. XK 


$ Thecightſort of CHremone hath leaues like vnto the garden Crowefoote. The ſtalke REL 

; from amongſt the leaues of a foote high, beating at the top faire white lowers made of fiue 
leaves: m the middle whereof are many little yellowe chines or threds. Theroote is made of mal} 
flencer threds or ſtrings,contrarieto allthe reftof the Winde flowers, 


g Anon 


TO: 
. 


k_AAES TeaSae 6 


' | HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 305 
9 Anemone trifolia. | Io Anemone Papaner acea. o 


three Winde flower. barre: of . Poppie Winde flower, 


| *% The deſcription. ay Fox ay 
9 Theninth ſort of Anemone hath many leaues like vntothe common medowe Trefoile,fleightly 


| ſniptaboutthe edges like a ſawe: on the top of the ſlender ſtalkes ſtanderh a fingle white flower 


ending to purple,conſiſting of cight ſmal leaves,reſembling'in ſhape the flowers of common field 
Crowfoote. The roote is knobbie with certaine ſtrings faſtned thereto. 
19; Thetenth kinde of 4xzemonec hath many iagged leaues cutecuen to the_middlerib, reſembling 
theleaties of Geraniwn colunbinwn,or Doucs foote. The leaues that do embrace the tender weake 
ſtakes are fAat and fleightly cut. The flowers grow atthe top of the ſtalkes , of a bright ſhining pur- 
p'ecolour ſer about a blackiſh pointell,and fmall thrums or chiues like apale, The roote is knobby, 
thicke,and verie brittle,as are moſt of rhoſe of the Anemones. | OR: 

By |  *Theplace. 

Allthe ſorts of Anemonesare ſtrangers,and not founde growing wilde in England; notwithſtars 
Ging all and cuery ſort of them,do growein my garden very plentifully. ; | 

| | MN * The tame. es 

They do flower from the beginning of Ianuarie to thgende of April, at what time the flowers 
do fade,and the ſeede flicth away withthe winde,jif there be any ſecede atall; the which Icoulde ne- 
veras yet obſerue. | | | | 
; | * The names. | | 

W7wer;, or VWinde flower,is ſo called = 77 <4untbatisofaic, ofthe Winde: for the lower doth 
never openir ſe!fe bur when the winde doth blowe;as Plinie writeth : whereypon allo cps of 


” 7 


Guers Mexbs Pete rin BnglithWinde flower, 2095 0757 oarnants © 


'Thoſerth'doublefloivery arecatied in the Turkie toorig Giil/and OwlarHiter : and thoſefvich 
fmalliazgettleaues ahdYottble flowersare calleÞZale benzrde,and Galipoli lake, They do'call thoſe: 
vidifinall iagged leaues 4nd fingle Rowers BIA Binioade avid Brurgarre, OO 
| | *% The temperature. | ——_—— | 
© Allthekindes of amemone rare ſbarpe; biting roongjarid of abiding qualitie, © 2 ®'\ A 
| V1 | *T 


= 


306 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
KEEL + Thewertnes. | | 

A - Thelcaues ſtamped,and the iuice ſniffed vp intothe noſe, purgeth the head mightily, 

B Therootechampedor chewedprocureth ſpitting, and cauſerh water and flegme to run foonk 
of the mouth.,as Pellitoric of Spaine doth, : | 

© Irprofiteth in colliries for the cics,ro ceaſe the inflammarion thereof. 

D The juice mundifieth and clenſeth maligne, virulentand corofiue vicers. 

E The leaues and {talkes boiled and caren of nurſes carffeth them to haue much milke : ir pro- 
uoketh the tearmes,and caſcth the leproſie being bathed therewith, 


«01 wilds Anemones,or Winde flowers. Chap.72. 


&* Thekindes. 


Þ Ike as there be many and diuers ſorts of the garden Anemones : {0 is there of the wilde kindes al, 
ſo,which do varie eſpecially in the flowers. - | 


I Anemone nemoriuwn lutes. | | 2 Anemone nemoran alba, 


_ Yellowe wilde Winde flower. ; White Winde flower. 


ſy 4 IG ; 
_ TRA" INS. = 
TE ALTA en 
IE IN 'y L »% 


J 
q 


| q | * The deſcription. [Togrs ug 
I He firſt of theſe wilde Anemones bath iagged leaues deeply curor indented, which dogro# 
vpon the middle part of a weake and tender ſtalke: at the rop whereof doth ſtandea pre- 
.- tie ycllowe flower made of fixe ſmall leaues,andin the middle of the flower there isalittl 
_—_— poinrell,and cerraine flender chives orthreds. The roote is fmall, ſomewhat thicke &&vetſ| 
rittle. TR «#2 | | 
2 Theſccond hath iagged leanes,not vilike towarter Crowfoote or mountaine Crowfcore.The 


flowe, 


i 


© AFSM 


ofLondon,called maſter 7ohn Franquens very good friende, 


14 THEST @ROD OF! FDANT S:11HT Zdy 


gower groweth atthe top of the ſtalke nor vnliketo the precedent in ſhape, fauing thatthis is of a 


milke whute engender likethe other, I haue in my garden qne of this kigde with white flo- 
ers very doubIe,AY (0 dtetBh ne dcltwarigihwtoeby | ull merchant 


\ Aves) | Waay\ = 
? The wilde ne. 


f. 


"MK 


4 


Y | | | 
| NA DOE 
JE ZN |, 


SP * The deſeription. | 
p . urs thirde fort hath flowers of a purple colour ? agreeing in euery other reſpe& with the reſt of 


4. Thefourth hath many ſmall leaues deepely cut about the edges, cuen to the middle ribbe like 
thoſe ofCheruile. The flowers are of a lighrpurpliſh colour tending to ſcarlet, which makerhthar, 
thatwecallbluſh colour,antis inother reſpects like the other. 1 5 11 3307 "I 
welfer aconrod 5fl5 alt | The plate, 1 2} 4p 
Alltheſe wilde Anemones do growein moſt woods & copſes through England, except that with 
the yellowe flower,which as yetl hauc not ſeene: notwithitariding, Thaue one of the grearcr kinds 
"hich beaeth yellowe flowers whole-figure is not expreſſed nor yet deſcribed , for that ir-doth 
Ky notably reſemble thoſe with ſingle-flowers , but.is of ſmall moment, either in beautic of the 
flower or otherwiſe. .: +. oy 
*% The time. 
iTbey flower from the middeſt of Februarie vato the ende of Aprill, or:the midſt of Maie. 
* 92 2 *% The namys. 
| There hath notbeene any that haueſer downe other names then their ſeuerall titles doexprefle: 
*may callthemin Engliſh wilde Anemones,or Winde flowers. th 
| * The —_— and vertues. 


Thefaculties and temperature of theſe plants are referred to the garden ſorts of Monti 


a Of 


z - 
T 3 
4 - 


THE $ECOND 3OOKE ata THE 


of inw henovcr,r Pape finer. Gap. 73. 


Hefirt theſe Paſſ Gower harh matyſinall eaves Finely cur or iagge 4kerhoſeofea 
"T1 rots : among which riſe vp naked ſtalkes, rough and bairie; ;whimeupon do growe beauti 
full lowers bell faſhion, of a bright delaied purple colour: in the bottome whereof Lt 
_ weth atuftofyellow thrums, andin the midele of hecheumsthouſtech font fill paepl 
rell: when the whole flower is paſt there ſucceedeth an head or knoppe , compact of many 
w_ lockes, and in the ſolide parts of thekniops lieth the cede fatandhoarie, euery ſcede 
his own final haire hanging at it. Therooteis kako four xs 
cot thoſe of = CAnemones , (as it doth allother parts verie notablie reſemble) whereof no doubt 
is akin | 
2 There is no difference at all in leaues, woes, or ſeedes, keivecud hired Paſſe flower and 
| theprecedent, norin anyother int, burin checolour of the flowers: for whereas the other are 
ofa purple colour,thele ate of abelghrerhd, which ſetterh forth the difference. 
3 | The white Paſſe flower hath many fine iagged leaues , cloſely couched or thniſt res | 
Slich reſemble an holi-water ſprinckle, agreeing with the othets i in rootes, ſecdes and (hapedf 
Sy re woke | our 3 08 vp emer: 1k oth 


& 


ww 


” RY 


= Rar Ei 5 ot. A. As. 


5 


I « 


SY % FF * YR ID: }ÞIOH FF T IH% TORS. "III nn 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. _ 309 


3 Pulſatillaflore albo. | 
hite Paſle flower. | % Theplace. 


Raellizes writeth, that the Paſle lower growerth , 
in Fraunce in vntoiledplaces : in Germanie they = 
- growe in rough anditonieplaces, and oftentin.cs 
on rockes. F208 | 
Thoſe with purple flowers do growe very plen- 
tifully in the paſture or cloſe belonging-ro the 
 perſonage houſe of a ſmall village ſixe miles from 
Cambridge,called Hilderſham ; the parſons name 
that lived at the impreſſion heereof was waſter 
Fuller,a very kinde and louing man, and wHling to 
ſhewe vnto any man thefaide cloſe, who dcelired 
the ſame, E: 
| % The time. + 
They flower for the moſt part abour Eaſter, 
which hath mooued me to name jr Paſque flower, 
or Eaſter flower: and often they do flower againe 
in September, | 


p_ 


| * The names. } 
Paſſe flower is called commonly in Latine Pul- 
fſatilla + and of ſome Apmmmriſme: in French 'Co- 
welourdes : in Dutch Bnectenchell: inEngiith 
Þaſaue flower,or Paſſe flower: and atter the Lacm 
name Pwlſarel!, or Flawe Rowerz in Cambr.dge- 
ſhire where they grow, they are namied Coventry 
bels. 
*% The temperature, _ | 


. | ; \ | Paſſeflowerdoth extremely bitc , and exulce- 
rateth and eateth into the skin if ir be ſtamped and applied to any paitof the bodiez whereupon 
it hath beene taken of ſome to be a kinde of Crowfoote, and not without reaſon , for that itisnot 


nferiorto the Crowfſootes: and therefore it is hot and dric, 


% The vertaes. | 


There is nothing extant in writing among authors of any peculiar vertue , but they ſerue onely 
forthe adorning of gardens apid garlands, being flowers of great beautie, =- - þ' 


Of eAdonu flower. (hap.74- 
The deſeription. 

1 T7 He firſt hath verie many ſlender weake ſtalkes, trailing or leaning to the grounde, ſet on 
4 cuerypart with fine iagged leaucs very deepely cur like thoſe of Camomill, or rather thoſe | 

of Maiweede : vpon which ſtalkes do growe-{mall redde flowers , in ſhape like the felde 
Crowfoote, with a blackiſh greene pointell.in the middle, which being growne to maturitie tum- 
argu - wool grecnith bunch of leeds, in ſhape like a lictle bunch of 'grapes,.. The rooteis ſmall 

reddic, edt 4 * 
2 The ſecond differeth not fromthe precedentinany onepoint,butin the colour of the flowers, 


Wh are of a perfect yellowe colour,wherein confiſteth che ditference. | 
| | V 3 | 1 Flos 


zis THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| 1 Flos Adonis fore rubro. | 2 Flos_Adonts flore lutes. 
is red flower, | | | ' Adonis yellow flower, 


- pe - 
* = 
» : 4 - - 
# bd __ 
” 
# 
” 
P -, 
% 


% 


P's . " 7 4 : 
IS: la Y} 
TEES 
RYE IT 
AY 


The red flower of Adonis groweth wilde in the weſt parts of Englande among their corne,euen 
as Maie-weedeglothin other parts, and is likewile an enimie to corne as Maie-weed is from thence 
I brought che ſeede,and hane ſowen it in my garden for the beautie ofthe lowers ſake, That with - 
the yellowe owes is a ſtranger in England, * | | 
OHIM © The time, | (93S 
They flower in the fommer moneths,Maie,lunc,and Iulic,and ſometimes latcr. 
| if *% Thenames. © | | 
Adonis flower is calledin Latine Flos Adonis, and Adonidis : of the Dutch men Feldzo(zlin:n 
Engliſh we may call it red Maythes : by which nawe it is called of them that dwell where it gry 
weth naturally, and generally red Camomill : in Greeke iesv0:wr , and Erantheman ; our 
women do call it Rolearubic. * Thetemperature. | | 
There hath not beene any that hath written of the temperature heereof: notwithſtanding, 
farre as the taſte thercofſhewerh,it is ſomerhingh-r,but not much. | 
| *% The vertw's. | | 
| The ſecede of Adonis flower is thought to be good againſt the ſtone : among the auncients itwas 
not knowne to haue anic other faculuc: albeit experience hath of late taught vs , that the ſeede 
ſtamped,and the powder giuenin wine, ale or beere to drinke , doth woonderfully and with great 
cttc& helpe the collicke.. WE 


Of Dockes. Chap.75. 

| | | * The kindes. | 

ID Hoſeorides ſerteth foorth fower kinds of Docks, wilde or ſharpe pointed Docke; garden Docke; 
rounde leated Docke; and the ſoure Docke called Sorrel] : befides theſe the later Herbariſtes 

have added certaine other Dockes alſo,which I purpoſe romake mention of, FER | 


1 


— = -=- LAG 


TE > odio 


vn N 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. [1 311 
1 Lapathum acutwn. | [1 2 Lepathun acution minimn. 
Sharpe pointed Docke: | | Small iharpe Docke. | 


a _—_—, 
V 
"4 


AY 


% The deſcription. | | 

Hat which among the Latines ſignifieth to ſoften,eaſe,orpurge the bellie, the ſame ſigni- 
fication hath a=, among the Grzcians: whereof Lapathum indax#«de, (asfome do 
 reade)tooke their names for herbes which are vſed in pottage and medicine , verie well 
'tohauec the power of clenſing of theſe there be many kindes and differences, great ſtore 

every where growing , among whom is that which is now called ſharpe pointed Docke, or ſharpe 
leafed Docke. It ure; alwaics in moiſt medowes and by running (treames, having long narrow 
leaues ſharpe & hard pointed; among the which commeth vp round hollow ſtalks of a browne co- 


' bur-hating jointslike knees, garniſhed with ſuch like leaues,but ſinaller : at the ende wherof grow 


many flowers of a pale colour, one aboue another; and afrer them commeth a browniſh three 
ſquare ſeede, lapped in browne chaffic huskes like Patience. The roote is great, long, and yellowe 


within, 


2 Theſecond kinde of ſharpe pointed Doc 
leedeinrundles abour his braunchesim ch 
mer; called alſo ſharpe-pointed Dotke;-- 
F- " > 05940139 9vgh The place. PIE | 
Theſe kindes of Docks do grow;as'is beforefaide, in medowes and by riuets ſides, 
They flower in IuneandIulic: ig 1 9c? 
| 1% The names. 


likethe firſt, but much ſmaller,and doth beare his 
t huskes; like Sorrell, not ſo much in vicas the for- 


_ Theyarecalled in Latin Lopathuiv aturws, kumex Lats Lputhion.of ſome Oxylepathum:in 


ngliſh Dacke and ſhape poinred Dock, the greater and the leffer: of the Grecians 3Z+4=%»; in 
a Dutch UWengelwurt3, Strei urt3 : in Italian Rombice :in-Spanith Roman, Paradtelly, in 
Dutch Patich(which worde is derined of Lapethion) and alfo Pecrdickt in French Pzreile, 
F-20015 (5:47 bet % The nature and vertues. LIE Coty © 42th 
Theſe herbes are of a mixture berweene colde and heate, and almoſt dric inthe thirde degree, A 

| V 4 | | cſ>ecially 


5 


= EY 


302 THE SECOND BOOKE "OF THE 


eſpecially the ſeede which is veric aftringent.' 

B "The —_— of anyof the kindes of Dock 

flixe,and caſeth the paines of the ſtomacke. | |» | 

C Therootesboiled ill they be very fofrand ſtamped with barrows greaſe,andmade inte an vine. 

ment; helpeth the itch and all ſcuruie ſcabs and mangines. And for the ſame purpoſe itſhall bene. 
 ceſlarie toboile them in water, as aforeſaid,and the partie to bebarhed and rubbed therewith, 


es drunke in wine ſtopperh the laske and blouddie 


; Of water Dockes. Chap.78. . 


Hydrolapathum magnum. ml 4 .Hydrolapathum minus. 
: ETD =l Small water Docke. 


4 hed 


| 
j 
| 
| 


- He Great water Docke hath very 


dens among goodand | | 
: wherefore I intende not ro ſpend further time about his 


3 Higpolg 


; 


HISTORIE :OF- PLANTS. 313, 


| i « polapat hum atiuwn. =_ 6 Hr athum rotundifolium. 
lc . Pados ,ot tlie Rubarbe, | Ballads Rubarbe, 


* (IO ' 
ka th 4% 


Wl 
IN 


ll IN HW 


it. - 2b * Thedeſcription.. =p bt = 
5 Thegarden Patience hath very ſtrong ſtalkes , rrowed or chamfered, of tenor twelue fore 
high when it growerh in fertill grounde, ſer about with great large leaues like to thoſe of the water 
Docke, hauing alongſt the ſtalkes rowarde che toppe flowgrs,of alight purple colour declining to 
brownneſſe, The ſecede is three ſquare, conteined ui thinne chaffic huskes , like thoſe of the com- 
mon Docke, The roote is verie great, browne without and yellowe within,in colour and taſte like 
.thetrue Rubarbe. ls bd {PIR 


[ 


6 Baſtarde Rubarbe hath great broade rounde leaues , in ſhape like thoſe of the great Burre 

Docke,. The ſtalke and ſeedes are o like vnto the precedent ,thar the one cannot be knowne from 
the other; ſauing that the ſeeds of this are ſomwhar leſſer, The root is exceeding greatand hicke, 
veric like ynto the Rha of Barbarie, as well in proportion as in colour and taſte; and purgerth, after 
the ſame maner, but mult be taken in greater quantitic , as witneſleth that famous learned phi- 

| ltionnowe liuing, maſter doctor Bright and others, who haue experimented the ſame... 

| 7 The ſeventh kinde of Docke is beſt knowne. vnto all, of the ſtocke or kindred of Dockes; 

ithath long thione leaues, ſometimes redde ineueric part thereof, and often' ſtripped heere and 

there with lines and ſtrakes , of adarke red colour: among which riſe vp ſtiffe brittle ſtalkes of the 


lame colour; on the toppe whereof come: foorth ſuch flowers and ſee : AS the common wilde 


—_—— CO ——w_ 


Docke hath, The roote is likewiſe red,or of a bloudie colour, . 1... 
| They dogrowe for the moſt pact in ditches and water courſes,very common through Englande, | 
Thetwo laſt dogrow in gardens,my ſelfe and others in London andelſewhere,haue themgrowing * 
orour vie in Philicke andchirurgerie, | RE OE TE $2 IO 


. hs 3ak 


| 3 717 v 181 | bf + BEG. ef . t 4 
hg the Dockes, doriſevpinthe ſpring af the yeere, and cheir ſeede is ripe in June and Au- 


. | | | | * The 


_—* » »* WW 


\ Za2- THE SECOND BOOKE 'OF THE 
eſpecially the ſeede which is veric _, _ | q 
B Thepowderof anyof the kindes of Dockes drunke in wine , ſtoppeth the laske and bloydgie 
- flixe,andeaſeth the paines of the ſtomacke. | | | 
'C Therootesboiledrill they be very ſoft,and ſtamped with barrows greaſe,andmade inte an vine. 
ment; helpeth the itch and all ſcuruie ſcabs and mangines. And for the ſame purpoſe it ſhall bene. 


\ 


ceſlarie toboile them in water, as aforcſaid,and the partie to bebarhed and rubbed therewith, 


| Of water Dockes. Chap.78. >. 


2 Hydrolepathum magnum. 4 Hydrolapathum minus. 


Great water Docke.  _ * SmallwaterDocke. 


4 
1 


3 Fg7 He Great water Docke hath very long and greatleaues, ſtiffe, and harde, not vnlike to 
T the garden Patience,bur much longer and broader. The ftalke riſech- vp to a great height, 
oftentimes tothe height of fiue foorg or more, The flower groweth at the top of the ſtake 
in ſpokie tufts,browne of colour, The ſeede is conteined in chafhe huskes,three ſquare,of aſhining 
pale colour. The roote is verie great,thicke ,browne withour,and yellowiſh within. | | 
The Small water Docke hath long crooked and crompleld leaues}; plaited or folded in d- 
uers parts,ſer vpon a ſtiffe ſtalke. The flowers growe from the middle of the ſtalke ypwarde inſpo+ | 
kie rundels,ſer in ſpaces by certaine diſtances rounde abour the ſtalke , as are the flowers of Hore- 
hounde: which Docke is of all thekinds moſt common, and of lefle vie, and takerl1 no pleafureot 
delight inany one foile or dwelling place, butis founde almoſt every where, 'as wellvpon the lande 
as in wateric places, buteſpecially in gardens among goodand holſome porherbes , being there 
= 5-40 then welcome or deſired: wherefore I intende not toſpend further time about Ws 
c{cription, 1188 SW 2c 6 Kc | 


3 Hippo 


verielike ynto the Rha of Barbaric, as well in proportion as in co 


HISTORIE :OF- PLANTS. / 313. 


Hippolapathum ſatiuum. | 6 Hippolapat hum rotundifolium. 
Parks ,ot wire Rubarbe. | pede Rubarbe, 


— J 
- ” : n = mb 
> —— : * hy —Y 
- - / 3 / T. = 
E ; 4 
"4 \ 
wr. ; , \ | - 
—_ \ | , Ny 
2 — i mY 
* - p* of 
. \ 
— bs = "4 0 


F q' 
ti, F of at 
WY 


X 
AST, 


5 Thegarden Patience hath very ſtr ſtalkes, þ rrowed or chamfered, of ten or twelue foote 
high when it growerh in ferrill grounde, ſer about with great large leaues like to thoſe of the water 
Docke, hauing alongſt the ſtalkes rowarde the toppe flowgrs,of a light purple colour declining to 
brownneſſe, The ſeede is three ſquare, conteined utthinne chathe huskes , like thoſe of the com- | 
mon Docke, The roote is verie great, browne without and yellowe within,in colour and taſte like 
thetrue Rubarbe. [: 204 MPR EAR FAR RO ha 

6 Baſtarde Rubarbe hath great broade round leaues , in ſhape like thoſe of the great Burre 
Docke, The ſtalke and ſeedes are fo like vnto the precedent ,that the one cannot be knowne from 
theother; ſauing that the ſecds of this are ſomwhar lefler, The root is exceeding great and NIC 
lour and taſte; and purgeth, a 


the ſane maner, but mult be taken in greater quantitic , as witnefſeth that famous learned phi- 


h % # 


ltionnowe liuing, maſter door Bright and others, who haue experimented the ſame... > 
7 The ſeventh kinde of Docke is beſt knowae. ynto all, of the ſtocke or kindred of Dockes; 
thathlong thione leaues, Finetimes redde in eyeric part thereof, and often' ſtripped heere and 
there with lines and ſtrak&F, of adarke red colour: among which riſe yp ſtiffe brittle ſtakes of the 
lame colour; on the toppe whereof come foorth ſuch flowers anc ſeede as the common wild 
Docke hath, The roote is likewilc red,or of a bloudie colour, . Roa Bee NIE 


\ They do.growe for the moſt part in Ctc 


} 
, 


& Moſtof the Dackes. doriſe vpin the ſpring of the yeere, and their ſcede is ripe in June and Au- 


* The 


314 THE SECOND' BOOKE' OF 'THE 


RC ben) Wks. *% The names. o ad | 

The Dockeis called in Grecke »4=%: in Latine Kumex, and Lapathwmgyct Plinie inhis 19 book 
x2.chaprter ſecmeth ro attribute thename of Kaex onely to the garden Docke, _ | 

The Monkes Rubarbe is calledin Latine &amex ſatiuus,and Patient ia,or Patience, which worde 
is borrowed of the French,who call this herbe Paczence : after whom the Dutch menname this 
herbe alſo Patientie : of fome Rhabarbarum Monachorur, or Monkes Rubarbe: bicauſe as it ſhould 
ſeemeſome Monke or other hauec vſed the ropte heereofin ſteede of Rubarbe. 

Bloudwoorr, or bloudy Patience , is called in Latine Lapathun F pore of fome Sangui 
Dr aconis, of the bloudie colour wherewith the whole plant is poſleſt , and is of potherbeg the 
chiefe or principall,hauing the propertie of the baſtarde Rubarbe; bur of lefle force in his purging 
, | f £ * The temper ature. 

Generally allthe Docks are colde, ſome little and moderately, and ſome more: they doe all of 
them drie , bur not all after one maner :notwithſtanding, ſome are of opinion that they are crie 
almoſt in the third degree, 8! | 
+ The wertues. 

A Theleauesof the garden Docke orPaticnce may be caten, and are ſomewhatcolde, but more 
moiſt,and haue withall a certaine clammineſſe; by reaſon whereof, theyeaſily and quickly paſſe 
through the belly when they be eaten : and Nene writeth that all the Dockes being boileg doe 
mollifie the bellie, which thing alſo Horace Bath noted in his ſecond booke of Sermons, the fourth 
Satyre writing thus, 


| ———— $1 dur a mor abitur aluus 

Muzilus,e wiles pellent obHantiaconche, 

WH 7 1-44-08 ahi brew herkl oY 

meg callechir a ſhortherbe,being gathered before the ſtalke be growen yp ; at which rime itis firteſ 
to be eaten, o! | 

B Andbeing ſodden, it is nor ſopleaſantto be eaten as either Beetes or Spinage: it ingendreth 
moiſt bloud of a meane thickneſſe, and whichnouriſherh little. 5 

C The leaues of the ſharpe pointed Docke are colde and drie : butthe ſeede of Patience, and 
water Docke,do coole, with a certaine thinnefle of ſubſtance, — 

D The decoction of the roores of MonkesRubarbe is drunke againſt the bloudie flixe , the lake, 
the wambling of the ſtomacke which commeth of chioler : and alſo againſt the ſtinging of ſerpents 
as Dzoſcorides writeth. "Bets 4 PEE woe 

E Irisallogoodagamſtthe ſpitting of bloud, being taken with Acacia(or as ſome would hae i, 
the dried iuice of floeg)as Plinie writeth, ©! | | 


. 


no 


F MonkesRubarbe or Patience is anexcellent holſome pothetbe; for being pur intothe potrage 
in ſome reaſonable quantitie, it doth looſen the kelly; helpeth the iaunders; the tympanie and ſuch 
like diſeaſes,proceeding of colde cauſes. *'! pos 

If you take the roots of Monks Rubacbe,8&red Madder, of eche halfe a pound; Sena fower oun- 
ces; anniſe ſeede andlicorice,ofeche two qunees ; Scabiouſe and agrimonie,of eche one handful; 
ſlice the rootes of the Rubarbe, bruſe the anniſe ſeede and licorice, breake the hearbes with your 
hands, and put them.into a ſtone por called afſteane, with fower gallons of ſtrong ale to ſteeper 
infuſe the ſpace of three daies: and then drinke'this liquor as your ordinaric drinke for three weeks 
rogither at the leaſt, though the longer you rake ir, ſo much the berter ; prouiding in a readines an 
other ſteanſo prepares that you may haue one vnder another,being alwais carefil to keepe a good 
dier: it cureth rhe dropſic,the yellowe iaunders, all maner of irch, ſcabs, breaking out,anc mang- 

nefle of the whole bodie: ir purifieth the bloud from all corruption; prevaileth againſt the greene 
ſickneſle very greatly,and all oppilations orſtoppings: wakieck yoong wenches to looke faire and 
cherrie like, and bringeth downe their rearmes;the ſtopping whereof hath cauſed the ſame. 
"The ſeede of baftarde Rubarbe is of a miifeſt aftringene nature, infornuch that it cureth the 
bloudieflixe,, mixedwith the ſeede of Sorrell,and giuen to drinke in redwine. | 
* There haue notbeene any other faculties attribyred to this plant either of the auncient or [ate! 
writers, butyenerally of all it hath beene refetreto the other Docks or Monkes Rubarbe,of which 
number 1 afſire my ſelfe this is the beſt ; anddoth-approch neereſt vnto the true Rubarbe. Manic 
reaſons induce me ſo tothinke and faic: fiſt this hath the ſhape and proportion of Rubarbe, i 


4 


—_— * "5" = 


-— =- 


.® 


— 
= 


a ho > T** file rw GW Fs my 


5 BR eo eR3 


HISTORIE OE PLANTS. © 315 


{ame colour, both within and without,without any difference. They agree as well in taſte as ſmell: 
ircoloureth the ſpittle of a yellowe colour when it is chewed , as Rubarbe doth: and laſtly ir pur- 
gcth the belly after the ſame gentle manner that the right Rubarbe doth , onely heerein ir dif- 
fereth , that chis muſt be giuen in three times the quanritie of the other. Other diftinQions and 
differences with the temperature and cuery a9 Fn vanan LIeaue vnto the learned phiſiti- 
ons of our London colledge (who are very well ableto ſearch into this matrer)as a thing far aboue 
my rcach,beingno graduate, but a countrie ſcholler,as the whole framing of this hiſtorie doth wel! 
declare: but] hope my good meaning will be well caken,confidering I do my beſt,nor doubring bur 
ſome of greater learning will perfe& that which T hauc begun according ro my ſmall skill, efpecial- 
ly the ice being broken vnto him , and the woode rough hewed to his handes. Notwithſtanding 1 
thinke itgoofto ſaie thus much more in mine owne defence : that although there bemanie wants 
and defe&ts in me, that were, requiſite to performe ſuch aworke z yet may my long experience by 
chaunce happen vpon ſome one thing or other that may do the{earned good : confidering what a 
notableexperimentT learned of one Johr Bennet a — of Maidſtone in Kent, a man as flen- 
derly learned as my felfe, which he practiſed vpon a butchers boie of the ſamecowne, as himſclfe 
d vnto me; his practiſe was this : being deſired to cure the forefaide ladde of an ague, which 

did greeuouſly vexe him, he promiſed him a medicine, &for want of one for the preſent(foraſhifr, 
as himlelfe confeſſed vnto me)he tooke out of his garden three or fower leaues of this plantof Ru- 
barbe, which my ſelfe had among other ſimples giuen him , which he ſtamped andftrained with a 
draught of ale,and gaue it the ladde in the morning to drinke: it wrought extremely downwarde 
and ypwarde within one hower after,and neuer ceafſed vnrill night, In theende the ſtrength of the 
boje ouercame the force of the phiſicke, it gaue ouer working , and the ladde loſt his ague; ſince 
which time (as he faith) he hath cured with the ſame medicine many of the like maladie , having 
eucrgreat regarde vnto the quantitie, which was the cauſe of the violent working in the firſt cure. - 
By reaſon of which accident, that thing hath beene reucaled vnto poſteritie,which heeretofore was 
notſomuch as dreamed of,” Whoſe lun: attempr, may ſet an edge vpon ſome ſharper wit, and 
greateriudgement in the faculties of plants, to ſeeke New into theirnature then any of the aun- 
cients haue done : and none fitter then the learned phiſitions of the Colledge of London; where 
mma) ſingularly well learned,and experienced in naturall __ | 

"The rootes fliced and boiled in the water of Carduus BenediCtus to the conſumption of the 
third part,adding thereto a little honie,of the which decoCtion eight or ten ſponfuls drunke before 
the fir,cureth the ague in two or three times ſo taking itat the mo: vnto robuſtous or ſtrong bo- 
dies twelue ponfuls may be giuen. This experiment was praCtiſed by a worſhiptull gentlewoman 
calledmiſtreſle Anne Wylbraham, vpon divers of hir poore neighbours with good ſucceſle. 


Of Rubarbe. Chap.79. 


%* The deſcription. 

I His kinde of Rubarbe hath very great leaues, ſomewhat ſnipt or indented about the edges 

like the teeth of a ſawe,not a the leaues of Enula campana,called by the vulgar fort 

| |Elecampanebutgreater: a which riſeth vp a ſtraight ſtalke of two cubirs high, bea- 

mgatthe top a ſcalic head like thoſe of Knappeweede, or Jacea maroy: In the middle of which knap 

orhead,thruſterh foorth a faire flower conlitingaf many PrP le threddes, like thoſe of the Arri- 

choke; which being paſt,here followeth a great quantitie of downe, wherinis wrapped long ſeede 

likevnto the _=_ Centorie, which the whole plant doth very well reſemble. The roote is long and 

taicke-blackiſh without, and ofapale colour within : which being chewed maketh the fpirtle veric 
Kllowe,as doth the Rubarbe of Barbaric. — | 


al 
. Wo i 


THE SECOND |\BOOKE OF THE 


; l wx The teſcription. 
SOR SSH, | 3 Touching theRubarbe vſedinfhoppes ofths 
mn, B00 3 | | forme or bigneſſe of rheplanr it felfe, or of the 
' | Traues or flowers, wefinde nothino ſet downintthe 
| # olde writers : D/-ſcorz4es hath expreſled a certajne 
 ? likeneſſe, ſubſtance and colour of the roores onely: 
_ | 7 and yet but of that Rubarbe which 'groweth {© 
: | thoſeplaces that arebeyonde rhe ſtreight of Con. 
| | ſtantinople, called the blacke fea,and Pontus 
' } Euxinus, or alſo Mzotis, called the white ſea, 
; | | Thegreatnesofthe rootes of Rubarbe(and asit 
«As very like of the whole plant itſelfe alſo)dothnor 
' | alittle varie according to the difference of thete. 
4 gions,ground and weather, which(as we mwſt ever 
'! Noweand thenrepeat) be oftentimes great cauſes 
| | of alteration and difference in plants. 
' * Butſecingrhere is extant a picture of the greene 
' | Rubarbe with his lowers, ſtalke,and roores,irſhall 
' notbe amiſle to fer foorth h:s deſcription likewiſe, 
| | | Rubarbe hatha greene thicke ſtalke a footehigh, 
Q : garniſhed with many leaues , of two ſpans long, 
Th "preg longer or ſhorter,according to their ape, 
|  'narrowe toward the ſtemme, broad and rounde at 
' | the toplike apeare, bowing backwardes towarde 
Why | the ground,couered ouer with a certaine downeor 
L=Z=> | | woollines whenthey be yoong 8 greene,but when 
Ro  ——_ ———— | dey beolde fapaly lowith colour: outofthe 
2 Rhabarbarwn florens. 34 = Rhabarbarum ſxcatum. _—. 


Flowring Rubatbe. a0 The dry roores of Rubarbe. 


A C- — 
LE CES 
7” > 
: HIT <5" | RE . PF! 
*. * ” 
y_—_ I , WAG 
> RA of 
- 
£ "a, os md " yu 
=> %a 4 
AD « ww». 
> 


2 _— Tur THY 
877 / SN UL Wer a i ' 
<> ; : a { - 
"017 : 
.- F/ a, ; A \,\ 

| p.! . 


5 aj 
ret * - > 
a 4 I : = 
- - LEE 
0 , - * 
- ” % 1.4 4 "x 
. / & E « of 
o s D it j 197 w EY : oy "i 
- 4 - W k N 
, T Y $3 x x ks : 3 W 
y | y ; y ? : " 71 
[4 && & 
F; . 41 [1 4 o #-3 , 1 2, . 
» : : : - 5. | % 
” & } - 5 s. SY / : 4 | " RY WR. L 
: 4 x < F + »#d 1 ; * » * 
wr = ETC TIMO RIZR 3 A 
4 þ-\ 7 $4. 3% y 0 « 
- ; L y 's F a + o 
4 A MJ $ fi 74 LE "6, ., ” x 
: [7 4 : - " 
"; o « 4 : [ . I's : 1 mw. . x 4 —, LA 
*% , : J E 
- 4 ! : : : "Ge n 
[1 - e —_—; - 
: [ $ . : : , 1 , 
MA 5 - A ad; 
£ : 7 5 © > - PEO f \ %. 
* - K 3 w 
: b, bh f ” 
y & & ” * _ MW L 
F., _ i 
% x - f 
: 1 y 
4 * 4 4 " 
| 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. " 317 
| amid ; chere groweth vp aflender ſtalkbearing flowers, conſiſting of fige little leaues 
middle of pr ieneryen 4 ſmall beaten without mb which tinne from white to yellowe, in 
conſu red 9 garden violet, bur greater,&of a ſtrong vnpleaſant ſauour, The root growerh two or 
rue ndtuls deepe in the grounde,wrappedin = of adarke browne colour ; ſomerimes as 


'kooeasthecalfe of a mans legge , ſometimes leſſer: from the maine roote ſhoote foorth manie 


'Sreddes and ſmall ſhootes,which ſpread farre abroadin the carth,wherebyirincreaſeth, 


1" eto way =? | JR; Sfrigh 
of Pontus dried. cription. 

_ . | \ the Ponricke Rube be is lefler and flenderer 
Jas that of Barbarie, Touching Ponticke Ru- 
barbe Djoſcorides writeth thus, Rha that diucrs 
call Rheon, which groweth in thoſe places that 
are beyond Boſphorus,from whence it is brought, 
hath blacke rootes like to the great Centorie, bur 
leſſer and redder,ao9wes , thatis to fay,withour ſinel 
(as the copies haue ) looſe or ſpungic , and ſome- 
chinglight, andofthe kindes ofRubarbe of lealt 


woorth. | | 
| | **Theplace. 

Iris —_ our of the countrie of Sina( com- 
monly called China) which is towarde the eaſt in * 
the vpper part of India, and that India which is 

without theriuer Ganges: and not at all Ex Scent- 
 Farwnprouincia, (as many do vnaduiſedly thinke) 
which is in Arabiathe happie , & far from China: 
it groweth onthe ſides of the river Rha as _dmza- 
mus Marcella faith, which river ſpringeth out of 
the Hyperboreimountaines in the highnomhern 
parts,and running through Muſcouic,it fallerh in- 
to the: Caſpian or Hircan ſea :' as alſo vpon the 
banckes of the riucr Rha,now called Volga. 
* The choice. 
The beſt Rubarbe is that which is gw : 
from China freſh andnewe, of a light purpli 
| red, with certaine vaines and braunches, of an vn- 
certaine yarietie of colour,commonly whitiſh : but when it is old the colour becommerh ill fauored 
byturning yellowſh or pale,but more, if it be worme eaten : being chewedin the mouth it is ſome- 
what gluie and clammic and of a ſaffron colour , which being rubbed vpon paper or ſome white = 
thing ſheweth the colour more plainly: the ſubſtance therof is neither harde or cloſely compacted, 
nor yetheauie ; but ſomthing light, and as it were in a middle berweene harde and looſe and ſome 
thing Þungic: it hath alſo a Grants andpleafant ſmell. The ſecond in goodnes is that which com | 
meth tom Barbarie. The laſt and woorſt from Boſphorus and Pontus. = | 
* The names. | | | 
Itis commonly called in Latine Xhe Barberwn, or Rha Barbaricwn, of divers Rhew Barbarwn: 
he Moores and Arabians do more truely name it Rawed Seni,4Sinenſiprouimeia; from whence it is 
brought into Perſia and Arabia,and afterwards into Europe: and likewiſe from Tanguth, through 
the lande of Caraia into the lande of the Perfians,whereof the Sophic is the ruler, and from thence 
nto Egypt,and afterwards into Europe. Itis called of the Arabians and the people of China, and 
the parts adiacent, Kavend Cini ,Raued Seni, and Kaned Scenz, in ſhops Rhabarbarwn : in Engliſh = 
andRewbarbe. ' * The temper ature. FS 
| Rubarbe is of a mixt ſubſtance, temperature and facultic: ſome of the parts thereof are carthie, 
binding and drying : others thinue,acreous wit and purging, | | #5 4k 
- *% The vertues. 207 | | 
Rubarbe is commended of Dieſcorides againſt windineſle, weakneſle of the ſtomacke and tn 
__ ? | pricfes 


Pg v9 OHH 


+ 4 
OY . 
"3, 
o 


m_ I 
— 


TN 


AVDOETSITTREETTY. v . 
" Ns KORTE LEP 
_ Ws. 


'31i8' THE SECOND BOOKE-OBR:THE 


griefcs thereof, conuulſions, diſeaſes of the ſpleene, liver;apd kidneics, g5piogs andinward or 

ings of the guts, infirmities of the bladder ie: awed TO apantanrign 

Paine inthehuckle bones, ſpittingof bloud,hoxrtneſle otbreagh, rexingyrithe hicket it ern 
| Gy the laske proceeding of rawehumours fits in agues ; and ial the bitivgs 0 ye. 

B Moreouerhe faith,that it taketh away blatke and blew $6 © {break Ddh Each 
mixed with vineger and the place anole Beni 0s i "FASL gHODARes. Cite 
C  Galenaftirmethitto be good for burſtings,cramps andconuulfions,andfar thoſerharare ver 

* ſhoft winded,and thar ſpit bloud, _ | 0 kwÞ:nagTloadigdift. Li 

- D Burrouching the purging faculrie,neither Dieſcorides not Galen hath written any thing, bicauſe 


it was notvſed in thoſe daics to purge with. Galen helde opinion , thatthe thinne acrious parts doe 
makethe binding qualiticot more torce:, not bicauſe ir doth reſiſt the colde and earthi lubſtance 
but by reaſon that it carieth che ſame, & makethir deeply topearce, &therby to wotke the greater 
effe&, the dric and thinne eflence conteining in it ſelfe a urging force and qualitie to open | 
ſtruions, but helped and made more facile bythe brian acrious parts. Paulus AEs; 
ſcemeth to be the firſt that made triall of thepurging facultic of Rubarbe : for in his firſt bogl 4 
chapter he maketh mention thereof, where hereckoneth' turpentine among thoſe wed 

| whieh made the bodies of ſuch as are in health ſoluble. Butwhen we purpoſe, ſaith he, tomakethe 
aarcins more ſtrong,we adde vntoit alittle Rubarbe. The Arabians that followed him broy 
ittoa further vic in phiſicke, as chiefly purging downwardcholer,and oftentimes Selywe: 

E The purgation which is made of Rubarbe is profitable and fit for all ſuch as are troubledwith 
choler, and for thoſe thatare ſicke of ſharpe and rertian feuers, for them that haue the yellow jaur- 
ders,andbad liuers, qo" $4 ! | 

Ir is a good medicine againſt the pleuriſie,inflammarion of thelungs,the ſquinancie or {quincie, 
madnefle, frenſie,inflammarions of the kidnaies, bladder, and al[the wwarde parts, and clpecialle 
againſt Saint Anthonees fire,as well outwardly as inwardly taken. Hs 

Rubarbe is vndoubtedly an eſpeciall good medicine for the liuer and infirmities of the gall, for 
beſides rharirpurgerh foorth cholericke ard naughtic humours , it remooucth ſtoppings outof 
the conduits, || PLN | WM. 

Ir alſo mightily ſtrengthneth the entrailes themſelues ;inſomuch as Rubathe is iuſtly tearmedef 
diuers,the lik ofthe liver; for Galen in his : 1,booke of the methode or manner of curin ,afhirmeth 

, thar ſuch kinde of medicines are moſt fit. andprofitable forthe liver, as haue ioined wits purging 
and opening qualitic,an aſtringent or binding power. The quanttic that is to be giuen, is fromone 
dram to two :andin the infuſion from oneand a halfero three. : : | 

Ir is giuen or ſteeped, and thatin hor diſcaſeswith the infuſionor diſtilled water of Cycorie,En- 
diue,or ſome other of the like nature ; 8& likewiſe in Whaie : andifthere be no heate irmaybe g+ 

xk Irisalſo oftentimes giuen being dried atthefire,bur ſo,that the leaſt or nopart thereof arallbe 

| burned; and being fo vied it is aremedie forthe bloudic flixe, and for all kinds of laskes: foritboth 
purgeth awaynaughtie and —_ humours, andlikewiſc withall ſtopperh the bellic. 

Lhe ſame being dried after the ſame maner doth alto ſtaie rhe puermuch lowing ofthe monthly 
ſickneſle,and ſtoppeth bloud in anic part of the bodie, eſpecially char which commeth throughthe 
bladder; bur it ſhoulde be giuen in a little quantie, and mixed with ſome other bindi | | 

Aeſaes faith,that Rubarbe is an harmeleſſe medicine, and goodatall times and for all ages, and 
likewiſe for children and women with childe, | | 


Of $ orrel. ; Chap. $0. 


| 1 V 
 *%* The kindes. * 
'T Here be diners kindes of Sorrell differing in many points,ſome of the garden,and others wilde, 
ſome great and {ome leſler. £9 bj | 4 Th 


F 3 *0 STD 


T. = = > & T & 5 *% #> > * 


5 


A on © =, SS 


K  o—-EAN 7” 


Te 


HISTORIE. OF PLANTS. 319 


cual hes. dreads. 2 Oxalitaberoſa. - 
c—_— " | Knobbed Sorel 


* The deſeription, 


I Hough Dizſcorides hath not in all things fafficien expreſſed the Oxalides , yet none 
_ . ] oughtrodoubrburthatthey bear cndivced asthe fourth kinde of perovey 

| For though ſome like it well thatthe ſeed ſhould be called D rims, yet that is to be vnder- 

ſtoode according to the Common phraſe , when eger things are confounded with thoſe which be 
harp & fower; elſe we might accuſe him of ſuchignorance as is not amongſt the ſimpleſt women. | 
Moreouer the worde Ox#s doth not onely ſignihe the leafe,but the ſauour and arrnefle, which by | 
ahiguredrawne from the ſharpnes ofkniues edges,is therefore called ſharpe : for «&« xs ſignifieth | 
2 Inarpeorſower juice ;, which pearceth the rogng like a ſharpe knife: whereupon alſo Lapathuns | 
maybecalled Oxli , as itis indeede,bauing leanes thinner, tenderer, and more oileous then Lyra 
11 acatwn, broader next to the ſterme, horned and creſtedlike $ inageand Atriplex: The ſtalks | 
8 much ſtreaked, reddiſh and full of iuice : the roote -yellowe _ fibrous : the {cede ſharpe cor- 

neredand ſhining, growing in chafhe huskes like.the other Dockes. | | 


}  Theſecondekinde of Oxals or Sgrrell,hath Jarge leaues like Parience,confuſedly owing t0- 


Sither vpon a great tall ſtalke,ar the top whereppgrowe tufrs of a ch1ffic ſubſtaunce. The roore is 
tuberous,much like the Peonie, or rather Philipendula,faſtnedto the lower part of che ſtemme with 
wall long ſtrings andHaees;. OO En Ki 
3 » Therhird $.4e of Sorrell growerh yery ſnafl, braunching hither and thither, raking| old 
thegroundirhere irtdmveth,wv crebyir.diſperiech it elfe farreabroade. The leaues are little a 
mnne, having two ſinall leaucs like cares fa ned thereto, in ſhewe like the herbe Sagittaria, - The | 
kede i raſte is like the other of hiskinde, | 


\ 


f 


4 Thefourthkindeof Sorrell hath leaues ſomewhat rgund and corneredyhauing two ſhorr cares 
&d vnto the ſame, The ſcede and rootein taſte islike the other Sorrels, | | 


2 : Oxali4 


320 THE . SECONDE . BOOKE'| OF THE 
\ 1 4 Oxalic Franca ſen Romana. 
f Round Sorrell, +A 


*T he deſeription, 


> REN SSEF. ,. Englande, andhath veric large leaues, in ſhape 
[. 520 8" © like the garden Sorrell, b utcurled and crowp 

LE LELNIPESE  aboutthe edges as is the curled Colewoorte, The 

-£Y ! os, © ſalkriſcth'vp among the leaves, ſet here &there 

#5" * with thelike leaues,bur lefler: the flowers, ſeede, 

= androotes arc like the common Sorrellor four! 

'- 6: Thefinall Sorrelſthat groweth vypondryba- 

' © renſandiedirchbankes, hath ſmallgraſſic leaues, 

| - * ſemewhat forked or croſſed oucr like the ctoll 

.'-\ hilt of a rapier. The ſtalkes riſe vp among the 

+ -*eaues,ſmall,weake,and tender, of the ſame love! 

 *'''raſterhar the leaucs are of. The flower,ſeede,ad 

g j roote , is like the other, Sorrels, but alcogithet 


| ..} 4" The ſwalleſt fort of Sorrell is like vnto the 
GY precedent, fauing that the loweſtleauesthatls 
'  , flat'ypon the grounde be ſomewhat rounde, liks 
|- | ned the ral Bell aower, called Conpun 
2 frm » Rotwundifolia, which ſenteth foorth tmedlr 


Cace, ATR 
b | 6 Os is 
: , % ff % F 0 


Fe 4 5” This kinde of curled Sorrell is Wo 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS: En 


6 Oxaluninoy, PS FI 
- SmallSonell. " Theſwallt Sorrell. 


* The 
Thecommon Sorrell groweth for the moſt i gardens the ſecond by waters lides: : the tvs - 
lat ypon euerie grauelly or ſandie barren ground,and ditch bankes, 
*% The time. 
They douriſh atthar time,when as the other kinde of Dockes Jo flower, 
% The BANKS. v | 
Garden Sorrell is called in Greeke 3Zexls and drefvels, of Galen ofvaendor, that is to fie, CActdum 
lycthwn,or Acidus Rumex fower Docke: and in ſhops commonly CMcetoſa: in the Germain toong | | 
Sarzampfſer: inloweDurch Surckele,8 $urinck ; the Spaniards Arederes, Agreles and Aze . | 
as: in French Ozejfe, and Serelle; Argrette : MEngliſh garden Sorrell, | 
Theſecondis called of thelarer Herbariſts oſs Acetoſa,and Tubereſins lopathun:in Engliſh | 
binched9rknobbed Sorrell. Eu 
"Thethird is called inEngliſhſheepes Sorrell; in Dutch Schap Surkel. | : 
" Thefourrh Romaine Sbrrell,or rounde Sorrell. | | 
Thefittcurled Sorrell. The fixt and ſeuenth barten Sorrell. | 
Tay 1 The nature. . 
The Sorrels are moderately Coe and drie. 
| * The vettues. 
| he comb vndoubredly called and mightily dric; burbicauſe itis ſower , ir lewiſecuneth 1 A 
onrs, 
iuice heereof in ſummer tinie isa proficableſaucei in many meates, and pleaſanrrothe caſte. B 
Nhooleh an hor ſtomacke: : mooucth apperirp. ro fneate 3 z tempereth the heate of the liver, and 
openerh the ſtopping 5 thereof, | 
 Theleanes arew ſuccefſe addedro ded6tions which are vſedi gg. C 
Theleaucs of Sorrelſ taken in goodquantitie , ſtamped and ſtrained into fowe le , anlapuli D 
therof,cooleth rhe ficke bodic,quencherhthe thirſt, andalaieth the heate of ſuch AS AXETrOW> | 
dledwith peſtilent feuer hor ague,or any preatinflammarion within, 
'Theleaues fodden,and caren mm ofa ach rart, oreaten as meareſofreneth & looſe- E 
nethtlie beſlie,and doth artemper and coolethe God exceedingly. 
The !rede of Sorrell drunke in —_ red wy opppeth the laske and bloodic flixe, | F 


MR, & Ae fue = 


Ra 5 Re Aw Wu 


THE SECOND BOOKE' OF' THE 
_ Of Snehgwrede. Chap.$1. 


''2 Biftorta minor. | 
Small Snakeweede, 


171 au” | 
*, * mW 


: 
' 
\ 
\ 
\ 
_ 
% 
% +» 
: * 
” 
LY . 
: La 
» % a 
a, _ 
oo o— w 2 
0 _ 
w © # _ 
- p—_ 
\ A. >}. Va 
Sz" S 
” Q : 
- Py 
- . 
= _- 
= > 
-— 
% 
4 =_- 
. 


' © 1% The deſcription. 
He great dela Le leaves much 
like Paticnce,bur ſmaller & morewrink 
ledor crumpled, on the vpper fide of a 
; darke greene, and vnderneath ofa blewiſh greene 
| colour, much like Woade, The ſtalke is long, 
| {moothe, andrtender, h at the top 2 ſpiked 
| knaporeare, ſerfull of.{mall whitiſh op 9%. 
clining to;carnation, Theroorcis all in a lumpe, 
. without faſhion ; within of a red colour likemno 
|. taſte ies) the kernell of an acorne:; 
all 'Biſtort hath leaues aboue three 
{ooh kg ,and of the bredth of a mans naile: 
_. thevpper ide i is of a greene colour, and vnder- 
| neathof an ouerworne greeniſh colour : pay 
IAN SS} Sp | pier riead wan fulies he mai 
> Wl 4 if LD Ep : of ioines or $7 ACA 
WE / i Ag \ Fj; LNG | 
FR; W "6 $7 c hee havin Fae 


T Torup an UT Ss | 
[ un a Wore nbc of flo 


TY S_ 7 _ af” 


bk. A. Ad * wm 


;  Omilſed Sore guliaovecin hoteceo 
* Ritems x; i herbe: 


"—_ 


'{ HISTORIE) OFiPLANTS. | 343 


$95 and ſeed. The roote is tuberous like the other, but ſmaller,andnotſo much crooked. 


Broade leafed Snakeweede hath many large vneuen leaues, ſmooth and cene : amon 
ich riſe vp ſmallbrittle ſtalks of rwo handeshigh, bearing at the topa Five ſpite of flowers, like 
no the great Biſtorr, The roote is knobbie or bunched, crookedl y turned or wrythed this way 
and that way,whereof it tooke his name _ he * 

*% Theplace. 
1 Thegreat Biſtort groweth in moiſt and water places,andin the darke ſhadowic woods and is 
very common in moſt gardens, _ : Wes f 
> The mall Biſtort groweth in great abundance, in Weſtmerland, at Crosby, Ranenſwaith, ar 
the head of a parke belonging to one Maſter Pichermg, fromwhenceir hath becne diſperſed into 
many gardens,as alſo ſent vnto me from thence for my garden, 

*% The time. | 
| They flowerin May,and the feedeis ripe in Iune. | 

*% The names. | | | 

Ziftorta is called in m_— Snakeweede; in other places Oiſterloit : in Chesſhire Paſshions and 
Snakeweede, and there vied for an excellent potherbey Itiscalled B:Forre, of his writhed rootes, 
andallo Colabr ina, Serpentaeris Brit nice, Dracontion Pliny,Dracunculus Dedon. and Limonium Ge 
weri. . 


w The nature. 

Biſtort doth coole and dric,in the third degree. | | 

% The vertnes. © | ( 

The juice of Biſtort pur vp into the noſe, preuailerh much againſt the diſeaſe called Pohpw, and 
the biring of ſerpenes,or any venemous beaſt,being drunke in wine,or the water of Angelica. =» 

The roote boiled in wine and drunke,ſtopperh the laske,and bloodie flixezit ſtaieth alſo the ouer- 
much flowing of womens monethly ſickneſles, o 

The roote taken as aforeſaid, ſtaterh vomiting, and healeth the inflammation, and ſorenes of the 
mouth andthrote: ir likewiſe faſteneth looſe teeth, being holden in the mouth for a certaine ſpace , 
andatſundrie times. . | <0 | 


"I " 0 bs | | 
—Tis. i F.+b4 461 FcEL % 
W397 0 LEY tte i JO 1 44k CA 25 3255 
Of Scuruie graſſe,or Spoonewoort. - (hap. $2. 


* The deferiptivn 


bur or” wmber, ofa ſhining greene colour fomemhar broad.hicke hollowe like i Sj. 
rs, x Uo which commerh the ſecede, 


' THE SECOND! BOOKE OF [THE 


wy : , : 


place. 


Lincolneſhire neere yhtothe ſea, as inWhis 

countie. It hath beene founde of lare © owing many 
Lancaſhire,called yeoprrough hill, | 
it will be content with any ſoile,place atſocuer: for proofe whereof,my ſelfe haue ſowen 
che ſcedes of itin my S ers, with whom they flower, flouriſhand 
bring foorth theirſcede ſpicie rake: 
whic y other ſea plants, 


Gdersphjoes 6n the btimdefthe 
aveſe f; xv on the Eſle: | 


e marſhes Holland, in the fame 
om the ſea ſide vpon a great hill in 


| : ' #The | 
The firſt groweth by the ſea ſide ar Hull , at Boſtqp, and Lynne, and in many other places of 
LEG 


ET: 


*# 4 . "Ox, {£4 *4$ F 
H © $4670 b» FH 
- . , « ” ” 
” , Y Fi 1 #- 8” z 4 * ! . - - , 
44 & * Fw Fa# $ 3%/ . TEEAC . 
4 


” ARTY 


: & +, 
: r | , } / ? . 
. þ : . 


'\Weate notignoranr, 
kraut; thatis,”Cech/ecrisor Spoonwartybyzeafon of the 
thelcaucs flike « ſpoone ;and hauethoughr irto be 


ove Gerniin beft learned Haije ſecne the troe 
the Gerinnes AL 


NCACEL S: | 
"OILY 2 De N14 3136s STI *ESTEF OC z 


En 
'f FY 


being a depriuation of all Bodie, called Srorbatwn; 


a Ly 
_ a% - 
© & (EY p - 


y 


Rs 
«- 8 6; 
1 = 2 F 
a | 


ſceme ſtrange vnto thoſe that ds not knowethat 


a. Engliſh 


x <_T[TYCTCUFCTYCCIOECNMG_WRTCT CRT TIT IRE Anne _._ er —— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 325 


Engliſh the Scuruie,and Skyrbie; a diſeaſe happening atthe ſea among Fiſhermen, and freſhwater 
ders, and ſuch as delight to fir ſtill wichour labour, and exerciſe of their bodics ; and eſpecially 
abouethe reſt of the cauſes, when they raake nor cleane their bisket bread from the floweror mea- 


| lnefle that is vpon the ſame,which doth ſpoile many, Burfith this agrees not with Plixtes deſcrip- 


tion,and that there be many other water plants, as Na#urtium, Smm, Cardamine, and ſuch others, 
like in taſte, and not vnlike in ptoportion & vertues, which are remedies againſt the diſcaſes afore- 
aid,yet can there be no certaine argument crawn therefrom,to proouc itto be Brtannica.For the 
leaues attheir firſt comming foorth, are ſomewhat long like Pyrolx or Adders toong, foone after 
ſomewhat thicker, and hollow like a nauell, after the manner of ſunnedeaw, bur in greatneſſe like 
Soldanells,in the compaſſe ſomwhar cornered,in faſhion ſomwhar like a ſpoone : the flowers white, 
andin ſhape like the Cuckow flowers : theſcede reddiſh, like the ſeede of Thiafpr, which is not to 
beſeene in Britannica,which is rather holden to be Biſtort or garden Patience, than Scuruic graſſe, 
In Engliſh itis called Spoonewort,Scrubie grafſe,and Scuruie grafle. 
; | | *% The temperature. | | 

Scuruic grafle is evidently hot and drie, verie like in raſte and qualitie to the garden Creſſes, of 
an aromaticke or ſpicie taſte, 

*% Thewertues. | 

The iuice of Spoonewoort giuen todrinke inale or beere,is a ſingular medicineagainſt the cor- A 
rupt androtten vicers,and ſtench ofthe mouth: it perfectly cureth the diſeaſe called of 7zppecrates 
Yolunlus Hematites : of Plinge Stomacace : of Marcellus Ofeeds: and of the Italians Scortutur : of the 
Hollanders and Frifians Scuerbuyck:in Engliſh the Scuruie : either giving the inice in drinke as 


| aforeſaide,or poezing five great handfuls to ſteepe, with long pepper, graines, anniſe ſecede, and li- 


quorice,of eche one ounce , the ſpices being braied,and the herbes bruſed with your hands, and ſo 
putintoa pot,ſfuchas is before mentioned in the chapter of baſtardeRubarbe, and ved in like ma- 
ner: or boiled in milke or wine and drunke for certaine daies togither ; worketh the like cffet. 

The iuice drunke once in a daie faſting in any liquor, ale, beere, or wine,doth cauſe the foreſaid B 
medicine more ſpeedilie toworke his effe& in curing this filthie , lothſome, heauie, and dull dif- 
eaſe, which is very troubleſome and of long continuance. The gums are looſed,fwolne and exulce- 
rate;zthe mouth greeuouſly ſtinking ; the thighes and legs are withall veric often full of blewe {pors, 
not much vnlike thoſe that come of bruſes: the face and the reſt of the bodie is oftentimes of a 
pale colour; and the feete are ſwolne,as in the dropfic. | 


| Thereisa diſcaſe,(faith Olaw magawiin his hiſtory ofthenorthern repro Napunting the campes, C 


which vexe them there that are betieged and pinned vp: and it feemerh to come by eating of falt 
meares, which is increaſed and cheriſhed with the colde vapours of the ſtone wals. The Gerimaines 
call this diſeaſe(as we haue ſaid) Scorbuck , the fymptome or paſſion which hapneth to the mouth, _ 
iscalled of Plinje 5wazzx3 , Stomacace ; and that which belongeth to the thighes oxon/fn: Marcellus 
an olde writer nameth the infirmities ofthe mouth Oſceao:which diſeaſe commeth of a groſle, cold 


 &tough bloud, ſuch as melancholic iuice is, not by aduſtion, but of ſuch a bloud as is the feculent 


or droſſic part therof: which is gatheredin the bodie by ill dier, flothfulneſle to worke, Jaifines(as 
we terme it)much ſleepeand reſt on ſhipboorde, and not looking to make cleane the biſquer from 
the mealienefſe, and vncleane keeping their bodies, whichare the cauſes of this diſeaſe calledthe 


 ſeuruieor ſcyrby. Which difeaſe doth nor onely touch the outwarde parts , but the inwarde alſo: 


forthe liver oftentimes, burmoſt commonly the ſpleene,is filled with this kinde of thicke,cold and 
tough juice,and is ſolen byreaſon that the ſubſtance thereof is ſlacke,ſpungie, and porrous, verie 
pttoreceiue ſuch kinde of thicke and colde humours. Whichthing allo Hippocrates hath written 
of in the ſeconde booke of his Prorrhetikes : their gums (fairh he) are infeed, and their mouthes 
ſtinke that have great ſpleenesor miltes 3 and whoſoeuer haue great miltes and vſenor to bleede, 
can hardly be cured of this malladie.,eſpeciallic of the vicers in the legs, and blacke ſpots. The ſame 
Ss affirmed Ly Þ auus _AEgrmera in his thirde booke 49.chapter,where you may eaſily ſee the diffe- 
rence betweene this diſeaſe andthe blacke iaundersz which manie timesare ſo confounded togi- 


| ther, that the diſtinion or difference is harde to be knowne, butby the expert chirurgion : Who of- = 


tentimes ſeruing in the ſhips,as well hir Maieſties as merchants, is greatly peſteted withthe curing 
thereof: it ſhall requiſire to carrie with them the herbe dried; the water diſtilled,and the inice pur 
ntoabortle with a narrowe mouth, full almoſt to the necke., &the reſt filled vp withooile oliue , ro 
keepe it from putrefaRion: the which preparations diſcreetly vied, will ſtande them in great _— 
ar | X 3 of 


LY 


326 THE SECON 
for the diſcaſe aforeſaide. 


waiblade. 


2 tr 
Ophrs 


On : 
of Fly #4 
Ra , by , 
f C WA 
& & Y b \ 4 
CE 20500950008 
” FF; 4 
-» - 


US os 


ts NF \ 


© FS nd 
mw 


| % The deſcription. | 
I Erbe Byfoile hath many ſmall fibres or threddie ſtrings, faſtened vnto a ſmall knot t 
H roote,from which riſeth vp aſlender ſtemme or ſtalke,render, fat, and full of iuice ; inthe 
middle whereof ,are placed in comely order two broade leaues, ribbed and chamfered,in 
| ſhapelike the leaues of Plantaine : vpon the top of the ſtalke groweth a ſlender greeniſh buſheot 
flowers,made of many ſmall flowers ; cach little flower reſembling a gnar , orlictle goſling nenly/ 
hatched,very like thoſe of the third ſort of Serapias ſtones. | | 
2 Ophris Trifeliaor Trefoile twaiblade , hathrootes, tender ſtaſkes, andbuſtef flowers like the 
recedent; bur differeth in that, thatthis plant hath three leaues which do clippe or imbracethe 
about; and the other hathbur two, and neuermore, wherein eſpecially conſiſteth the diff 
rence: although in truth I thinke it a degenerate kinde, and hath gorten a thirde leafe per accidens, 
as doth ſomerumes chaunce vntothe adders toong, as ſhall be declared in the chapter following. 
0 |  Theplace. 
Thefirſt groweth in moiſt medowes,tennie jy and ſhadowie places. haue found it in m+ 
ny places, as at Southfleete in Kent, in a wood of Maſter Sydleys by Longfield downes,in the 
by Londorfcalled Hampſtecde-wood, inthe fields by Highgate, in the woods by Ouendennedr 
_ to Clare in Eſſex, andinthe woods by Dunmow in Eſlex. The other ſortis ſeldome ſeene. 


+ Ti 


1 HIST ORIE- OF! PLANTS. |: 327 
| *% Thetime. 
They fipwer in May m_ | | = 
[RV *+T he names. 


Iciscalledofthe later Herbariſts B;fo/ium,and Ophris. 
 *% The nature and vertwes. ; 
Itis reported of the Hetbariſts of our time, to be: 'good forgreene oh burſtin gs, and rup- 


cures; whereot I haue in my vnguents and Balſams for greene wounds, hadgreatexpericnce, and 


good ſucceſle. 


4 Of eAdders toong. Chap.84. 
des rooNge. the % The deferiqtion 


Engliſh Adders roong, of ſome Adders 
grafle, though by rly) riſeth foorth of 


the grounde,having one andno more, fattc or 


tender ſtalke, one finger and an halfe long; on the 


name, 


rwo and ſometimes more crooked toonpgs, yet of the 


me ſo tothinke , for that in gathering of rwwentie 


buſhels of the leaues, aman ſhal hardly finde one of 


x thackahiog. 
| do boon + The plac HM 
 Adders toong groweth in moiſt medowes thedoghoun moſt parts'of Eni iasina medqwe 
neere the þ Sorel” year adioining to Londonz;in the Mantels by Lonc ih thi 'medowes Y 
Cobrooeyinche des! in Walchar rigor axe nee other places. gunth e's 7 4 
"Than tiodefogntde in Aprill and Maie; but in lune they afequire vaniſhed ;nd gone.” 
* The names.” by 


#4 vllyeraria : in Engliſh Adders toong , or Serpents m_ 1 
Nat tains Nater Jungelin, 

© *Thenatwe. 
Adder roongisdiein the thirde degree, 

*% The vertnes. 


The leaves of Adders toong ſtamped in aſtone morter wy boiled in oile oline vnto the con- 


pe of the iuice, and vntill the herbes be drie and parched , then ſtrained, will yeelde a moſt 
excellent greene oile,or rather a Balſame for greene wounds,comparable vnto oile of Saint Iohns 
woortyf it do not Farre ſurpaſſe it by many degrees: whoſe beaurtie is ſuch, that very many Artiſts | 
fave thought theſamero be mixedwith R_ | 
X4 of 


 Phio loſſum , or Lingua Serpenti (called in | 


oleous in ſubſtance,ofa finger long,and verylike the | 
 yoong and tender leaues of Marigoldes: from the | 
in 02 of which leafe fpringeth our a ſmall and 


ende whereof doth growe a long ſmall toong , yor 
vnlike the toong of a ſerpent, whercof it tooke the | 


I haue ſeene an other like the former,in root, ſtalke, | 
and leafe; and differeth in that that this planr hath 


ſame faſhion , which if my indgement faile nor, 
changeth pey accidens,cuen as we ee children borne 
with two thombes ypon one hand: which mooiierh | 


AE Ren nr oo ew Ano RO EE RE 
Pe ra Att a ae fo es 9 CR TIRE 
EO ON En O22, a 


is calledinſhops Livigas ſerpentls,' Lin laee, and: Lingeialeee itis allo called 7a» 


ee OIETY "a EA Sir pos, 
VWs x | ee We, hel. 368 
5 OG HOY Ln, > 74 T.; 
FA [* 20- 4 M " 
\ ” 


__ " a4 "FR 5 y , 1 6 
OT One £2 INS 
? " Ap 2 OG Sy 


Ib 


OE THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Ph one Berrie,or herbe Trucbue ad Moonewoort: Chap. $8. 


Lunar is minor. 
Small Moonewoorr, 


= Erbe Paris riſeth vp with one ſmall achder ſtalke rwo ohandes pada Very, appabgen 
come foorth.fower leaues direRtly ict one againſt another,inmaner ofa Bur crolle ot 

a true loue knot; for which cauſe amon g theauncients it hath beene called herbe Trucloue: : inthe 

middle of the ſaid leaues commeth a alike flower,of an herbie or grafſic colour; out of my midlt 


whereof there ariſeth vp a blackiſhþrowne bercie: : the rootEis longand eender,creeping vader 
carth,and dif} perling i itſelfe hither and thither, - » | 

The fwall Lunane ſpringeth. foorth of the groundwith one leafe like Adders toong, agg 
cut on both fides into fie 07 ſixe deepe cuts or notches, not much vnlike tholeguas af Fongeryin 
or Ceterach, of a greenecolour; whereupon doth grow a ſmall naked ſtemme of a 1 
ring atthe top many little ſcedes cluſtering Coir, which being gathered and laide inapl 
' or foch like thing,for the ſpace of three weekes, there will fall roy. the ſame fine duſt or mcale ot 


a whitiſh colour, which is the (ced jf it being] foorth any. The roote is jo guece and LI 20% of many 
ſmall threddic ſtrings. : 


X The place. 

Herbs Paris eroweth pentifullyi in all theſeplaces followin that is roſaie, in | Challney wool 
necreto wakes Coulne , ſeauen miles from Colcheſterin ang andin the wood by RobinhooG 
well, neere to Nottingham; inthe parſonage orcharde at Radwinters in Eſſex, neere to 
Walden zin Blackburne ata place called Merton nn Lancaſhire; in the moore by Canterburiecat 
ledthe Clpper in Dingley _— {ixe mils trom Preſton in Aunderneſle; in Bocking pain 

Brain 


þ ne F-11 / 


CHISTORIE GFOUBUCANTS EH %Ss 


Braintree in Eſſex; at Heſſer in'Lancaſhire ; and in Cotting woode, in.the north of Englande; as 
thar excellent painfull and diligent Phiftcion niaſter do@orT7 arxey of late memorie doth recorde 
n his Herball. | OY 
Lunaria Or ſiriall Moonewoort growerh vpon dric and barren mountaines.and keathes, I have 
{ounde it growing in theſe places following, that is toſaie , about Bathe in Somerſerſhire in ma- | 
nieplaces, eſpecially at a place called Carey, rwo miles from Bruton, in the next cloſe vntothe 
churchyardez on Cockes heath betweene Lowſe and Linton, three miles from Maidſtone in Kenr, 
Jrgrowerh alſo in rhe ruines of an olde bricke kill by Colcheſter , in the grounde of maſter George 
Sgrr, called Miles ende: it groweth likewiſe vpon the fide of blacke Heathneere vnto the ſtile that 
leadeth vnto Eltham houſe,about an hundrezh paces from the ftile : alſo in Lancaſhire neere varo 
awoode called Faireſt by Latham : moreouer in Nottinghamſhire, by the weſt woode at Gringley, 
&ar Weſton in the Ley field, by the weſt fide of the towne andin the oy, fielde at Yorke,ncere 
\ntoWakefielde in the cloſe where fir George Savelſhis houſe ſtanderh,.called the Heath Hall, by 
therelation of a learned doQtor in philicke , called maſter 10h» AMerſheof Cambridge , and many 
other places. | 
h, *% The time, 


Herba Paris lowreth in Aprill,and the berric isTipe in the ende of Maie. 

Lanariaor ſmall Moonewoorr, is to be ſeenc in the moneth of Maic. * 

| te The names. 

One Berric, is alſo called herbe [rueloue and herbe Paris ;in Latine Herbs Paris. 

Iunaria minorgis called in Engliſh ſmall Lunaric & Moonwoort, it is called likewiſe Ophiogleſſon. 

| *% Thenature. | 50 

Herbe Paris is exceeding colde, whereupon it is proued to repreſle the rage and force of poiſon. 

Lynaria minor is colde and drie of tewperarture, , | 

| * The vertues. | | | 

The berries of Herbe Paris giuen by the ſpace of rwentiedaies, are excellent good againſt poi- A 
ſon, or the powder of the herbe drunke in like manner halfe a ſpoonefull ata time in the morning 
faſting, | wy {et WO 
Thefawe is miniſtred withgreat ſucceſle, vnto ſuch as are become peeuiſh, or without vnder- B 
ſtanding, being miniſtred as is aforeſaice, cuery morning by the ſpace of twenty daies, as Bapriits 
Sardis and Mathiolushaue recorded, Since which time,there hath beene furtherexperience made 
f againſt poiſon,and pur in practiſe in rhe'cicie of Paris,in Louaine, and at the bathes in Hel- 
bythe right excellent Herbariſts Marhias de Vobe], and Petrus Pens, who _ often read, 
atit was once of the Aconites, ealled P ardelzanches, and fb by conſequence, of apoifoning quali- 
tie choygatie ir voto dogs and lambes, who receired nb Hitt by the ſame : wherefore they turther 
proſecuted: the expeticiice thereof, and gaue-vnto two' dogs faſt bound, or coupted* rogerher, a 
dram of Arſenicke, and one dram of Mercurie ſublimare, mixed with fleſh,which the dogs would 
not willingly eate,and therefore they had it crammed downe their throres: vnto one of thefe dogs, 
pac a this antidote earthy alittle red wine, whereby he recouered his former Kealth 
agai | withina few howerszbue the other dog,which had none of the medicine,died incontinently. 


” 


# LR This is the receir, © BETS. 
| R. wrrinſque Avgelice,( innutt )domeiticam, &  funeitrem VicetoxictY aleriane domeHice,Po- 
\ . , lipody querni,radicum Althee, V rtica,ane Jin, Corticis Mezerei Germanict,3'tj. grano- 

'  ramherbe Paridis,N.24. foliorum ciuſdem cum toto; N wn.36. Ex maceratis in ateto radict- 
vides TA ennimpalnds., ||, | 
 Thepeople in Germanic do vſe the leaues of Paris herbe ih greene wounds, forthe which itis C 
very good,as reporteth Joachimus Camerarius, wholikewiſe faith, that the powder of the rootes gi- 
uento drinke,doth ſpeedily ceaſe the gripings and paine of the collicke, | 
_ Small Moonewort is ſingular to heale greene andfreſh wounds; i ſtaieth the bloodie flixe. It D 
hath beene vſed among the Alchymiſtes, and witches to do wonders withall, who ſay, that it will 

locks,and make them to fall from the feete of horſes that graſe where ir doth growe, and hath 

beene called of them Martagon whereas intruththey are all but drowſie dreames andillufions,but 

lingular for wounds as aforciaid. . | Prot | 
Of 


Th 3 aw Www on _ 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of Winter gy: __. 86. 


17/24 
g Sf 
6; 


FOWASAL : 
4 


GO A AAAS 
4 P Ts 
f 1d 


SF, 


- 7 _ EAA #1, 
f " i, ” "7 - 


D 
# ” > 
#7 1 © A; 
. A G F "- 


Yrolahath many render and very Oh ee M almoſt like the ns ofBeete, bur ratherin 


- mine + 50mg rothe leaues ofa Peate tree, whereof ir tooke his name Fyrols, forthat 
is Pyriſorms, Among theſe leaues commerh vp a ſtalke | with pretie white flow- 
ers, ofa pleaſant ſweete fimcll like Li/lrum conualizm, or Lilia valley. The roore is {mall and 
threddie, creeping far abroad vnder the ground. % | 
2 Monophyllonor Vnifolmom, hatha leafe not. much walike the greateſt leafe of Ivie, with 
.xibs orfircwes like the Plantaine leafe, which | fingle leafe doth greue ſprip foorth of the 
alone, bur when the ſtalkeriſeth vp,it briogerh \ yon his ſides two leaues, in faſhion like the former; 
= the toppe of which {lender ſtalke , come fporth fine ſmall flowers like Pyrola , which being 
vade:., there ſucceede ſmall red berries. The rgote is bagy,! tender , and crocpng far abroad vndet 
tlc vp er taceot the carth. lacs of 
| * "Thephee. 
1. Profle erowerh i in Lanſdale, and Cen inthe north part of England, eſpeetallyi inacloſecal 
led Craggeclofe, 


2 Monothylln orowerhi in Lancaſhire in Dingley wood, ſixe miles from Preſtoni in Aundereil 
and in Harwood,neere to Blackeburne likewiſe, 't 

 *% Thetime, _ 
1 Pyrolaflowreth in June and luly,and groweth winter and ſommer, 


2 Meonophylln fowiethi in May,and the ws * is ripe in Septcmaber. 


1 Pyrelais calledin Engliſh Winter Sn :ithath beene called Limonizrs of divers, burn 


2 AManophylon according tothe erymologie Gf FP word,is calledi in Latinc Yaifoljum :inE 
One biade,or One lcafe, Lilo | 


4 Th 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS, 331 
4 _ *% Thenature. | 
1 Pyrolais cold inthe ſecond degree, and drie in thethird, 
2 Monophylbn is hote and drie of complexion. 
en þ * Thewvertnes. | - 

?;rvleis a moſt ſingular wound herbe, cicher giuen inwardly, or applied outwarely, the leaues A 
whereof ſtamped and ſtrained,and the iuicemade mto an vnguent,or healing falue,with waxe,oile, 
and turpentine, doth cure wounds, vcers, and fiſtulaes, that are mundified from the callous and 
rough marter,which keeperh the ſame from healing. | 

$i decoction hereof made with wine, is commended to cloſe vp and heale wounds of the en- B 
railes,and inward partes : it isalſo good for vicers of the kidneies, eſpecially made with water, and 
the rogtes of Comfrey added thereto. J 1 

The leaues of Monophyllon,or Ynifolixmn, are of the ſame force in wounds with Pyrola, ef] pecially C 
inwounds among the nerues and ſinewes, Moreouer,it is eſteemed of fome late writers, a moſt per- 
ſ& medicine againſt the peſtilence, and all poiſons, if halfe a dram of theroote be giuen in wine, 
andthe ſicke go to bed and ſweate vpon it. { 


Of Lilly in the valley,or «May Lillie. Chap.87. 


2 Lilium conual.izon floribus ſnaue-rupentibus, 


Red Conuall Lilies. - 


 _ #%*Thedeſeription. EO 5 
I He Comuall Lillie,or Lillie of the Vally hath many leaues like the ſmalleſt leaves of Water 
Plantaine; among which riſerh ” anaked ſtalke halfea foote high, garniſhed with manie 
white flowers like little bels,with blunt and turnededges, of a ong ſauour, yet pleafanc 
mough; which being paſt, there come ſmall red berries, much like the berries of Aſparagusy 
wherein the ſecdeis contained. The roote is ſinall and ſlender,creeping farabroadinthe ground. 
| | . | } | 2 The 


232 THE SECONDE |BOOKE 'OF | THE 
2 Theſecond inde of May Lillies, is like the former in cuery reſpe@ ; and herein varicth orgic 
fereth,in that this kinde hath reddiſh Rowers,and is thought to have the ſweerer ſmell. 
x Thefirſtgrowethon Hampſted heath, fower Failes from London,in great abundance: nee. 
Lee in Efſex,and vpon Buſhic heath,thirteene miles from London,and many other places, 
2 + Thatother kinde with thered floweryis a ſtranger in England : howbcit I haue the ſame groy. 


ing in my garden. | 


| % The pine, | 
They flower in May,and their fruit is ripe in September, 


| *% Thenames. | Es 
The Latins have namEd it Lilium conualiium: Ge ner doth thinke it to Calionymon : inthe Ger. 
maine toong Yeyen blumien : che Lowe Durch even bloemkens : in French Auger : yer 
there is likewiſe another herbe which they call Muguer, ——_—y named in Engliſh Woodrof, 

It is calledin Engliſh Lillie of the valley,or the Conuall Lillie, and May Lillies, and in ſome places 

Liriconfancic. | The nature, | 
They arc hote and drie of complexion, | | 

'* Thewertues, 

A Theflowers of the Valley Lillie diſtilled with wine, and drunke the quantitie of a ſpoonefull, te. 
ſtorerh ſpeech vnto thoſe that haue the dum palfie and thatare fallen intothe Apoplexic,& is good 
againſt the gowte,and comforteth the hart, | | 

'B Theyatcraforeſaiddoth ſtrengthen the memoriethar is weakened and diminiſhed, it helpeth 

@ alſothe inflammation of the cies, being dropped thereinto. = 

C The flowers of May Lillies putinto a glafle, and ſet in a hill of antes cloſe ſtopped for the ſpace 
of a moneth,and then taken out,theria you ſhall finde a liquor, that appeaſerh the paine andrick 
of the gowte, being outwardly applied ; which is commended to be moſtexcellent, 


Of Sea Lauander, Chap.87. 
| || 2 Limenivn PErMen. 


1 Limoninn. 


af -. 
> Ca 
——_ Ivy 
\ \ x 
. i k 
NN 


TIN. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. +. 333 S | 


* The deſcription. 
Here hath beene among writers from timeto time, great contention abour this planr Lt- 
oy monium,no oneauthor agreeing with another: for ſome haue called this herbe Limon; 
ſome another herbe by this namezand ſome in remoouing the rock, haue mired themlelues 
in the mudzas Atshrolus, who deſcribed twokindes , but made no diſtinion of them , nor yerex- 
eſſed which ivas the true L:moninmmgbut as a man hevein i ignorant, he ſpeakes not a word of them, 
Now then toleaue controuerſies and cauilling, the true Limon;wnis that which hath faire leaues, 
like the Limon of Orenge tree, but of a dark green color;ſomwhar fatter,%& a little crumpled:among 
which leaues riſeth vp an hard and brictle naked ſtalke,ofa foote high,diuided at the rop into ſundry 
other ſmallbranches, which growe for che moſtpart vpon the one ſide, full of Jirtle blewiſh tow. 
ers,;n ſhew like Lauander, with long red ſcede,and a thicke roote like vnto the ſmall Docke, 
2: Thereis akindeof Limonixen like the firſt ineach reſpect, Hut leſſer, which groweth vpon rocks 
and chalkiecliffes..:'. . - *+The place. 
;. Thefirſtgrowerh.ingrear plentic vponthe walles of the 
s Ferrey going into the lle of Shepey:in thefalrmarſhs 
op many other places, _. ow 
2, The ſmal kindeI could neuer fiadein any oth&Fface,bur vpon the chalkiecliff going from the 
I ec downe tothe ſea fide,vpon thelefthand. . ! 
n * The time, They gower in Iune and Iuly. | 
| 11% Thewames.. 
.(ballbe needleſſera trouble you with any other. Latinc name than is expreſſed i in their ir ridles: 
thepeople neere the ſea fide where it growerh " call CTERTEY Yea Lauand or. | 
*% Tre nature. | 
| | Theſerd of Linenmnris very aſtringentorbinding, v1 fs 
| *% The VEerfnes. | #17 þ 
Theſeede beaten into powder and Lime: in winezhelpeth the collicke, harkanie AT ſenteria. A 
The leedetaken as aforcſaid .ltaierth che ouermuch flowingof womens tenmepand al other fluxes B 


blood. 
i Of, Serepin Turbith,or Sea $ raywort« Chap. $8. 


+I ail Puleare. 5 Sea "ELIE Ty 4. & The deſeription, . 
IX | a r'T He Cleide of Tr: hath hos (ag 
> D, large leaues, ſomewhathollow or furrow- 
ed, of a ſhining greene colour declining to blew- 
nefle, like the leaues of Woade : among which 
riſeth vp aſtalk of two cubits high & more; ewhich — 
taward the to dinidec; ipco 1 many ſinall bran- 
ches, garniſhe with many flowers like Camo- 
mill, yellow in the middle, ſex abour or bordered 
with imall blewiſh leaues,, like a pale, as inthe 
i of Camomill, which growe into a whi- 
tiſh rough downeghar _ | 12a with the wind, 


Bb IE rnSK: 


LIE: 2& fy 7 
F Addi. pas 
+» 
X *, 


LEE 


rt againſt Granelend: alſo faſt by the 
by inet in Efſex: inthe Marſh by Har- 


” - ON 7 Ta : 
K 0” Sr 


P tl: 190 


; I "= | & 
| ? __ 7 OY "gry, 3, CY oy; 
" FX \ _d 7 2-77! i1D% wu. \ #4 > 
| Vos one in. 


1 - — — — 


LK OTE IOIOTY EL. bb | Gy int 
4 < EEE yu ro 


ere it waxe 


c—_ 


ag NS, ir F) = WS TY F | 
B1 pe K, S4TI54©.* 
BAD! rings. 


ZI r 
—S Set eh the great rootes1 
MENENE= * 7 hetpme. 


4; Th = 
1 MY: NOT kk 


ry LUND 


— _ | Theſc hetbes doflowerin May andlune. 
*% The 


334 THE SECOND BOOKE' OF THE 
: Ken u lane was called Tripol 
 Irisreportedby men of greatfameand ,that this plant was called Tipo Re 
doth change regs wid of his flowersthrice ina day. Indeede the word Tripoliam doth importſg- 
- much.This rumor we may belecue,and itmay be rrue,forthat we ſee and perceiue things of asgrex 
and greater wonder,to a efchakend .This hetbe I planted in my garderi hither(in his 
ſealon)1 did repaire doortbermh hereof, burIcouldnoteſpic any ſuch vatiableneſſe here 
inz yet ARRAY I may fay, thatas the heatc of rhe ſunnedorh change the colour of divers floy. 
ers: ſoit fell out with this, which in che morning was very faire, bur afterwarde of a pale 6r wan co. 
lour. Which prooucth that tobe bur a fable which D zoſcorides writerh, thatin one day itchangeth 
the colour of his flowers thrice : that is to ſayin the morningit is white, at noone purple, and Wo 
eucning #e,0r crimſon. But itis not varrue,that there _ be found three colours of the flowers 
in one day,by reaſon thatthe flowersatenor allperfeedrogither (as before partly touched,)bu 
one after another by little and little. And there may<cafily be obſerued three colours in them, which 
is to be vnderſtood of them thar are beginningi to flower, that are perfe&tly flowred, and thoſe that 
are falling away. For they that are blowing,and be notwide open &perteR, are ofa purpliſh co- 
lour,and thoſe that are perfe and wide open,pf a whitiſh blew z and ſuch as are falling away,have 
a white dowrie: which changing happeneth yntg ſundry other plants. This herbe'is c = 
Serapias Twrbith : women that her Ar Lp theſca ſide, callitinE blew Daifies, orblew ns 
mill ; and about Harwich it is called Hogs beanes, for that the ſwine doe dra, whoges 
-chemon: as alſo for that the knobs about the roores do ſomwhar reſemble the Garden Beane, Itis 
called in Greeke rremizor,and of divers {nyg,itma ay befitly called At#er Marinw,or Ame lim Mirinu: 
in Engliſh Sca Starworr, Serapias Turbith,of ſome Blew Daiſies, The Arabian Serapio, doth cl 
Sea Starworr, Turbith, and her him Auzcen : 2 | Aftuerixethe Grecian doththinke that Turbich 
is the roote of Afpum': Meſues indgedit to be the roote of an herbe like Fennell. The hiſtoric of 
Turbirh ofthe ſhops ſhall be diſcourſed ypon in his proper place. 
* Thenaore. 
Tr + ipoliuem is hot in the third degree, as Galen faith, 
% The vertnes. 
A The roote of Tripaliumtaken in wine by che quantitie of two drams, dre forth liegewate 
riſh and grofſc humors,for which cauſe itis ooh given to them that have the 
B Iris cell habehonia 39% av comparable with Pyrols, ifnor of greater efficacie, n 
healing of wounds cither = or inward. 


[ 


Of Tp arbith 4 aw ann a $9. 


'* The ef, 


| ArciaaLuftanian'oeÞ hifiion ſath char Turbithis. r aroorewhich | 
I preamnee .radgs ung is ofaſp Turbihiea plan AS thick hi 
bringeth dare nr 4 the mariſhMab 
| ike thoſeof the Mallowe. ofa reddiſh white colour : the ouryadtis 
of who bar thre i which is in medicine , andis the fame tharis vſedin 
chooſethar forthe beſt whichis re, & roy 
alſothat whereunto doth cleaue a congealed u 
ſomewhat white. But, as Garci« faith,itis notalwai 
bicauſe they ſee that our marchanrs note the' beſt Turbirh th by the 
they gather theſarne , either to writhe or elſeightly them, tharthe 0) 
Iſle out; which ropre being oncehardned , they An out fromthereſt to ſell ar 2 price 
"Iris likewiſe made white, a5the faide autor ſhewerb, beg OI :fori Fs 
mos ; oth 


- 


— a” 


EEE ERSIRESDT 


= 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 335 
Turbith Alexandr inwn officinarmn. 
Turpetwmn,or Turbirh of the ſhops. * The place. 
[ | .. Irgroweth by the ſea fide, 'bur yet nor fo neere 
that it may receive the vapors thar riſe from the 
fca,but twoorthree miles diſtant, and that in vnril- 
led grounds rather __ drie. It is founde in 
Cambaya,Surrates,in the Ne ] 
places hard adioining; alſo in Guzarares, whereir 


oy 


e Dion,Bazaim,and in 


DO F <3. we, 
, m y Av, oy , br Ye SHE Rs EN Jos V3 - 
gY + 3 Ks fed! £4 E bog % T2 WH Ion on % C9 _g 5 ES) fab Tor Lal Fa 
JL, O32, RAISOR” Frabis OF 8 oY I wad . « Vs 


S+ bt. &$*'y LY, 
PENS <A TT IRE SC 


LARA Ta 

* *7 & ” 
FP: ry, 
Fes "A 


JF -growerh plentifully,from whence great abundance 
Y/ of itis broughrinro Perſia, Arabia, little Aſia, and % 
ſo into Europe:but thar is preferred which groweth X 
in Cambaya. G 
,  t% Thenames. | 3 
| Iriscalled of the Arabians, Perſians, and Turks 3 


Turbith:;andin Guzarata Barcaman : in the pro- 
uince Canara, in which is the citie Goa, Tigmr : 
likewiſe in Europe the learned call it by ſundrie 
names, according to their ſeuerall fancies, which ; 
hath bred ſundric comrouerſies as it hath fallen ; 
out berweene the HermodaQtyles, and Turbith; 
the vic and poſleſſion of which , we cannot ſeeme 
, towant : butwhich plant is the true Turbith, we 
.haue great cauſe to doubr. Some haue thought our 
T ripolium marinwn, deſcribed in the former chap» 
rer to be. Turbith: others haue ſuppoſed it to bee 
one of the Tyrhimales,but which kinde they knowe - 
not : Guillandinus ſaith , that the roote of Tythi- 
mals mirſimitts is the true Turbithz which cauſed 
L Obelics and. Pena to plucke ypby the rootes all 


thekindes of *thimaley and drie them very curiouſlic zwhich when ay hom cheld,and through- 
r 


ly tried they founder nothing ſo.The Arabians and halfe Moores that dwell inthe caſt parts, hauc 
po divers names vntothis plant: and as their wordes are divers, ſo haue boy fignificati- 
ons;bur this name Turbith they ſeeme to interpret ro be any milkie root which dot nag 64 purge 
fegme, as this plant doth. So that as men haue thought good pleaſing, themſclues, they haue” 
made many& divers conſtrutions which haue troubled many excellent learned men , toknowe 
whoſe roote is the true Turbith.. Bur briefly roſer downe mine opinion, not varying from the 
"5 an ofmen which areof great experience; I thinke affuredly thattheroote of Scammonie 
tioch is the true & vndoubted Turbith; onexealonepecially that mooueth me ſoo thinke is, 
forthatThaue taken vp the rootes of Scammonie which grewe in'my garden, and compared them 
with therooteg of Lurbithy betweene:which I founde little or no differencearall;'- ' > 7 
ood | 4 1143 1 112% The temperatare andverines,” 0 OOO | 
. thelndjanphiſitions do vſe it topurge flegme , towhich if there beno ague they doadde gin- A 
gerotherwiſe the  giuc it withoutirin the broth of achicken, and ſomerimes infaire water, —- 

_ Oifeſues writeth. , that Turbith is hoc in the thirde-degree3/and'thar ir voideth thicke rough B 
oneouo he. ſtomdcke., cheſt , firiewes, and out of the furthermolt parts of the bodie : bur 
(whefaith) itis lowe in working, and troublerh and ouerturneth the ſtomacke; and cherfore gin- 

7, maſticke,.anc ices areto/bemixed withit; alſo oilcoffweete almondes, or almiondes- 
hemlolve ,orſugar, lcaftthe bodicwich the vic heereof ſhoulde pine and fall away. Others ren 
Parwith dates, fvecte almonds, andcertaine other things, making thereof a compoſition (that = 
the aries call - Eleuaric)which is named hezurixr: common in ſhops, and in contintall 
err phiſitions, | | 
«There is q ws time of this Turbith one dram(more or leſſe)twwo atthe moſt:but in the de- C 

c | | | 


c infuſion three or fower, ' 


eb 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


vl br na wy 06 
Ef 2 Arkaahads undef Arroncheade bach ped hte; broade — 
ET IEEE cone 
ſalkes of a greeniſhcoloux,from i LIP IIONY cto 

dent. The rooteis ſmall and threddic, IT | 


21 


+ - Bod 
. OY l 
| > | 
*. 4 3.9 g 0 


HISTORIE) OF/ PLANTS. |: 337 


3 Sugittaris Anguſtifolis. Narrow leafed Arrowhead. == 
RF 2 M0977 Lag 29g! ISHS 4:1 wp Theplare, 


_ | Theſe herbesdogrowin-thewarrie ditches by | 
faineG is fielde ncere yato London; in the 
Tower ditchat London z inthe ditches-neere the | 
wals of Oxfordez by ChelmesfordeinEſſex, and 
many other places ya y inthe ditch neere 
theplace ofexvcnion, c faint Thomas: VVa- 
 tringsnorfarfruLondon. {00 0 


: k IG "The rome.” >*0, 1 
| They flowerin Maig andTune, 
| SSUSMIA, TY OCHS 0874371 1 
| * The names. 3s | | 
$S1gittayid maybe called m Englif h water EET 
Archer,or Arrow headeg© ®! (co 


| * The nature andwtrtues, 191 
» I'finde not any thing exrant in writing either 
_ concerning theit vertues* or temperament, bur 
doubtleſle theyre colde and drie in qualitie,, and Hos 
are like water Plantaine in facultic and tempera- 
©. MEnr, | 


DEE , +» Of water Plantaine. Chap.9n 1 
I Plantago aquatic 2 Plantago 4quat humilic,Dwarfe water Plantain, 


| ” 
iv r\ OH 


VT Bus @ RAC m0 
- . 
_ EF 9 = / 
SES "# o "4 Pp -- vI- x 7 , 
- [ ” LANCE, . | , 
, 1 >. &> & yg. oe —{þ 
, 4 "3 ' RS - ILSS 
7 E j : \* - * f - 
/ - WC "YX 4 — 
£ — - - 4 ” - GS 
TEE, = "ED 
0 F o a. 17 ; A | - 
” _ "77 - 7 —_— = 2 A A L 2» & 
P. ” - * ry . 
Y o 1 &\ © Ge ( _———n—_— - 
- - _— Js 
: : C2 ©% 
: hy S 3 %z - 


AN EDS 
VM 
—WAN Wy f 
( 


_ S—, 
- A 
ef — 


Wa 
IV 
£ : 


WO 
| _- wuThe 


1 


238 THE /SECOND| BOOKE OF; THE 


I T He firſtkinde of water Plaintaine hath faire great large leaues like the lande Plantaineus 


Fil 


ſmoother,and not ſo full of ribbes or finewes : among which riſeth vp a tall ftemme " 010g 
| footehigh,;deuidingitſelfe into-many ſlender braunches, garniſhed with infinite fg | 
white flowers,which being paſt there appeere triangled huskes or burtons, wherin is the ſeeg. The 
roote is asitwereagreat tuftofthreds ot thrums. AE FORT | 
2 Theſecondcekinde hath long, lictle-; and nazrowe leaues , much like the Plantaine calleg RG. 
woort:among which riſe imall and feeble ſtalkes braunched ar the top, whereon are | 
white ſpotted flowers, con(iſting of-three flender leaues ; which being fallen, there come to _ 
view round knops,or rough bars :theroote is threddic. Wi id | 6 hs, 
2 * Theplace. of 
Theſe herbes growe abour the brinkes of riuers, pondes and ditches almoſteuery where. 
| oo MA nigra ve The tame. S 
They flower from Iune ill Auguſt, : 


| | *%* The pames, 

The firſt kinde is called Plantago aquatic, that fe Plantaine, The ſecond 2lenrags aquut; 

ca hunilis, that is the lowe water Plantaine.. -”, 

| *Thenature. 
Water Plantaine is calde and drie oftemperarure. 

ERY  w Thevwertues. | 

The leaues of waterPlancaine as ſome authgrs report, are good to be laide ypon the legoes of 

ſuch as are troubled with the dropfic,and hath the ſame propertie that the land Plantaine 


Of LandPlantaine. Chap.g2. 
There be diuers ſortes of Land Plantaines differing in forme very notably,as ſhall be declared. 
1 Plant o latifolta, = ; ; (Le "1.2 Plant ago incana. 
Brode leafed Plantaine., L | ND Hoaric Plantaine, 


HISTORIE) OFCPLANTS.! || 339. 
* The deſcription. 


, S the Greekes haue called ſome kinde of herbes, Serpents toong, Dogs toong, and Oxe 

| A roong3 ſo haue they termed a kinde of Plantaine _Lrxoglofſs,which is as if you ſhould ſay 

nbes toong, very well knowen vnto all, by reaſon of the great commoditie andplentic = 

cuery where; and therefore it is needlefle to ſpend time about The greatnes 

leaucs hath beene the cauſe of the varieties,and diuerſities of their names. | 

ond is like the firſt kinde,and differeth in that,that this kinde of Plantaine hath greater, 

| TOE Ne knaps:and the leaues are of an hoaric or ouerworne greene colour : the ſtakes. 
aric and hairic, ng 


w' of 


E AY # =53 5 


Plantagolatifoliaminor. 4 Plantavo aneuft ; lia minor. 
R Seoall road leafed Plantaine. * Small a Plantaine, 


% The deſeription. | 


3 TheſmallPlantaine hath many tender leaues ribbed, like vnto the great Plantaine, andis very 
likein each reſpe& vnto it,ſauing har itis altogither lefler. k | | 
4 Thenarrow leafed Plantaine is like vnto the {mal Plantaine,ſauing that the leaues of this plant 

ae narrower whereinconſiſterh the difference, \ " 


| * Thed:ſcription. | 
iked Roſe Plantaine hath very few leaues, narrower than the leaues ofthe ſecond kind of 
ſharper at the ends,& further growing one from another.Ir beateth a very double flower 
? wonaſhort ſtem like aRoſe, of a greeniſh colour tending to yellownelle. The ſeede growerh ypon 
| aipikie ruft,aboue the higheſt parr of the plant: notwithſtanding it is bur very lowe inreſpeRot the 
, tk taines aboue mentioned. | A 


xt kinde of Plantaine hath beene a ſtranger in England, andelſewhere vnrilltheimpreſ- 
f. The cauſe why I ſay ſo, is the want of conſideration of that beautie, which is in this 
Plant, wherein.it excelleth all the other, Moreouer, bicauſe thatit hath nor beene written of, or. 
recorded before this. preſent time : though plants of lefſer moment haue beene very curiouſly ſet 
; forth, This plant hath leaues like vnto : 5695 of the former, and more orderly ſpred vpon the 
aRoſe z among which riſc vp many ſmall ſtalkes like the other Plantaines,having at the 
ry one a finedouble Roſe, altogither ynlike the former; of an hoarie or ruſtic greene 


Fs T 2 5 Plantago 


| "© = 


159 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


5 Plantego Roſes ſpicats. BREA sf 4 6 Plantago Roſea exotica. 
 SpikedRoſe Plantaine, | | | en Rck Planar, 


I 
P* 


WA nw 


©] 


4 


_ "4 
[<Q 
IS), 
M 


« -- %4 IE 
WON 


LI 


JH 


y / 
/ 


aA ##- - 

TID UGTA 

TUM] 
ho 


WU j 1 
—_ ey ; [ 7 p *o 
SONALLTT #4 H7, »A 
—_ ART 4 % : 
| \ Wi \- 


OY, 


20%). * The place. 
The greater Plantaines dogrow almoſt cuery where, . 
The leſſer Planraifſes are found on the ſea coaſtes,and banks of great riuers, which are ſomtimes 
waſhed with brackiſh water. K 
* The tame. 
They areto be ſcene from Aprill vnto Seprember. 
p | % The wames. | jþ 
Plantaine is called in Latine P/antago, and in Grecke dpriynonc, and Lrnoghſſa, thatis tolay, 
Lambesroong,The Apothecaries keepethe Latine name: in Italian Piantegine, and Plantagine:i 
Spaniſh Lhantem : the Germaines Megricht in Low Dutch Uechbze : in Engliſh Plancaine and 
Weybred : in French Plantain. | | | 4 
* The temperature. | 
; Planraine, as Gz/enfaith,is ofa mixt temperature: forit hath inir a cerraine waterie coldneſſe, 
with a little harſhnefſe, earthic, dric, andcold. Therefore they are cold and&ricin the ſecondd- 
gree. To bebricfe;they are drie without biting, and cold without benumming, Theroote is of like 
remperature,but drier,and notſo cold.The ſecde is of ſubtile partes,and of temperature lefle cold. 
e" | *% The wertues. | 
A Plantaine is good for vicers that are of hard curation, for fluxes, iſſues, rewmes and rottennelſe 
and for the bloodie flixe.It ſtaieth bleeding,it healeth vp hollow ſores, and concauare vicers3s 
olde asnew. Of allthe Planraines the greateſt is the beſt, andexcellerh the reſt in facultieand 
verrne, | F | | | 
| B Theiviceor decoction of Plantaine drunken, ftoppeththe bloodie flixe and all other fluxesol 
the belly, ſtoppeththe piffing of blood, {pitting of blood, with all other iſſues of bloodin mani 
woiman,and the dcfire to vomite. | ; | | Plan 
| | | an 


" -— P89 ——_ A 


K'8, BB. kn” 


8 


'# 


'. *” HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 341 


Plantaine leaves ſtamped and made intoa Tanfic, with the yelks of egges, ſtaieth the inordinate C 
fuxc of the rermes,although it haue continued many yeeres. 

The of Plantaine with the ſeedeboiled in white wine and drunke,openeth the conduites or D | 
paſſages © the liver and kidneies,cure the iaundies,and vicerations of the kidneies and bladder. 

The iuice droppedinto the eies,dothcoole the heate or inflammation thereof, Itinde in ancient E 
writers many Good morrowes, which I thinke not meete to bring into your memorie againe, as 
thatthree rootes will cure one griefe, fower another diſcaſe, ſixt hanges abour the necke are gaod 
for another maladie,$c.all which are but ridiculous toies.. 

The re fingulargoodro make awacer to waſhaſorethroxe andmouch rhe pri parts F 
ofman or 

The ; of Planraine ſtamped, & pur into oile olive, 8ſcr.in the hor ſunne for a moneth tog i-G 
ther,and affer boiled in akertle of feerhing water (which we do call Baines Harie)8 then frained 
Mewacth; againſt the paines 1n the eares, the yarde or matrix(being SO_ intothe cares, or caſt 


- with a firing into the other parts before rehearled) or the paines of rhe fundament : prooued by 


alearned "oma eng [ Villow Godowras Sergeant noagey to the —_—_ Maicſtic. 


Ah Of Reboot, Chap: 93. 


Plantago quinqueneruie. 
| Ribwoorte Plaintaine, 


| %* The4 iption. | 
oorte or ſmall Plantalne, _ many leaues flat & A narrow,ſharpe 
| inced,and ribbed for the msſt parr with fiue UE tpn eg therefore ir was called 
vin1u:neruis : in qhemiddle of which leaues riſerh vp acreſtedor ribbed ſtalk, bearing at 
or duxic ng » ſerwitha fewe ſuch whits flowers as are the flowers of Wheate, 
| .Y = The 
| 
| 


S #® 


342 THE SECOND' BOOKE OF THE . 

The roote and other parts are like the other Plantaines. . | 

2 Roſe Ribwoort hath many broade andlong leaues;of adarke greene colour ſharpe pointed ang 
ribbed with fiue nerues or finewes, like the commonRibwoort: among whichriſe vp naked {tatke, 
furrowed, chamfered,or creſted with certaine ſharpe cdges :at theroppe whereof growerh'agrezr 
and large tuft of ſuch leauesas thoſe are that growenextthe grounde, making one entire tu ©; 
vmble,n ſhape reſembling the roſe,(whereof I thought good togine it his ſurname roſe) which is 
his lower. % The plat 

_ , Ribwoort groweth almoſt euerie where in the botders of path waies, and ferrill fieldes. 

Roſe Ribwoorrt is not very common in any place;znotwithſtanding ir | Aya: m mygarden, and 
wilde alſo in thenorth parts of Englande and in afielde neere London by a village called Hogge/. 
don founde by a learned marchant of London maſter Zames Cole, alouerot plants , and very &j. 
full in the knowledge of them. ST | | 
| *% Theteme. | 


They flower and flouriſh when the other Plantaines do. | 

> -| . % The wames. 

Ribwoorte is called in Greeke awnivwes; : in Latin Quinquenernia ,and Lanceola, or Lenceolaets: in 
rn 3 to Spitziger wenrich :in French Zanceole : in lowe Dutch Hondts rtbbe,thac is toſaic 
in Latine Coſta canjna , or Dogs rib: in pur ow Ribwoorr,and Ribwoort Plantaine. 

+ The ſecond I haue thought meere ro call RoſeRibwoortin Engliſh, and Quizqueneraia Roſecin 
atine, Lend | | {1 


| *% The temperature. 
| Ribwoortis colde anddrie inthe ſeconde degree, are the Plantaines, 
| | + Thevertnes. | 

The vertues are referred to the kindes of Plantaine, 


«4 $800 of ſea Plantaines. Chap.94. 


1 Holofleun Salamanticums. 


' HIST ORTE/OF/PLANTS. a 
-3'Thedeſs priew.. > | 


ynto the kindes of ſea Planraine, The firſt hath long leaues like the common Ribwoorte, | 
narrower , couered with an ouerworne greene-colour, with ſome hearineſſe or 


taine, beſet with many ſmall flowers of an herbie colour declining to whitenes. The ſeedis like that 
ofghe Plantaine: the roote is long and woodie.”' |: >» of | | , 

2* Theſecondis like the former, bur ſmaller : the flowers are like to Coronopas, or the leſſer Rib. 
W | | | 


3 Plantagomaring. | 4 Hohflewl Petr ewn. 


 SeaPlantaine. | Mountaine Plantaine, 


3 Thethirde kinde which is the ſea Plantaine, hath ſmall andnarrowe leaues like Buckes horne, 
but without any manifeſt inciſure, cuttings or natches vponthe one ſide :among whichriſeth yp a 
Þikie ſtalke like the common kinde, but ſmaller. | | 


4 There is alittle graffic plant growing vpon ſtonie mountaines and rockes coucred with graſle, 
\ Called Holoſteurn Petreum: ithath man 


ce leaues, ſtiffe, bentic, rough and ,As e | 
gaſſe is: the top of eche grafſic leafe dmidethir ſelfe into diuers parts in maner of aſmall cuft, The 
rooteis ſlender and very full of threddes. Lal | 
No os Melt. ee be | 
The two firſt do grow in moſt of the kingdomes of —_ Carolus Cluſane writeth thathe never 
greater or whiter then neere to Valenria, acitie 0 -_ by the high waies: fince they haue | 
beene founde at Baſtable in the Ile of Wight: and inthe Iles of Garnſey and Larſey. 
Thethrid doth growe neere vntothe ſea fide in allthe places about Englande where T have tra- 
relled.eſpecially by the fortes on both the ſides of the water at Graueſend; at Erith neere London; 


atLeein Efſex; at Ric in Kent; at Weſtcheſter, and at Briſtowe., 


wv 7 he names. 


| rw ary isalſo called P/antago angu#rfolia albida, or Plantego Hiſpanienſi: in Engliſtr Spaniſh 


Plantaine,or flowing ſca Plancaine. | | | 
m , | Y4 = The 


ſe: among which there riſerh vp a ſtalke bearing at the top a ſpike, likerhe kinds of Plan 


244 THE SECONDE|)BOOKE OF THE 
| * The temperagure and wertues. 
Galen faith,that Holoftizm' is ——_— a binding anderyiag facultic. 
Galen, Dioſeorides,and Pliny haue proouediitto be ſuch an excellent wounde herbe, hack pw 
cio rd rr a4 a wounde though it bevery great and large ge db thei anbon 
ar. chatifirbeputintoa porwhere ) rome fleſhare boiling, itwill ſoder them 


on Theſe herbes hauec the ſame faculties and) verrues that the other Plantaines haue _ PF 
thought to be the beſtofall the kindes. 1 


Bk ke Buckforn Plantaines | "IA 95. 


2 Coronopmu ſave Ser pentina miner, 
SnallSea Buckbone 


IN 
: \ 
\\ 
) \\ 
= 
4 Þ,> 
SA 
3 


/ 1 | \ 
OP 


N 


= = 


| * youu!" eſcription. | 
I He new writers following as it were b == that haue written lon agone,have 
T beene content to heare . and} na , ETD owne certainties by 5 45 ſpex- 
- ches; which w__ wrought ſuch confuſion and corruption in writings, thatſo ny__ 
ters ſomany ſundrie opinjons,as may moſt euidencly ——_ in reincheſe plants and inothers: And xl 
ſelfe am content rather rq ſuffer this ſcarre ro paſſe, than by correQting the crror, to renew the 
- wound, But for mine owne opinion thug I thinke: Theplane which is reckoned for a kinde of Cr» 
_ #opms,is doubrlefie akinde of Holoeum; my reaſon i is, bicauſe it hath graſſie leaues, or rather lcaues 
like Veronica /ylue#ris,or wilde Pinks; a roote likethoſe of Peeing or Auens,and the ſpikic cart 
of Holoftiwm or ſea Plantaine, which are certaine arguments, that theſe _ hauec —_— 
the plant, but onely the picture thereof, and ſohaue {et downe their 0 I heareſay. Thi 
plant likewiſe hath beene | pogithernkyonen vato the oldewriters, ” on the hillexn 


& 


CRECRADTRATYS3 


| ws ge the waſhings of the fea at Maflilia in great plentic, almoſt every whereamo 
| Tragaganthuw, having a moſt thicke and ſpreading cluſter of leaues, after the manner of Sedum 
| min mum ſaxemn montanum,or ſmall Stonecrop, ſomewhat like Pinaſter, or the wilde Pine, as well 


"HISTORIE OF'PLANTS. a6 
ng the 


*n maner of growing as ſtiffeneſſe, and great increaſe of his ſlender branches,which are nine inches 


long, Irhath rhe {mall ſeede of Plantaine, or Serpentine vulgaris, conteined within his ſpikie cares, 
| The roote is ſomewhat long, wooddie,and thicke,in taſte ſomewhat hotand aromaticall, | 
| 2 Theſccondfortofwilde feaPlantaineor Serpentine differerh nor fromthe former, bur onely in 


quantitie and {lenderneſle of his ſtalks, and the ſmalneſſe of his leaves, which exceede notthe 


height of to inches, growing moſt plenrifullyypon the cliffes and rocks, and the tops of the bars 


' ren mountaines of Sauena,and Narbon in Fraunce, 


Coronopre ſine ſerpentinia minime. 
; Small et Planeta 


o 


C; 


- + The deſcription. 


3 This ſmall ſcaplanc is likewiſe one of the kindes 
of ſeaPlantaine, participating as well of Buckhorne 
as of Holoſt;ams, being as it were a degenerate kind of 
ſea Planraine. It hath many grafſic leaucs, very like 
vntothe herbe Thrifte 5 among which come foorth 
little tender footeſtalkes , whereon do growe' ſmall 
{pikie knops like thoſe of ſea Plantaine. The roote is 
-tough and threddie, | | 


- 
f 
- - : 
CR 
2 


<a 


4 Cauda Muyris, Mouſeraile. | * Thedeſeription. | 

Þ 4 Mouſetaile or Cauds muris, reſemblerh the laſt 
kind of wild Coronepa or ſea Plantain,in ſinall ſpikie 
knops, leaues and ſtalkes, that I know norefſon to 
the contraric,bur that I may as well place this ſmall 
herbe among the kinds of Coropepme or Buckhorne, | 
as other writers haue placed kindes of HoloH#jumn in 
the ſame ſeion; & if that be pardonable in them, | 
I cruſt this may be tolerated in me,confidering that | 
without controuerſie this little and baſe he 2 
kinde of Holo#jum, hauing many ſmall ſhort grafſie 
leaues ſpred on the ground, an inch long orfome-. 

| whatmore; among which dorile ſmall render na- . 
ked ſtalkes of two inches long, bearing atrhe rop a | 
lirtle blackiſh torch, or ſpikie knop in wor like 


that of the Plantaines, reſerabling very notably the | 
taile of a mouſe, whereof it tooke his name, The | 
roote is ſmall and threddie. RS TR | 


| * Theplace. OS. ; 
| The felt and ſecond oftheleplints areirangers 
-& on IDE aan, bl heard ſay,that 
ney growe vponthe rockes in Scylla,Garnieyand 
the lle of Mad. 5/7) png 
'-'| Mouſetaile groweth vpon a barrenditch banke | 
| .neere vnto agate leading into a paſture, on the | 
right hand of the way as you go Rar "35 Pp 


246 | THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


V wy 4 called Hampſtecd ; ina fieldas you go from Edmonton, a village neere London, yn 
| houſethereby called Pims,by the footepathes Sficl z in Woodford Rowe in Waltham "ny hr 
uiche orchard belonging » w Maſter Fraxci, Whet Home in Bienand other places, 
* The time. 
They flower and gouriſhi in May and lane. oo 
'% The names. 
| Mathioluwiiterh, that the people of Goritia do commonly call theſe two former plants 5& 
taria and Serpentina, "bur ynproperly'; for that there be _ plants which may berter +00 
Serpentrna than theſe two ; we may call themii in Engliſh wild ſea —rupfir ung ws. doubtleſſe they 
are kindes. 
Mouſetaile is called in Ls Canuda Maris R and Canda maring : in Grecke wieeggs, or wit ws, 
Myoſarosis called of the French men Quewe - fa: in Engliſh Bloodſtrange and Mouſcraile. 
*% Thet ature. | 
Coronopmsis cold and ahie much like vnto the Plantaines. Mouſeraile i is colde and ſomething dry- 
- ingavitha kinde of aftriction or binding lol, | 
%* The wvertues. 
Their faculties in working are referred vnto the Plantaines and Harts horne. 


Of Buckborne Plantaines,or Harts horne. Chap.96. 


I Corm Cerwimon, | : 2 grrenper Ruelly 
Hartes horne. | Creſles,or Bucks horoe. 


% The Abrheti: 


Vekes borne or Hanerhome hh nw ns cr NO OE ; exon boththe ſides wit 

'B! three or fower mos ſtarres or cnagges,teſembling the braunches of an Harts horne,ſpres 
dingit ſelte on the ground like a ſtarre: from the middle whereof ſpring ſmall, 

naked hairie ſtalkes z olenternd whereofdo to grodlidelnops AND __ ſc of the ſmal 


Plantaine,Theroote 1 
7 » Znlw 


% - 


der an ds 4 
&% ab 


| HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS, 347. 

+ twins Buckes horne or Swines Crefles,hath maiyfinall and weake ſtragling braunches, trai- | 

--- heere and there vpon the grounde,ſet with manyſmall cut or1agged leaues, | Mr like the 

former,but ſmaller and nothing ar all hairie,as isthe other, The flowers growe among the leaues in? 

{all rough cluſters, of an herbic greemth colouyz which being paſt, there come in place lirtle flat | 

s broad and rough,in which the ſeede'is comtemed. The roore is white, thregdic,and in taſte 

Neche garden Creſſes. yd ' 't Thepliee,- vr] | 

| They growe in barren plaines and vntilled places,and ſandie grounds ,as in Touthill fielde neere 

| to Weſtminſter ; at Waltham eweluemiles __ London , and vpon blacke Heath alfo necre | 

1] *% Thetime. 

They flower and flouriſh when the Plantaines do,whereof theſe haue beene taken to be kindes, | 

þ | » t* Thenames. k3: SfDIpe | | 

- Buckes home is called in Latine Corna Cerninam , or Harts home: diners name it Heyba Stel'a, 

2nd Stelaria, although here be another herbe lo called : in lowe Dutch Hert5hoozen tin Spanilh | 

Gaiabella : in French Corne de Cerf.Dioſcorides & allo diuers others after him name ir porn; which 

doth ſignific Cormicts pedem,a Crowes foote : notwithſtanding itis not Coronerme,which he hath cx- | 

nſſed made the. ſamecitle : itis calleda]ſoby cerraine baſtarde names, as.Hlarenaria , or Sand- 

woort,Sanguinarie, or Bloudwoort :and of many herbe Iuje,or herbe Eue, | | 
Ef Je3s wt * The temperature. | 
Buckes horne is like in temperature to the common Plantaine , in that it bindeth, cooleth, and | 
drieth. * Thewertnes. | | 

Theleaues of Bucks horne boiled in drinke , and ginen morning andeuening for certaine daies A 
ither, helpeth moſt woondertfully thoſe that haue tore cies, waterie, or blaſted, and moſt of rhe | 
eniefes that ha vnto the cies, experimented by a learned Phiſition of Colcheſter called maſter | 

ze,and the like by an excellent apothecarie ofthe ſame townecallcd maſter Buckſfone, * + 

The leaues and rootes ſtamped with baie falr, and tied to the wreſts of the armes, taketh awaie B 
of the ague :andiit is reported to worke the like effect being hangedabout the necke of the pa- 
ientin a certaine number, as vnto men nine plants rootes and all, and vnto women andchiidren | 


Of Saracenes Conſound. Chap. 97. 


Solidago Saracenisa, Saracens Confound, * The deer iption. 8 

-  eada- 7 Aracens Conſounde hath many long narrow | 
S\) 7 Te 72 'Y leaues cutor Yeightly ſnipt abour the edges: | 

7 RS & 1 I - | among Wwhichriſc vppefaire brownehollowe | 

| MW W! -Y ſtalkes,of the height of fowercubites; along which | 
| parece PN cucn from the boxtome'tothe te ieferopith long, 
| | [- NF | ſmall, and natrowe leaues, like them of thePeach | 


rree: at the top ofthe ſtalkes growe little bleake yel- | 
low flowers, which turne into downe, and are caricd 
away with the winde.The'roote. is veric fibrous or 
q \ threddie, Fl 
| "WW "1-1/4 Rk ' Saracens Cn ame0d, 2c 150 
| | 4 ride from great Dunmowein Eſſex , vnto a plice | 
called\Clare in the faide countrey ; from whence I 
brought ſome plants immto'my- garden. \ * | 


WR 


_—_ 


My '% Thetime. > 9 gen 
| It fowrethiirMaic,andtheſcede is ripe the ſame 
6 fo rey HL *% The name. 4 S = 
 Saracenes Conſounde is calledin Latine So/idigo 
Saracenica , Or Saracens Comfrey, and Conſolide 
Saracenica: in Durch Hetidiniſch UTIundtkraut ; 
of ſome Herbs fortis:'in Raga Saracens Con-. 
ſound,and Saracenes Woundwoorrt. Ci 
- | ? *% The 


CY 
4 _ 
- 
a - = ” _ = _ 
% »« w5 
RR. % 
v 


a H_ 
5» 474 Ilan - 


- MF 


- 
9 


\ 
\ A 
; am 
- — 
”* 


348 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| #* Thenatare. 
Saracens Conſonnd is dre inthethirde de e, with ſome manifeſt heat. 
| *% Thewertues. | 
A Saracens Conſoundis not inferior toany of thewounde herbes wharſocuer, being inwardly wi. 
niſtred, or outwardly applied in ointments or oiles: with it Icurcd maſter Cartwright a gentleman 
of Grayes Inne, who was grecuoully woundedintothe lungs, andthat by Gods parnhnns in (bor 
ſpace. | 
B R Theleaues boiledi in water ken, dorh reſtraine and ſtaic the waſting of the liver,takech 
away the oppila:ion and ſtopping | © [ane,aq profirech againſt1 the jaundics and feauersof long 
continuance. 
C Thedecoction of the lezues madei in water,is excellent againſt the ſoreneſle of the throte,jfirbe 
therewith gargariſed, it increalcry alſothe venue and force of lotion or waſhing waters, appto. 
priate for priuic pores Aics,and ſuch like,if itbe mixed herewith, 


Of aide in Of. 98. 
1 Virga auree. 7] 2 Virgaaures CArnoldi Filenmes, 
Golden Rod, -| ace Ras o i) Arnoliol new CE WY 


* Pa - 
OS > 7 . - 
—_— 


I Olden Rod Ce catioker vented ſhape pointed; m_ogg ahi. | 
a riſe vp browne s two foote high, , diuiding themſelues towarde the 


eric branches;chargedor loden wirh final ellow flowers, which when they pe ume 
into downe,which is caried away with the winde. The roote is threddie and browne of colour. 
2 Theſecond fortof Golden Rod hath ſmallthinneleaues, broader than thoſe of the firſtdeſer- 
bed, ſmooth, with ſore - wn _ $ ab yutheedges,and ſhapupoi ed;of ahotandharl 
raſte inthethrote | afaire reddiſh ſtalke, whereof it tooks 
his name, The flowers owe at - top gay ny a: goldc rand fo colour, whereof ſme haue So_— | 
his name: whoſe opinion I holdfor beſts which flowers turne into downe that is carried 34) 
with thewinde, as is the fe cr, The won rope of many ſtringsor threds. th 
* 


\ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 349 


| vs The place. | | 
They both growe plentifully in Hampſteed wood neere vnto the gate thatſeadeth out of the | 
wood, vAtO 2 village called Kentiſh rowne, not far from London; in a wood by Rayleigh in Eflex, 
hardeby a Gentlemans houſe called Maſter Zzeovard, dwelling vpon Dawes heath; in Sourhfleete, 
andin $Swanfcombe wood alſo neere vnto Graueſend, IG | 
by 7 *% 7 hetime. 
. - They flowerandflouriſhin the end of Auguſt. | 
| \ : % Thenames. T | 
kiscalled in Engliſh Golden Rod : in Latine Y7rga avres, bicauſe the branches are like a gol-. 
dn rod :in Dutch Guldenroede 2 in French Yerge d'or. | | 
| * The temperature. 
Golden Rod is hot and drie inthe fecond degree; it clenſerh with a certaine aſtrition orbin- 


ding qualitie. | 


—— * Thevertnes. | 

Golden Rod prouoketh vrine, waſterh away the ſtones inthe kidneies, and expelleth them; and A 

withall bringeth downe tough and rawe flegmatike humors ſticking in the vrine veſſel;,which now 

andthen do hinder the comming away of the ſtones ; and cauſerh the grauell or fand which is 

brictle,ro be gathered rogither into one ſtone, And therfore Aryoldus Y illanouanus by good reaſon 

hath commended it againſt the ſtone and paine of the kidneies. | v4 
Itis ofthenumber of thoſe plants that ſerue for wound drinkes, and is reported that it can fully B: 

performeall thoſe things that Saracens Conſound can : and in my pratiſe ſhall be placed in the 

foremoſt ranke. itch FE: | FE 
Arnoldas writeth,that the Ciſtilled water drunke with wine for ſome few daies togither,worketh C 

the ſame effezthar is,for the ſtone and grauell in the kidneies, | ; +; 
Itisexrolled aboueall other herbes for the ſtopping of blood in fanguinolent vicers and blee- D 

ding wounds ; and hath in times paſt been had in | 2 eſtimation and regarde than in theſe daies: 

for within my remembrance, I haue knowne the drie herbe which came from beyond the ſeas, ſolde | 

inBucklers burie in London for halfe a crowne an ounce, But ſince it was founde in Hampſteed 

wood, euengs it were at ourtownes end, no man will giue halfe acrowne for an hundred weight of # 

it: which plainly ſerteth foorth our inconſtancie and ſudden murabilitic, eſteeming no longer of 

anything (how pretious ſocuer itbe) than whileſt itis ſtrange and rare, This verifieth our Engliſh 

prouerbe,Far ferchr and deere bought,is beſtfor Ladies.Net it may be more truly ſaid offantaſticall | 

Phiſitions,who when they hauec found an approoued medicine,8& perte@ remedy neer home againſt | 

any diſeaſe ; yetnot contented with that, they will ſecke for a new farther off, and by that meanes | 

many times hurt more than they helpe. Thus much I haue ſpoken,to bring theſe new fangled fel- 

lowes backe againe to eſteeme berrer of this admirable plant than they haue done; which no Coube 

bath the ſame vertue now that then it had, although it do growe fo neere our own homes in ne- 

ucr ſogreatquantitie. | 


 Oficaptaine «Andreas Doreas his Woundwoort. Chap.99. 


% The deſcription. | 

His plant hath long thicke and flat leaues; ſharpe pointed , of a blewiſh'greene like vnto | 
Woade, which being broken with the hands hath a pretie,ſpicie ſmell. Among theſe leaues 
fiſeth vp a ſtalke of the height of a tall man, diuided at the top into many other branches, | 
Wherupon growe ſmall yellowiſh flowers," which turne into downe that flieth away with the winde. 
Theroore is thicke almoſt like Helleborws albus. == | 
Of which kinde there is another like the former; bur thatthe leaues are rougher, ſomwhar blunt-' 

l indented at the edges,and nor fo fat and groſle. p x | 

| Herbs 


PA 


$50 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Herba Doria L'Obelj, | $4] | | 
Doreas Woundwoorr. | $1 + The place. 
= 2, VV 
I: | Theſe plants. growe naturally abour the bor. 
' © (ders or brinkes of riuers neere to Narbone in 
| * | Fraunce, from whence they were brought int 
' England, andare contenfro be made denizons in 
; my garden, where they flouriſh to the height 
- 'aforeſaide. 
[| .*% Thetime. 
| . | + They floweredinmy garden about the twelfth 
> of Iune,. | | 
[Y-23 |  *% Thenature. 
' Therootes are ſweete infmell, and hot inthe 
} © | [third degree, | 
T * The vertues. 
' Two drammes of the roores of Herbs Doris 
| boiled in wine and giuen todrinke,draweth down 
: wateriſh humors,andprouoketh vrine. 
' The fame is with good ſucceſle vicd inmeds 
' cines that expell poiſon. v3 


of Fe lwoort,or Baldmoney. Chap.100. 


kW 8 OP * The kinder. 
Here be diuers ſorts of Gentians or Felwoorts,whereof ſome be of our owne countrey; others 
more ſtrangeand brought further off; and alſo ſome not before this time remembred); either 
the auncient orlater writers,as ſhall be ſer foorth in this preſent chapter. ab, 


i E | | * Thedeſeription. 

I He firſt kinde of Felwoort hath greatlar 4 , not vnlike to thoſe of Plantaine, very 
well reſenbling the leaucs of the white Hellebore: among which riſeth vp a rdtnd hollow 
ſtalke as thicke as a mans thombe, full of iointsor ons! the the Portingale dead nettle, 

euery ioint or knot ſet rounde about with ſmall yellowe ſtarlike lowers, like acoronet or garlande: 

at the bottome ofthe plant nextthe grounde the leaues do ſpread themſelues abroade, embracing 
; orclippingtheſtalke in thar place rounde about, ſer togither by couples one oppoſite againlt an 
other. The ſecede is ſmall, browne, flat, and ſmooth like the ſecdes of the ſtocke Gilloflower. The 

roote is a fingerthicke. The whole plant is of abitrertaſte. . b 

2 Carolus Cluſasſerteth foorth an other ſorrof great Gentian, riſing foorth of the grounde with 

 ſtiffe,firme or ſolide ſtalke, ſer with leaues like vnto 4ſeclepius, by couples one oppoſite againſt ano 
ther cuen from the bottome tothe w in certaine diſtances : from 9 boſome of the leaues there 
ſhoote foorth ſervpon lender footeſtalkes cerraine long hollow flowers like bels, the mouth wher 

of endeth in five ſharpe corners. The whole flower changeth many times his colour according q 


the ſvile and clymate z3now and then purple orblew, ſometimes whitiſh,and often of the colour 
aſhes. The roote and ſeede is like the precedent, 2% i 
| * oe ; I Gent 


Ll 


HISTORTE: oF. PLANTS. 


et 


$1947 was,” * 
*% 


4 Gentiens Penne minor. 
Spotted "_—" of D.Pennic. 


£ 
- 
: 
4 

po 
E# 
p- 


EAT BE 


ET Tor © - T _ or p oy 
rt il LEO 0 8 COTS OT WY: 


352 THE SECOND! OOKE) OF! THE 

2 Croflewoort Gentian hath many ribbed leaues ſpredwoetrthe ground, aund, like veto the | 

Sopewoort,butofa blacker mamma. nom : among which riſe —_— jointed ſtalkes caling : 
| teaningr rowardethe grounde, The flowers growe at the rop in bundels thicke thruſt toLither Fi 

thote of ſweete Willams , of alight blew colgur, Therooteis thicke,andcreepeth in the grounde 

farce abroade, whereby i greatly incteaſeth, || || 

4 CarolusCluſaw hath fer foorth in his Pannihides hiſtorie a kinde of Gentian, which he 

from maſter Thames Pennie n, door in Phiſicke of famous memoric, and a Pens» Dif 

corides for his fingular knowledge in ants: which Taber Aontenz hath ſer forth i in his Duck 

booke for the Geench of nin, ; wherein he greatly deceiued himſelte , and hath with —_ 
ſcription wrongedothers. : 

e12. ſort orkinde of Gantiangfher Cluſiws hath arounde ſtiffeſtalke, firme and ſolide, ſome. 
what reddiſh atthe bottom, jointed or kneed like vnto Croſſewoort Gentian,The leaucs are broad, 

{mooth, full of ribs or ſinewcs ,ſer abourtke ſt4lkes by couples, one oppoſite gant another, The 

flowers growe vpon ſmall cender ſtalkes,com; act of fiue lender blewiſh leaves, ſported very curi 

ouſly with many blacke ſpots and littlelines ;| jauing in the middle fiue yellow echi ues. The ſeede 
| is ſwalllike ſande: the! toore is little, yoo _ a fewe ſtrings ofa rn colour, 
e place, *© 
Gentian = goo in thadowie woods,and the exe FO of lealie,Slauonia;Germaty, 
and Bur from whence maſter Jſaac de Lawxe aleamedphiſition , ſentmeplants for "A 
creaſe of m pe, wa Croſſewoort Gentian growerh i ina paſtureatthe welt ende oflictleRaynein 
Eſſex, on - 4 north ſide of the waic leading fram Braintric tone Dey zandin the horlemy 
by the ſame cloſe. «of | | 
- 14. The time, | 
They flower and Aouriſhin Auguſt;and the ſecede isripein Sorenlbd 
 *% The names. 

Gentins king of Nlyrhwras the firſt landed of this herbe,andrhe firſt that vſed it in medicine, fir 
which caule it was called Gentian afterhis owne name ; in Greeke nei : which name alſo the 
thecaries reraine vnto this daie,and call it Gentiana : -itls n2ncdi in Engliſh Felwoott tt Gencan 
terwoort; ; Baldmoyne,and Baldmoney: : 

| "ou Thetemperature, 


The roote of Felwoort is hot, as Dia feorides faith, c clenſingorfſeouting; duers copies hw 
'itis likewiſe binding,and of abirter rake, || 


*% The ver}aes. 

A Ilrisexcellentgood,as Galen faith ,whch there is neede of attenuating, purging, clenſing, andre- 
moouing of baths ol valiric it taketh of his extreme Kicrernells, " 

B lIrtis repontedto be good for thoſe thar are troubled withcrampes and conuulfions; for ſichs 
arcburſt,or hauefallen from ſome high place 3 for ſuch as hauc ewill livers and bad ſtomackes, It 
put into ——_— Asintothe compolietn named Theriats diateſſaron: which AEtimcalleth 
AMyFHernws, a ie or hid ſecret. 

C Thisisof ſuch force and verrue, faith »linie, that it helperh carte which are not onely troubled 
with the cough,but are alſo broken winded. 

'D Therooteof Gentiangiuen in powder the quantitie of 2 drain wich a little pepper and herde 
Grace mixed therewith,is p rofirable for themthar are birren or ſtung with any maner of venemous 
beaſt or madde Dogge: or for any that hath raken poiſon. | 

E ThedecoQtiondrunke is good againſt the ſtoppings ofthe liuer and ſtomackehelperh digeſtion 
diſſolueth andſcartereth ——— bloud; and is good _ all colde diſcaſes of the inwar® 


parts, 


Of Engl: ih felboor Chapaon 


*T bedeſeription. 
Ollowe leaſed Felwoort or Engliſh Gentian,hath manylong rough rootes,difj | 
H and thither within the vpper cruſtof the earth ; fromwhich immediately riſeth a fat tice 
ſtalke,joinred or kneed by certaine diſtances, ſer ar euery knot with one leafe,and ſomerimes 
mo,keeping no certaine number: which frans doat the firſt incloſe the ſtalkes round about,bei's 


La.4 LES " ls } 8 


HIST ORIE) /OFOPLANTS. |: ves 
one whole and entire <leafe without any inciſure at all, as it were a hollowe tri nke; which afteritis 
entolis ft X *breakethyin' one fide or other, and b-c&mmettt a flarri To Teaſe, like voto 


' Jooreat Getitiart of Plantaine,” The flowers come foorth of che boſomie of the'vpper leaucs, ſet 


render foote ſtalkes, in ſhape like thoſe of the ſmall Bindweede, or rather the flowers of Sope- 


- woortof a whitiſh.colour, waſhrabour the brane with a little light carnation, Then wfolowerh the 
| poephichasyerThave notobſerud | | Ys 4 


' "4 


od "Y 


ee leg | Erif 


F I _ ſtrange We rcmgs ind | 
mall grouc of wood called innic, neere 
vnto a ſinall village in orthampeon/ſhire 
"_ Lichbarrow : cliewhere haves not heard 
of it 


* ha 
It ſpringeth foorth the ground in Aprill, 
and bringeth foorth his flowers and ſeede in 
the endot Auguſt, 


% The vhotr 
I haue thought good to giue vnto this plant, 
in Engliſh the name Gentian ,being doubtlcfle 
|. . akindethereof. The which hath-nor beene ſer 
| foorth, nortemembredby any that hath writ- 
ten of plants yntill this rime, In Latinewe may 
call it Genti4xa concaus, of the hollow leaves: 


it may becalledalſo Hollow leafed Felwoorr, - 


1% T/, « temperature 4 and wetues. 
|. - » Ofthefaculries of this plant, as yetT can ſay 
of nothing, referring it vntothe other Gentians, 
 . vncillrime ſhall ciſcloſe that, which yetis ſe- 
crete and ynknowen, 


Of Baſtard Felwoort. Chap.to2. Pu 


% The defeription. 


He Baſtard Felwoort hath many ſmall tender branches,ſet with —_—_— leanes at every | 

joint by couples like thoſe of the ſmall Centorie, Act the top of the ſtalks do grow hollow 

flowers,bell faſhion, of anexcellent faire blew colour, like vnto thoſe lowers which Dodo- = 

newcallerh Yjola Calathjana. Theſeede is blacke, que very ſmall, Theroote is very little, and lome 

thereto faſtened. 

2 Theſecondkine hath many little ribbed "et like thoſe of the ſinall Planraine; z among which 
tiſeth vp a tender ſtalk ſet with ſuch leaucs by couples, as thoſe were thatdid grow next the ground, 
The flowers grow atthe top of the ſtalkes, © _— of fiuelittle leaues , of a perte@blew colour, 

roote is jeinagl and tender, 
| Z 1 I Gentianell 


Foe 


254 THE SECONDE|  BOOKE OF! THE 


, WES | J $: | | | 
1 Gentianella Alpina xi.Clusyj. | 2 Gemtianella Alpina verna. 
Baſtard Felwoorr,,, |, © | AlpesFelyoortoftheſpringrine 


Y 
(' | 


£ —_ _ 
5 Ge 
— 


AR... 


: 


tr: 6,0þ:108 The ple, > 
Thefirſt of theſe wilde Gentians doth growe vpon the mountaines of Helueria, and qfGerms- 
nie,bur are ſtrangers asyetin England, |. WR bs | £ 
 Theſecond Cope plenrifu = in Waterdowne foreſt in Suſſex, inthe way that leadeth from 
Charlewoodes lodge vnto a houfe ofthe Lord of Abergauenie, called Eridge houſe, by a brooke 
ſide there,eſpecially vpon a heath by Colbrooke neere London; on the plaine of Salisburie, hade 
by the curning from the ſaide plaine vnto the right honorable the Lorde of Pembrookes houſe a 
Wilton, and vponachalkie banke inthe high moe berweene Saint Albons and Goramberrie, 
| a | [ " W Thetime. | 
\« They flower and flouriſh from Auguſt to theende of October. | 
L on is as much ſaide inthe title toiiching their names, as is extant in writing, aſwell in Englik | 
as LAatne, | | E | BY 
: * The temperature and vertnes. 
There faculties in working are referred vatothe other Gentians, alchough they be of leſle force 


and bitterneſle, 


Of Calathian Vulet, or Autumne bell flower. © Chap.103. 


*T he deſeription. 


Mong the number of the baſe Gentiansthere is a ſmall plant, which is late before it com- 

meth yp, hauing ſtalks a ſpan high,and ſometimes higher,narrowe leaues like vnto Time, er 

by couples about the ſtalkes by certain diſtances: long hollowe flowers growing at the 

top of the ſtalkes, like acup called a Beaker, wide at the top, and narrower towarde the bottone, 

of a deepe blewe colour tending topurple, with certaine white threds or chiues in the bortome; | 
the flower at the mouth or brim is five cornered before it be opened, but when ir is y 296 it ap 

ore with five cliftes or pleates, The wholeplant is of abirter taſte, which plainly eweth ito 

akinde of wilde Gentian, Theroote is ſmall, and periſheth when it hath perfected his ſeede, 

and recouereth it {elfe by falling of the ſamie | | | | 
- | Pneumonantle. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. — 
Pneumonanthe. | $5 | 
Calathian Violet, 1 The Place. 


f | Iris founde ſometimes in meadowes, often-| 
W/W, times in vnrilled places, It groweth vpon Long. | 
FF} fielde downesinKent, neere ynto a village cal- 


15” - 
T5 ” 


y }/ led Longfielde by Graueſendezvpon the chalkie 


cliffes neere Greene-Hythe & Cobham in Kenr, 
and many other places. Ir likewiſe growerh as 
you ride from Sugar Joafe hill ynto Bathe, in the 
weſt countrey, Y . 
| L, - *% Thetime. 
The gallant flowers heereof be in their braue- 
rieabout the end of Auguſt, and in September, 
| % The names. 
There is great ambiguitie in the words of Pl 
nic and Raellius,which Ido not intendetorepear, 
| bicauſe they dorather confounde the memorie, 
then bring any profite to the Reader. They com- 
pare the yellow Marigold, with the bleweor azu- 
red Calathian Violet, which are no more like, 
then things that are moſt vnlike. Nowithſtan- 
ding, for the better ſatisfying ofthe curious Rea- 
der,[ſhall deliver vnto you the wordes of Ruc{/;- 
«s. Calathian Violetis thegiftot Autumne: the 
other Violets are of the ſpring : it hath, ſaith he, 
(and that truely)alitrle leafe,not vnlikero that of 
the ſmall ſtocke gilloflower altogither without 
ſmell, The flower is like a little bell cuppe, grow- 
Sr On ing onelyin Autumne, offo beaurifull a colour, 
thatit paſſeth the very blewe it ſelfe. By which words we may gather, it can be no kinde of yellowe 
Marigolde as P/;ny woulde haue it. Itis called /jola Autwnnalis, or Autumne Violet , andicemeth 
tote the ſame that Y ater ius Cordus doth call PF newnonanthe,vhich he ſaith is named in the Germain 
toong Lungen blumen,or Lung flower : in Engliſh Autumne bell lowers,Calathian violers, and 
of lome Harueſt bels. ! En: 


*% The temper ature. YL: 
This wilde Felwoort or Violert,is in temperature hot,ſomewhar like in facultie ro Gentian,wher- 
ofit is akinde,but farre weaker in operation. | 
| % The vertnes. | | | 
Thelatter Phifitions hold it to beeffeQuall againſt peſtilent diſeaſes, and the bitings and ſting- A 
ings of venemodtis beaſts. 


_ Of Venus Looking glaſſe. Chap.104. 
% The deſcription. | 


:  Efides the former Bell-Aowers, thereis likewiſe a certaine other, which is low and little z the 
1}) ftalks whereof are render, rwo ſpans 9 7 get into many branches moſt commonly lying 
' vpon the ground, The leaues aboutthe ſtalkes arelircle,lightly nicked in theedges, The flow- 
ersare very ſmall , of a bright purple colour tending blewneſle very beaurifull, with wide mouthes 
like brode bels, hauing a white chiue or thred in the midd!e. The flowers in the day time arewide 
open, and abour the ſerting of the ſunne are ſhut vp and cloſedfaſt togirher, in finecorners,as they 
ae before their firſt Cl ar as the other Bell lowers arc. The rootes be very lender, and pe- 


liſh when they baye perfected their ſeed, = 
ko Sie | 'Z3 Specnlun 


356 THE SECOND /BOOKE' OF THE 


 Speculunm V eneris. Venus Looking elaſſe, 


N 4 
Q T/ 


ee/ing roote,or 


x Helleborws alÞus. 
Whae Hcllebor. 


'inap entifull and fruirfull ſoile, I found itin a field 
- among thecorne by Greenehithe , as I went frog, 
 thencetoward Dartford in Kent, & in manygthe 
* | places therabout,but not elſewhere ;from whence 

' Ibrought of the ſeedes for my garden, where 
| come yp of themlclucs from yeere to yeere wal 


ling of the ſeede. 

; * Thetime, 

| IrflowrethinJuneandluly, andthe ſced Is pe 
intheendof Auguſt, 

F * The names. 


brycha, but vnproperly : of other Carrophylim/e 
' tum, or Corne Glllotower, or Cs: 
 Speculum Y eneris,or Ladies glaſſe. The Brabanders 


'incheir toongcall it U2owen Spiegel, 


; | We hauenot found any thing writren citherof 
his vercue or temperature , of the ancient orlater 
'WTILETS, 


\leeſewoort. (hap.ros. 


*% The place. 


It powen inploughed fields among the come, 


It is called Campane Arzenſis, and of ſome Ow- 


* The temper atare and Vertues. 


2 Helleborws albus pr ecox. 
Timely white Hellebor. 


A 
EE 


- — 


iS. 8. BE 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 3957 


% Thede ſcription. 


and not vnlike the lcaues of the great Planraine,folded into pleates like a garment pleated 
to belaide yp in acheſt; among thele leaues. riſeth vpa ſtalke cubite long , ſet towardes | 


1 Þ He ficſt kinde of white Hellebor hath leaues like vnto prear Gentian,but much broader, 


the rop full of little ſtarlike lowers,of an herbie greene colour tending ro whiteneflez which being 


aſt there come {mall huskes containing the ſeede. Theroote is great and thicke, with many ſmall 


_ thredshanging therear. | 


2 Theſecond kinde is very like the firſt,and differeth in that, that this hath black reddiſh flowers, 
and commeth to flowring before the other kinde,and feldome in my garden commeth ro ſeeding. 
EF % The place, | 
The white Hellebor growerh on the Alpes, and ſuch like mountaines where Ggntian dof grow. 
It was reported vnto me by the Biſhop of Norwich, that white Hellebor groweth in a wood of his 
owne neere to his houſe at Norwich. Some fay likewiſe thatit doth growe ypon the mountaines of 
Wales; I fpeake this vpon report, yetI thinke not, but that it may be true, Howbcir Idare aſſure 
you,that they grow in my garden at London,where the firſt kinde flowreth and ſeederh very well. 
 *% Thetme. | 
+ Thefirſt Aowreth in Iune,and the ſecond in May. . 
| | + The names. 


|| Neeſewoortis called in Grecke ®9Copes Mende: In Latine YVeratrum album, Hellebor us albus, and 
 Sareuis Hereulens, The Germans call it UTIr1T5 mieſFuurt; the Dutch men Nieſwoztel: the Irali- 


ans Elleboro bianco: the Spaniardes Yerd: g45578 blanco: the French Elebord blanche : and we of 
Englandcall it white Hellebor, Niefwoort, Lingwoort, and the roote Neeſing powder. 
| | - *%* Thetemperature. 
| Theroote of white Hellebor , is hot and drie in the thirde degree. 
| *% Thewvertnes. 

The roote of white Hellebor procureth yomite mightely , wherein confiſterh his chiefe vertue, a 
2ndbythat meancs voideth all ſuperfluous flime and naughtie humours, Iris good againſt the fal- 
lng ſicknes,phrenſies, ſciatica, dropſics, poiſon,and agunlſt all colde diſeafes that be of hard cura- 
tion,and will not yeeld to any gentle medicine, | fn 
| This ſtrong medicine made of white Hellebor, ought nor to be given inwardly vnto delicate B 
bodies without great correRion,but it may more ſafely be giuen yato countrie people which feede 
groſſely,and haue hard,tough,and ſtrong bodies, | | 

Therooteof Hellebor cut in ſmall peeces,ſfuch as may aptly and conueniently be conueied into C 
the Fiſtlaes doth mundifiethem, &raketh away the callous matter which hindererh the curation, 
atidafterward way be healed vp with ſome incarnative vnguent,fr for the purpoſe, eo ET 
' Thepowder drawen vp into the noſe cauſeth ſneeſing , and purgeth the braine from grofſe and D 
flimie humours. : | 

+ The roote giuetito drinke in the waight of two pence, takerh awaie the firs of agues , killeth E 
mice and rattes being made vp withhonte and flower of wheate : P/;zze addeth that it is a medicine 


agaiutthe Lowhie evill, 
Of wilde white Hellebor. ( hap.106, 
* The deſeription. | 


I H E#borine is like voto white Hellcbore,, and for that cauſe we haue given itthe name of 

Heltborine : it hath a ſtraight ſtalke of u foote high , ſet from the botrome to the tuft of 

fowers ith faire leaues,ribbed and chamfered like thoſe of white Hellebor, of a darke greene co- 

lour:The flbwers be orderly placed fromthe middle to the roppe of the ſtalke, hollowe within, and 

white of colour,ſtraked heere and there with a daſh of purple, in like the lowers of Szririon, 

The fecde is ſinall like duſt or mores in the ſunne. The roote is ſmall, full of juice, and bitter in 
"= | | 


Ulxture at all, wherein couliſterh the difference. | | ; 
| : ® T 3 | 1 Helleborine 


2 The ſeconde is like vnto thefirſt , bur alrogither greater , andthe lowers white, without any 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| 2 Helkborine fore albo, 
T Wilde Neclnooeid his foe 


F; —_— | - k 
" <4 i 


3 rule wants 5. Claſi. 19 | | 
Narrow leafc Neecſewoart.} | | %* Th deſeription 
| 3. Thethirdekinde of + row being thei af 
ter Claſius account , hath leaurs like the firſtdeſcn- 
bed,bur ſmaller and narrower, The ſtalke riſcth vt 
the height of two ſpans ; at the top whercof grone 
faireſhining purple coloured flowers, conſiſting of 
ſixc lictle leaues , within or among which licth hid, 
things like ſmall helmers. The a; in proporrionjs 
like the other of his kinde, The co0te is finall ant 
x inthe ground, 
| * 7 he plice, - 
[They be _—_ in dankiſh. and ſhadowie 
the firſt was found growin Tg 
well paſtures , na Tamils from Welwen in Hatt- 
ford(hire- it groweth i in a woode fiue miles from 
ondon, neere vnto a bridge called Lockbridge: by 
ottingham neere to Robinhoode his well, whae 
my friend maſter Steven Byedwell a learned phiſiion 
founde the fame: in the woods by Dunmowe1n 7 
ſex: by Sourhfleere in Kent ;in alittle grouc off lugs 
15.00 ina woode by Clare in Eſſex. 
* The time. 
l | They flower in Maie and Iune, andperfect as 
| feedein A 
* The names. 


\Thellkeneſe that ithach with white has 


HISTORIE'OF!/PLANTS. | || ”/ 339 
doth ſhewe it may nor vnproperly be named Helleborine, or wilde white Hellebor, which is alſocal- 
dof Dioſeride jdes and Plinie immazic, or Epipattic;burfrom whence thar name came it is norappa- 


alſonamed «9». . : *% The temperature. = . 
Theyarthovghrrobehoranddrie of nature. | Y; | | 
- '*% Thewvertues. ' 
The faculties of theſe wilde Hellebors are referred vnto the white Neeſencort , whereof ty A 
kindes. 
"Irs reported,that the decoQtion of wilde Hellebor drunken, openeth the hopping of the liner, B 
any imperfeCtions of the ſame. | 
Of our Lacies $ hg Chap.to7. 
Calceolns Marie. | | 
Our Ladies Shipper. | | & The defeription.. 


Vr Ladies Shooe or Slipper, hath a thicke 
knobbed roote, with certaine markes or 
D notes vpon the ſame, ſuch as the rootes of 
_a Salamons Scale haue, butmuch lefler, creeping 
7 ig ED within the vppet cruſt of the ground; from which 
rifeth vp a ſtiffe and hairie ſtalke a foore high, ſer 
by certaine ſpaces, with faire broad leaues, ribbed 
with the like ſtnewes or nerucs, as thoſe of the 
Plantaine. Arthe top of the ftaike groweth one 
fingle flower, ſeldome two, faſhioned on the one 
fidelike an egge; on the other fide it is open,emp- 
tic,and hollow, andof the forme of a thooor flip- 
per,whercof i ittooke his name ; ofa yellow colour 
on the outſide, and of a ſhining deepe yellow on 
the inſide. The middle part 15 compaſſed abour 
with fower leaues,of a bright purple colour, often 
of a light red, or obſcure crimſon, apd fomerimes 
yellow as is the middle part, which, in ſhape is like 
an ow aforeſaid. | 
1% The ela, 

| Ladies Slipper groweth vpon the mountaines 
of \E57 popmann. __— erg I haue aplant 


rr oy 


"7 2257: by 
, 


- Ielomrerh abourchemittelfftibie, 
'* The names. © | | 
> --Fths commonly called Calceolus D. Marti: and. 
—_ | Mrs 'of fore Calceolus Sacerdotis + of Tome: | 
: in our Ladies ſhoo, of Slipper : inthe ww oooh Loa | 
3ando oa Danger rthen. 
| The remperatureand' VEertues. 


PUSFR'S 


jchingh pak of our Lakes ſhoo, wee haue ligne, bring nor cnt | 


eto the old. OREN nor © PG Ps new. 


F- [n KN | 5 


2312 offs 
Het Hof Sepia :vO01 
© lea oh enſan 


L4 


360 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
rootes bowing backwardes. The flowers inthe top of the ſtalks,and abourthe vppermoſt ivints we 
many ell ſmelling, ſomerimes of a beautifull red colour like a Roſe,otherwhile of a light purplegr 

* whice,which growe our of long cups, conliſtingoffiue leaues : inthe middle of which are certajne 
lictle threds. The rootes are thicke, long, creepin Fs 500k HR ſtrings hanging outof 
hem,like to therootes of blacke Hellebor, And if they haue once taken good & ſure rooting in Ha 

ground,itis impoſſible to deſtroy them, © Prat | 
S aponaria.Sopewoort ot Brulewoort. . 


;* The place. 


| Irisplanted ingardens for the flowers ſake,tothe 
decking vp of houles, for the which purpoſe i chief. 
ly ferueth, Itgroweth wildeof ir ſelfe neere to rivers 
and running brookes in ſunnie places. | 
N17 * Thetame. | 
| Itflowrethin Iuneand luly. | 
| * The names. | 
|| SS”,  Iriscommonlycalled Saponar;«,of the great cou. 
a\L-/ =} *P; ring qualitic that the leaues haue, For they yeelde 
ZE out of themſclues a certaine iuice when they are 
bruſed, which ſcowreth almoſt as well as Sope; 4 
though Xue{wes deſcribe a cerraine other Sopewor, 
Of ſome it is called Aſma, or Dameſonium : of 
others S4poneria Gentiana, whereof doubrieſſe jtis 
a kinde: in Engliſh it is called Sopewoort, andof 
 ſomeBruſewoorr, | 


L 4 *7 he temperature and Veriues. : 

' Tris hotanddrie,andnota little ſcowring withal 
having no vic in phiſicke ſet downe by any abr 
credit. | 


M—. - 


} Arſmart,or pag 1 aoper- (hap.109. T4 
I Rſmart bringeth foorth ſtalks a cubite Mepround Sngods jolnegderhnded, denbngeny 
ſclucs into many braunches : wheteon grow leaues like thoſe of the Peach tree,or of thelat 
| low tree. The flowers growe in cluſters vpon long ſtems , out of the boſome of the braur- 
ches and leaues andlikewiſe vponthe ſtalkes rhemſclues, of a white coJour tending toa brightpur 
le : after which commeth foorrh lictle ſeeds ſomewhar broade,of a reddiſh yellowe, and ſomimes 
blackiſh,ofa ſharpeandbitingraſte , asis allchereſt ofthe plane, and like vnto Pepper , whereof 
rooke his name; yethathitno ſinell atall, | OX PE is 
2 Dead Arſmarrt is like vnto the precedent in ſtalks, cluſtering flowers,rootes, and ſcede,and 
fereth in that, thar this plant hath certaine ſpots or markes vponttheleaues , in faſhion of ahalfe 
moone,of the colour of lead. The roote is ſinall andthreddie: the whole plant hathiio ſharpearby 
ting taſte as rhe other hath, bur as itwere a little ſower ſmacke vponthe toong, The roote is Ike 
 wiſefullofſtrings or threds. | 44 ESie. 2 HS + 7 agt'< Lab 
3 There is (faith Zobelixe ) a kindyol/ Per fptle POWINg in Germanic and Sauoy,whichT 
named Nolime tangere,touch me not; thexeaſon of the name is, faith he, bicauſcir ath the = 
of Mercurie,the ſeede of Balſanine,and the purple flowers of Larks heele ; all which are moſt ber 
ſome herbes both for meate and medicine: andcontrariwiſe this plant carying the faceof a 


% 


ſomeherbes, is moſt venemous and deadly, Therefore,faith he,takethis note by theway Ll ons 
' tengere. touch menot, that is,haue ſpecial regard, that in gathering of theſe wholſoreherdes,! 


=_ 


—— et = lth. Cs i ar. 


V TW" W. 


SS T5 eo 


;:-- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
per. 144 2 Per ſicaria maculoſe. 


, 
S*%® , + 
- 
* 
- 


wa) |}  Theygoweverycommon almoſteuery where : 
{6 NS EAM in ni6itand watcTriſh plaſhes, andneere to the 
= = |  brimsofrivers,ditches, and running brookes. 

L | | 


i | Theyflowerfi blo fluneroth 
| Theyflowerfromr inning of Iune to the 
| ende of Auguſt. | | 
LS. | * The names. | 

| - Arſmarrt'is called in Greeke vJernime:: of the 

W; ' Latines Hydropi ,or P uaticum,or - 
TOR tile, or water Pepper: in of Durch Uinatte 
yl; Preffer : in lowe Durch Unater Peper: in 
| French Curage, or Culrage: in Spaniſh Pimenta 
 aquatica: iter Pepper , Culrage, 

' and Arſmart, ing to his operation and 

 effe&, when it is -ſedin thoſe parts. 

| Dead Ariſmartis called Per/jcaris, or Peach- 

' woort, of thelikeneſſe thatthe leaues hatie with 

thoſe of the Peach tree, Tehath beene called 
 Plambago of the leaden coloured markes which 

areſeenc vpdnthe leaues; but Plmie would have 

ir called P/ambago, not of the colour, but rather 
ofthe effe&, by reaſon! that ithelperh the infir- 

' mirie of theeies called Phiwbum: yet rhere is an 

other Plunbezo of Plinies deſcription, as _ ” 

c 


362 _ THE. SECOND{({BOOKETOF:THE | 
ſhewed in his proper place: in Engliſh we may call it Peachwoort, and deadiArfinart . bic,.c. : 
doth not bite 9% HF 20 as the = doth. { | A . _ It 
Od | | The temperature. | 

Arſmarrt is hot anddrie: yet not ſo horas Pepper, according to Galen, 

Dead Arſmart,is of temperature colde and fomthing drie. 

| ” * Thewertaes, | = 

The leaues and {cede of Arſmart do waſte and conſume all colde ſivellings , diſfolue audſcg. 
ter congealed bloud that commerh of bruſings or ſtripes. | J 14h | 

The ſame bruſed and bound vpon an impoſtume inthe ioints of the fingers (called among the 
vulgare ſorta felloh or vncome)tor theſpace of an hower, raketh away the paine: bur ſaith the Ib 
thor,it muſt be firſt buried ynder a ſtone before it be applied; which doth ſomewhar diſcredite the 
medicine. h | - | | Ft. : 

The leaues rubbed vpona tyred iades backe , and a good handfull or two laide vnder the (4dyle 
and the ſame ſer 0n againe , woonderfully reteſheth the weaticd horſe, and cauſeth him rotrauel 
much the berter. | | HR | j 

Iris reported that dead Arſmartis good againſt inflammations and hor ſivellings, being ap- 
plied in the beginning,and for greene woounds1t it be ſtampedand boiled with oile # Keen. 
rurpcntine. | ; - | 7 | | 


- 


Of Bell flowers, Chap.nto. 


Sik *% The kindes. 9 | 
T Herebe diuers ſorts of Bell lowers , whereof the greateſt number of them when they be bro 
ken or bruſed do yeelda milkic juice: ſomelikewiſe be grear, others ſmall; differing verynou- 
blic aſwell in colgur of flowers , as inſhape and proportion : which ſhall be deuided into ndrie 
chapters cores the necrneſle ofthem in kinred and neighbourhood: and firſt we wil deſcribe 
Coucntrie bels, called Yio/s mariana. us 05 | 


1 Yiols Mariina. * | Fr 2 Viola Marianeftore «lbs. 

Blew Couentricbels, _ White Coucntrie bels. 
WAY oy b we mo ef? 
N AL ( iz 

WIZ © 

SA \\ ) WE; | 

SET FANVE 2 


HISTORIE OF" PLANTS... 7 T7 


| % T he deſcription. ee) AY 
| FN Ouentrie bels hath broade leaucs,rough and hairie; not vnlike torhoſe ofthe garden By- 
6 olofle,of a ſwart greene colour : among which do riſetiffe hairie ſtalkes, the ſecond yeere 
> after rhe ſowing of rhe feede,which ſtalke deuiderk it ſelfe into ſundrie Lravnches, where- 
upon Coc growe many faire andplcafant Bel! lowers,long, hollowe, andcut onthe biim with fire 
{eight gaſhes,ending in five corners toward night when the flower ſhurrerh ic ſelfke vp, as do the 
sf the Bell Bowers : in the middle of the flowers be three or fower whitiſh chines,as alſo much 
Jowny haire,fuch as is in the cares of a dpgge or ſuch like bealt.The whole fawer is ofa blew purple | 
colour, which being paſt,there ſucceede grear ſquare or cornered ſeede veſſels , deuided on the in- 
ide into diuers cels, or chambers, wherein doe lic ſcatteringly many ſmall browne flar ſeeds. The 
rooce is long and great like a parſnep, garniſhed with many threddie ſtrings which peritheth when = 
irhath perſefted his ſecede , which is-in the ſeconde yeere after his ſowing, and recouereth it (elſe | 
againe by rhe falling of the ſecede. RY 0G : Es 
+  Theſecond _ with the firſt in cachreſpeR,as well in leaues,ſtalks,as rootes; and differeth 
in that;chat this plant bringeth foorch milke white flowers,and the other not1o. | 
an & Theplace. | 
They growe in woods,mountaines and darke vallics,and vnder hedges amongthe buſhes, eſpc- 
cially about Couentrie, where they growe very plentifully abroad inthe fie!des, and are there cal- 
lcd Couentrie bels z and of ſome about London Canterbury bels,but vnproperly ; for that there is 
;nother kinde of Bell lower growing in Kent abour Canterbury, which may more fitly be called - 
Canterburie bels,bicauſe they growe there more plentifully than in any other countrie. Theſe plea- 
fant Bel lowers we hauc in'our London gardens,cſpecially for the beauty of their flowers,although 
they be kindes of Rampions,and rhe rootes eaten as Rampions are [ 
| | - % Thetime. | | | 
They flower in Iune, Inly, and Auguſt, the ſeed waxerh ripe inthe meane time; for theſe plants | 
donotbring foorth their flowers all at once,bur by parcels ; for when one flowretb,another ſeedeth, 
andb6th ypon one branch, FE | | | 
PA | *% The names. | " 
Coventric bels are called in Latine Yjo/z Mariana, cr Mercuties violets, and Coventric Rapes, 
and of fome Mariertes, It hath been taken to be Medion, but vnproperly,Ot ſome ir is called R:pum 
flueftre hich the Grecianscallz-144an ayere. 
| % The temperature an4vertues. | 
The roote is colde and ſomewhar binding, and nor viedin phificke, but eſteemed for one of the 
ſallet jootes,boiled and cat en wich oile,vineger and pepper, "| 


Of T brotewoort,or Canterbury Bels. (/hap.no. 


| * Theateſerivtion. | _ | 
He firſt ofthe Canterburie bels hath rough and hairie brittle ſtalks,creſtedintoacertame 

} fquarenefſe, diuiding cthemſclues into divers branches, whereupon do growe veryrough 

'* ſharpepointed leaues, cur about the edges like the teeth of a ſawe; and fo like the leaues 
ofnertles, that it is hard ro knowe the one from the other, but by touchingthem. The flowers arc | 
hollow, hairie within, and of a perfe@ blew colour, bell faſhion, not vnlike tothe Couentrie bels. 
Therocte is white,thicke and long laſting, | | ". 
2 Thewhite Canterburie bels are ſo like the precedegr,thatir is not poſſible to diſtinguiſh them, 
but byrhe colour of the flowers ; which of this plant is a milke whitecolour, & of the other a blew, | 
which ferterh foorth the difference. | | ae? | 
3 Thethirde fort of Canterburic Bels , called likewiſe Throtewoorte,of his vertue incuring the 
leaſes of the throteghath lang leanes,ſharpe pointedflightly indented about the edges. The ſtalks 
wvcround and hairie, diuiding themſclues into ſundrie braunches , euen fromthe borrome to the 
top,hereupon do grow pleaſant, flowers faſhioned like Bels,of a faint purple colour, The roore & 
ſeedes are like vnto the great Canterburic Bels. "2 > I 
4 The ſmall Canterburie Bels,hath vexy rough leaues,fomwhat cut about the edges. The flowers 
gone at the top of the ſtalke bellfaſhion,of a pleaſant azure blewe colour, The rooreis like the pre- 
cedent, bur alrogither ſmaller,which is the true aig right Calathian Violet. | 


I Tracheliuwnm 


364 THE SECOND, BOOKE OF THE ' 
1 Tracheliom mains. | | | | 4 2 Trachelium mam flore albs, | 
Blew Canterburie bels, © | | White Canterburie bels, | 


PW Er 


q - 
a. 
. 


; medbibowingwntiin | | | IG Tre 


Dutch Throtewoort, | Small Canterburie bels, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS: 355 
6 Viola Calathians. 


| Theutue Cylathian Violer. 


5 Giants Throtewoort hath very Jarge leaues of an ouerworne greene colour, hollowedin the 
middle like the-Moſcouites ſpoone, and very rough, {li ghely indented about the edges. Theſtalke 
5 two cubites high, whereon thoſe leaues arc ſer from the botrome to the top; from the boſome of 
eachleafe commeth foorth one ſlender footeſtalke , whereon doth growe a faire flower faſhioned 
like abell, ofa whitiſhccolour tending to purple, Thepointed corners of each flower turne them- 
ſelucs backe like, #ſcroule,or the Dalmatian cap ; in the middle whereof commeth foorth a ſharpe 
ſtile or clapper of a yellow colour. The roote is thicke,with certaine ſtrings annexed thereto. 

6 The (ltr kinde of Throtewoort of my owne deſcription hath ſtalkes and leaues very like vn- 
tothe preat Throtewoort, but altogither leſſer : from the boſome of which leaues ſhoote foorth 


very deaurifull Aowers bell faſhion,of a bright purple colour, with a ſmall peltell or clapper in the 
micdle,and in other reſpeRts islike the precedent. 
| | e *% The place. | 
The three firſt deſcribed do growe very vlentifully in the lowe woods and hedgerowes of Kent, 
aout Canterburie, Sicringborne,Graueſend,Southflecte, and Greenehyrh, cſpecially vnder Cob- 
{uy pale in the w Neading from Southfleere toRocheſter, at Eltham abour the parke there 
- c rom Gretaorich ; inmot of the paſtures about Watford and Buſhey,fifreene miles from 


ondon, 


The fourth growerth in the medowe next vnto Dirton ferrie as you go to Windſore, vpon the 
os hils about Greenehyth in Kent ; andin a fielde by the high waie as you go fromthence to 
_—_ ;in Hennyrgham parke in Eſlex; and in Sion medowe necre vnto Branforde,cight miles 


M London, _ 


* The 


”_ ON gs, a4 
0 _G 6 A ou "Ie ro L I Al FRY "IE XY y E- IeSt AO, ig, % ps ® 6. d 
ys ng TIF, as Ls N 'S Rs FE SP AR ET REY * S Ks 
: " . LM. tar CEN at as 00 OE: pan 0h OWE; . POR Nb EIS EOM NEST II: 7 Rr X Oe ITN, EEC 
ON Es SORE, p23 28-6 4 hid g Vo AI T8 ONS ©: by EONS ONSET, nn ER OIL Tt YET Hs, ; : tees O_ __ 
CE A SEEK. Ed Eat A TIT 3 1 DE TO NETS OOH ali RU CAE DOR LA CE IGE a - te. . 


266! * THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
% The time. 


All the kindes of Bettflowers do flower and flouriſh from Maie vato oga—g of Auo! 

exceptrthe laſt which is the plant that hath beene taken generally for the ian violer, Ks 

flowreth in the latter end of September ; notwithſtanding the Calathian violet or Autumne-yjg. | 

letis of a moſtbright and pleaſant blewe or azure colour , as thoſe arc of this kinde, although thi, 

plant hath changed his colourfrom blewe tqwhiteneſle by ſome one accident or other, 5 
| | | The names. [4 0 | 

' Throtewoorte is called in Latine Cerzicaria, and Ceraicaria major : in Greeke mayinuy: of moſt 

Y uularia : of Fuchſiu Campanuls : in Dutch Halſcruyt: in Engliſh Canterburie bels, Haskewogr, 
Throtewoort or Yuula woort, of the vertue ithath againſtthe paine and ſwelling thereof, 
The greateſt ſort which I haue ſet foorth nor before deſcribed, ſhal reſt and contenc it ſelfe with 
the name ſet downe in the title vnril ſome ſecond writer ſhall adde,thereto,or elſe referre it to afur. 
ther conſideration. | WE: | 1 
| 0 *% Thetemperature. 
Theſe plants are colde and drie as are moſt of the Bell lowers. 71 
|  % Thevertaes. | 
A Theophraſtusand Pliny have not ſer downe any thing concerning the vertuesof theſe Bel flowers; 

- notwithſtanding we haue founde in the later writers as alſo of our owne experience: that theyare 
excellent good againſt the inflammationof cthEthrote & Yaulgor almonds ,8&all maner of cankers 
and vicerations in the mouth, if the mouth and throte be gargarized and waſhed with the decodti 
on heereof, and is of all other herbes the chiefe and principallto be pur ints lotions, or waſhings 
ters, to inie&tinto the priuic parts of man or woman , boiled with honie, Allam, water, andibm 
white wine. # "5 ON. 


Of Peach bels, and Steeple bels. Chap.m. 


* T7, he kindes. | & 


L Ike as there be ſundrie ſorts of —_— Bell lowers, ſo is there alſo many kindes of Gnal Bl | 
em 


maner, that theyare caſic to be diſtinguiſhed, as ſhall be 


g5 


flowers,which differ in ſuch n 
ſhewedin the chapter following. 


&* Thed:ſeription. 


I He Peach leafe Bell lower hath a great number of ſmall and long leaues , riſing in agen 
buſh our ofthe ground, like the leaues of the Peachrreez among which riſeth vp a! 
ewo cubits high :alongſt the ſtalke growe many flowers like bels, ſometime white, ahdfot 
tht: moſt part, ofa faire blewe colour: but the bels arenothing ſo as they of the other kindes, 
and theſe alſo are more delated and ſpred abroadethen any of the The is ſmall likeRan- 
pions,and the roote a tuft of laces orſmallſtrings, .36%, ; [4 
2 Theſecond kind of Bell flower hath a great number of faire blewiſh or watcher flowers, likethe 
other laſt before mentioned , growing vpon goodly tall ſtems two cubits and a halfe high , which 
| are garniſhedfrom the top of the plant ynto the ground, with leaues like Beetes, diſorderly placed. 
This wholeplantis exceeding full of milke,inſomuch as if you do but breake one leafe of n_ 
many drops of amilkic juice will fall vpon the grounde. The roote is verie great and full of mike 
alſo; likewiſe the knops wherin the ſeede ſhoulde be, are emptic and voide of ſeed,ſo that the whole 
plant is alrogither barren,and muſt be increaſed with ſlipping of his roote, | 
| 3 - TheſinalleſtBell fowerhath many roundleaues, very like thoſe of the common fieldVi jokt 
ſpred vpon the L . jeu among which'riſe vp ſmall flender ſtems, array bo with many 
narrow leaues like thoſe of flaxe, The fmall ſtem is diuided atthe top into ſundrie little branch 
whereon do grow pretie blew flowers bell faſhion. The roote is ſmall and threddie. Wd 
4 Theyellow Bell oweris a very beautifull plant, ofan handfull high , bearing ar the top of i 
weake and tender ſtalkes moſt pleaſant flowers bell faſhion; of a faire and bright yellow ary 
+ Theleauesand rootes are like the precedent, fauing that the leaues that grow next to the ground 
this plant,are not ſo round as the former, | | 


[HI 


4% 
»4 
4 


E 
o 


{1{HISBORI 


m_y 
a 
"+ 
- 


anula lac? 


4mpan, 
Steeplen 


2 C 


| news 


wa, 


A 


a 


w_y —_—— — a — 
= A 
- " 


p__ _—_— 

- 7 C2 - p_ — 
"T7 | - Fs > 

— br - a 


W- 


JO 


1 
| fo 


d 


\= (| ——=— _ 
\ = Wa 


\J 


Yo 


- 
o 
& 


—_ —— 


/ R>- 


—— tt. 
WE 
\V C_ EH 


—— 


4 % 5 
of _— % 
\\ yy, — ; 
\ ws. 


\ 


_ 


= 


mw. I% SIREN FEY AYS K- 


"THE SECOND PEI Ire! THE 


*% # Tek ription. 


5 The led which Bell lower is a kinde of wilde Rampions, as is that which followeth, wn 
thoſerwo laſt before deſcribed. This ſmall plant hath a ſlender roor, of the bignes of a ſimal ſtron, 
with ſome few ſtrings annexed therto. The leaues are fomwhar long, ſmooth, & ofa perfet 
colour,lying flat ypon the ground; fromthence riſe vp ſmalltender ſtalkes, ſethere and thereyrith 
a fewleaues. The flowers groweatthe top,ofa milke whitecolour, 
6 Theother ſmall Bell lower or wilde Rampion, ciffererh not from the precedent, pncahs, 
colour of the flowers: for asthe Ms are hire theſe arc of a he purple colour, which _ 
foorth the difference. | 
" The, 
The two firſt growein our London gardens | mary not wilde in 
Thereſt, except that ſmall one with yellow flowers, do growe w in moſt E of rat 
eſpecially vpgn barren ſandic heathes,andſuch like cane 4 
3 Thetame, 
Theſe Bell lowers do Aowuh from May vnto Auguſt, | 
 * Thenames. 
Their ſeuerall titles ſer foort!: their names in Engliſh and Latine, whichis as muchas m_ 
{aid ofthem. 
* T he remperature and wvertues. 


Theſe Bell flowers , eſpecially rhe tower Yao (96 95mR are cold and drie, andof he _ 
Rapes, whereof they be kindes. | | 


- j 
t bo z 
id . #; 
+ : Fr 5 
& ® » S 
- 4 
Py | 
. : , | 0f 
< Jl , 
4 
« 
z 
- 


369 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
Of Rampions,or wilde Bell flowers. Chap.m.. 


| 1 Rapuntiun MANS. | 
GreatRampion. =” "Fo 


\ 


2 


+ Thedefeription.-/ 


*$4He great Rampion being one of the Bell flowers, hath leaues which appeere or come 
2" foorth ar rhe beginning ſothewhar large and broad; .ſaooth and plaine; norvnlikerorhe 
1 Teatiesof theBeere. Among) iſe vp ſtems cwo cubirs hi h, ferwith ſuch like leaues 
vs thoſeate of the fit{t't ringing vp,b earingar the ropoftheſtalka grear, thick, buſhie 
eare, full of firtle long fiowers clo ogither. like a.Foxe $aile 3 which ſmall flowers before 

thicke as a mans thombe, 
ion,hath 


mY AE Cot Aa ! 3 Rapunculie 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


fell fonnnd Brin gard 
The rſt is ſowen rdens, efj 
bicauſe the roores are "__ in nfallde, pa 

The ſeconde eth in woods and ſha 
places,infat wo lclayie ſoiles, tos 

*% The time. 
| They flowerin Morita and Iuly. 
* The names, 

' Rampions arecalled of ſome TA Alper of 
care or ſpike that is full of lowers, which are like 4]. 
moſt to tailes of foxes when they are bloomed; by 
Alopecaros or Foxeraile is altogither another herbe, 
which we haue deſcribedin the hiſtoric of 
| (hc which GN this hath beene named "Wk 

Mlopeeuron, that irmay differ fromthe 
bo © ndght pen Alopeewros or Foxetaile, Itis calledin 
Engliſh of allRampions, or grin amine and 
the other wilde Rampions. 

w* 7 he temperature, 

| The rootes of theſe areof a cold tempera 

A ſomething binding. 
 & Thewertues. [1 

' The rootes are eſpecially vcd infallads ro 
boiled andearen with oile,vincger,and 
- Some affirme, that the ion 0 roores 
are goodfor all inflammations of the mouth, and 
almonds of the throte,and other diſcaſes happening 
in the mouth and throte, as the other Dons 


O of W. al moo or xelow flocke vers, Ws 113. 


2+ The kindes. 


O F Wall flowers there be two inde, one with fingle flowers , the other with double both 
which are comprehended vnder the title V iels, deriued of the Grecke worde iwaz, Jengj,which 
ifieth to go, tobe foorth comming ,or to come foorth firſt: they are alſocallediwe, with the 


anthefle whereof many being delighted;, haue it a common name Leucoium , Of th 


whiteneſſe of the flowers Ro bur al AeFzcs, Leucos 


not bicauſe the flowers of Violers, or ſtocke G wers be white, being cut 


Wi ns 21 "nA g, nat- 
vo. w,ſmootb,ſlipperie,ofablackiſh colour, and lefſer than the leanes of Itocie 

- F&l G nall, yellow, very ſwecte of ſinell, andmadcof We 

- badeleeens which bangzhl, there ſucceedelong{lender cods, in which i 


pddduped. The whole plancis ſtiibbie, of a wooddie ſubſtance. hens 
the c winter, 


2 _Thedouble Wall flower hath Sa les 6 
wooddic ſubſtance : 


+ 2 is{o wellknowen ro lbcnes ne 


HISTORIE QFPLANTS. 
| 2 Viola lutea multiplex. 
. } ©, > Double Wall flower. 


% Theplace. | | 
ſtone wals, in the corners of churches every where among 


—” 0 5. ww 


| Thefirſt groweth bricke agd 
ndbilh,zndother feneplins, ' | 
The double Wall flower groweth in moſt gardens of England: whereof we haue another orc 
thatbringeth his flowers open all at once, —_ the other doth flower by degrees, by meanes 
whereof tis long in flowring, | 
Hd berieatenceicey re bedhechl h the peop! 
_ Heyflower for the moſt parr e yeerelong, bureſpecially in winter, whereupon ec 
n Cheſhire docallthem Winter Gillolowers, ha F700 lid 3 
« | *% The names. 
 TheWallfloweris calledin Grecke ><xiivy: in Latine Vjols lutes, and Leucoium luteum : in the 
Arabicke toong Keyrt: in Spaniſh Yzolettas aAmarithas : in Dutch Utolteren $ in French Girofflees 
tauines Violiers des muy ailles; in Engliſh Wall Gilloflower, Wall flower,Yellow ſtocke Gilloflower, 
and Winter Gilloflower. | 


B28 X#= -= & 


wy The temperature. 

—_ the whole ſhrub of Wall Gilloflower, as Galen faith, is of a clenſing facultie, and of thinne 

| | : &k The vertnes. OR 

; water writeth that the yellowe Vall flower'is moſt vſed in phiſicke, and mote then the A 

teſt of tocke Gilloflowers,whereof this is holden to be a kiade, which hath mooued metopreferre 

_ xtorhe firſtplace, Heſaith, thatthe iuice mixcd with ſome vn&ious or oilie thing, and boiled to 
the orme ofa lyniment, helperh the choppes or riftes of the fin@ament, | LS, 
th V3 ETPe boiled with white wine,honie,and alittle allorn,doth cure hot vicers , and cankers of B 

"Theleaues ſtamped with a little baic falt,and bound about the wreſts of the hands , taketh awaie C 

Pelbaking fr of the agowe, , + 151 | Cs EY COTE: 
Og ys Aa 3 "1 of 


o 
. 
: . 5 


EE ES HEAR - 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Jr 


Of Stocke Gilloflower « (hapu4-. 


; ' & The kinds. | [7 

Nder the.name of ſtocke Gilloflowers are comprehended many kindes of Violers, which 

differ eſpecially in the colour of the flowers,and alſo ſomewharin the leaues, Theſe mayhee 
deuided into two kinds : the one which hath whiter and ſofter leaues than the other, may be 

called white ſtocke Gilloflower , of the colour of the leaues, and not of the flowers: and theother 
yellow ſtocke Gilloflower, ofthe yellowe colour of the flowers. Againe,of the white ſtocke Gillo. 
flower,there be alſo two ſorts,that is to ſaic,the great and the little : and of this kinde there be ſome 
with double flowers ; ſome of their flowers are of one colour,and ſome of another : likewiſe theres 
| 2 degenerate or wilde kinde growing neere the ſea, which doe difter very much one from another, 
as well in colour of their flowers, as alſo.in ſtature and proportion , all which ſhall be diuided into 
ſeucrall chapters. WER i || | | [2% | 


t Leucoinm album, i. || 2 Lexcoimpurparewn. | 
| White ſtocke Gilloflower, _ Purple ſtocke Gilloflower, | 


* The deſcrivtion. 


1 He ſtalke of thegrear ſtocke Gilliflower is two foote high or higher, rounde,and | 

parted into diuers braunches. The leaues are long, white, ſoft, and hauingyp® | 

WS! themas it were a downe like vnto the leaues of Willowe, but ſofter :the flowers | 

| confiſt of fower little leaues growing all along the vpper part of the branches, ® | 

: = 54 a white colour, exceeding ſweere of ſmell: in their places come vp long andnu” | 
rowe cods,inwhichis conteined broad, flat, and round ſeede. The roote is of a woodie ſuſtaunc&® | 
is the ſtalke alſo. - | LY | LE 
The purple ſtocke Gilloflower, is like the precedentin ech reſpeR, ſauing that the flowers of - | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 373 
plant are of a pleaſant yo_ colour, and the others white , which ſetteth foorth the difference: of 


which kinde we baue fomethat beare double flowers,which are of diuers colours, greatly eſteemed 
fx the beautic of their lowers,and pleaſant fiveete ſmell, | 


3 Lewcoun wviolaceum. | 4 Lencoinm ſplueFre. 
Violet colour ltocke Gilloflower, | Wilde ſtocke Gilloflower, 


F< 


||. ES + Thedeſcription. \ 
/3 Thiskindeofſtocke Gilloflower that bearcth flowers of the colour of a violet,that is toſaie, of 
ablewe tending to a purple colout, which ſerteth foorth the difference berwixt this plantand the 
otherſtocke Gilloflowerszin cueric other reſpEtis like the precedent, 
4 The wilde ſtocke Gilloflower. hath a thicke and wooddic roote , with ſome threddie ſtrings 
faſtenedthereto : from which riſeth vp a ſtifte and brittle ſtalke, garniſhed from the bottome to the 
tufrofflowers withlong, fat and thicke hoarie leaues. The flowers groweat the top of the ſtalkes, 
of arediſh colour, The ſeede is like the garden ſtocke Gilloflower,bur leſſer, 
fy $5.5 | | &% The plate. kD 
Theſe kindes of ſtacke Gilloflowers do grow {ror gardens throughout England, * 
"Thewilde ſtocke Gilloflower doth growe vpon rockie and ſtonie mounraines, 
Bp bbc = *% The time, es 
They flower in the beginning of the ſpring,and continue flowring all the fommer long. 
; Ss «I21 *% The names. © | 
--TheSrocke Gillofloweris calledin Greekeaduiv : in Latine Viola alhe: in Tralian Yiola bianca : 
Opanilh F olefher lanques + inEngliſh Stocke Gilloflower , Garnſey Violet, and Caſtle Gillo- 


amoteg 1.415 x *% The temperature and vertnes, 

"\Theyare referred vnto the Wall flower, although in vertue much inferior, yet are they not vſed 
inphiſicke;except amongſt certaine Empericks and Quackſaluers,abour loue and luſt matters,which 
formodeſtic I'omit, -7 | | | 

ry | Aa 3 loachimm 


374 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE oe 
B MJoachimu Camerariwcreporteth,that a conſerue made of the flowers of Stocke Gilloflower, ang 
givenwith the Ciſtilled water thereof, helpeththe Apoplexie and the palſie: whereof Plurerch Go 7 
kerh in his booke De amore fraterno pulchery. inter Echinopodas velut aſperam, & inter ononin naſe. 
tur paſiim mollia Leucoia. ti | 


Of Sea ftocke Gilloflowers. (hap.n. 


| Pi 7 he hindes.. | 
FE Stocke Gilloflowers that growe neere vnto the ſea, there be diuers ſorts, differing as wellin 
leaues as flowers,which be comprehended in this chapter following, | 


I Leacoimm mar inum flore candido L Obetj. | 2 Lencoin mar inun rL 
White Sea ftocke Gilloflowers, | Putple Sea ſtocke Gilloflowers, 


I He Sea ſtocke Gilloflower hath a ſmall wooddie roote very threddiez from which riſcthv = 
an hoarie white ſtalke of two foote high, diuidedinto divers ſmall branches, whereonare 
placed confuſedly many narrowleaues, of a ſoft hoarie fubſtance. The flowers groweat 

the top of the branches, of a whitiſh colour, made of fower little leaues; which being paſt, there 
follow long cods and ſecede, like vnto the garden ſtocke Gilloflower. . 

2 Thepuple ſtocke Gilloflower hath a yery long tough roote, thruſting it ſelfe deepeintothe 
ground; from which riſe vp thicke,far,ſoft,and hoane ſtalkes. The leaues come fovrth ofthe ſalkes 
nextthe ground long,ſoft,thicke, full of iuice,couered over with a certaine downic hoarineſſe,and 
inipt vpon the one fide with a ſmall cut ornatch, ſuch as is to be ſeenc in the leafe of Buckes hotne. 
Theſtalke isſer here and there with the like leaues,butleſſer. The flowers growe at the top of the 

Nalks, compact of fower ſmall leaues , of a darke purple colour. The ſeede is conteined in long 

crooked cods like the garden ſtocke Gilloflower, . | 


HISTORIE 
; Lencotun marinum latifolium. 


Broad leafed Sea ſtocke Gillolomer, . |_|. ; 


OF PLANTS, : 375 


Y 
S 


_ ; 1This Sca ſtocke Gilloflower hath many broad 


o 


ues ſpred vponthe ground, ſomewhat ſuipe or 


. cuton the edges ; among which riſe vp ſmall na- 


; kedſtalkes, bearing at the top many little lowers, 


4 | hy | | VN \Þ 
” NO Wf.-\2 
FIG J% | r Val ' J 

ESTES 

Ry g) = VJeL 

y "F. : » D 


Fl 
8 
WA 
3 +» 


' 4 Leucoiuos mirinum Iuteummeing Clasi or Lobelj. 5 {ihyvte mayinyhden Eel Go Ch 


£1. ” . 
The Y zaſtocke Gillo 
bs . | d ; P #+ 
- rn” il " g # « 
, A 74 © Ou | = 
A. V £ , bt 152 
as " 4 % ” 
4  ” » - | « j F L 
\ : : ; . # F . 4 , l 
" "| 
, þ : | EF 


/ 


F 
: . p © - z bo _ *T, 
_-— a? {| # fo" 2 | ain” , 

4 k FP ws - r 
_ BD \* WA'Y// (, SZ IIFDIRtn 151 
F.O9 \ " % ' J 4 "> A IS : HILL 4 

WW RY bil ALE b 


> 
i 


= . 
i a SAS 1G - >< at 03719 
\ Dll / <A JIFS | 
HIDFID Of k\ —o_ \ v 4 
P \ 
" WW k 4 p \\ F + 7 
aA F%7 « +3 3 
{1+ his I\7+ * 
q F 


CY 


"SvLag} 9 O0izanlk 32 


- 
- — 


nt leg arts 4:rb4 vB revs = 
4 '-4 | , 
| UW 


ofa blew colour tending to a purple. The ſeedeis 


bs . 


contcined in long coddes like the others of his 


4 The great Sca ſtocke Gilloflower hath many 
broad leaues; growing in is om ruft, ſlightly in- 
dented abour-the edges, teletnbling the leaues of 
Sowthiſtle. The flowers growe at the top of the 
ſtalkes,ofa gold yellow colour. The roote is ſmall 
and ſingle, | 

5 Theſmal Yellow Sea ſtocke Gilloflower hath 
many ſmooth, hoarie, and ſoft leanes, ſer vpon a 
| m__ ſtalke; pu the top whereof growe pretic 
weete ſmelling ye!low flowers,bringing his ſeede 
im little longeads, The roote is ſinall; _ threddy. 


. 
VV 


% 


Small yellow Scaſtocke 


wer. 


ZR" WOT 
2 OT 


II NGH 
oy 


7 er rs 
F ESI? 24% * 


ELEC | 
CES - t & Ay 
volt 5:1: - $12 FLIES 
© ® 


Fl *. 
5" orf9 4-1 


* % . « od 
* 4-4 a 4%, TELE, 
- : & w FF F% #4 © a © 


.F + £7 


, q 
Y +4 7 
fi; of F424 } , 
- 


Q Ih71 rc, © 


IACSRT of: 


1971 1 


: - LES 
$1310 51311530 


Aa4 


376 THE SECOND 'BOOKE OF THE 
. | + Theplace. | 
Theſe plants do prowe neerevnto the Scafide, about Colcheſter, in the Ile of Man, necrePre. 
ſton in Aunderneſle and about Weſtcheſter, 
* The time. 
They flouriſh from Aprill to the endof Auguſt. 
* The names. | 
| There is little ro be ſaid as touching the! names, more than hath beene touched in their TY 


rall title $4 
* T begoinperizary andertues. 
Thaei is no vſc of theſc in phiſicke,but W4 peed for the beautie of their flowers, 


Of Dames Violets,or Quene Gilloflowers. (hap.ns. 


1 Fiola FUE LY e pur pures. ; | 2 Viols matronalis flire albo, 
— Dames ys, wil $09 White Dames Violets. 


AmesVi lets ne te + = Ca recccode, | 
ſomewhat aboutthe edges: amon pen ct .thehe 


Ow two 
bites , _ ſuch like o..1p [tb fobery Ds A rof the braunces, | 
of a faire purple col Wee ver like thoſe of the ſtocke Gilloflowers, = err ſweete ſmell; ater = 
which come vp indelong cods, whercin is conreinedfinall ongblackiſh A The rooteis flende | 
and threddie. | 
2 The Queenes white Gilloflowers are like the laſt before remembred, eg arthip | 
bringerh foorth fairewhite roots >  urple. FX 
Theplace. - 14) | 
They foci guns ord beamioltes homers. JN ſy 


Lg 


"HISTORIE OF: PLANTS. 377 


© "wThetime. - | 
They oſpeelly foweriwMaizand Iune.zhe ſecond yeere efteveheybeſorien, | - 
% The names. b 


Dames Violers is calledin Latine Pjols matronalts,and Viola ani winter Violets, & Yjols 
Damaſeend? in French Ytolettes des Dames, & de Damas, and Girofflees des Dames, or HMatrones 
rialettes « in Engliſh Damaske Violers , winter Gilloflowers , Rogues Gilloflowers , and cloſe 
Sciences. 
* Thetemperature. © 
The leaues of Dames Violets are intaſte ſharpe and hot, verylike in raſte and facultic to Erxca 
orRocket,and ſeemeth to be a kinde thereof. 
*% Thevertues. 
The diſtilled water of the flowers heercof is counted to beamoſteffeQuall thing to procure 
ſweate. | 


Of white Satin flower. Chap.n7. 


1 1 Few Lunaris © ſve Bolbons, | 
- White Sattin, + * The deſcription. 


'B: 


Olbonac or the Sattin flower,hath hard and 
round ſtalkes,diuiding themſclues into ma- 
nie other ſmall braunches, beſet with leaues 
like Dames Violets,or Queenes Gilloflowers,ſome- 
what broad and ſnipt about the edges, &in faſhion | 
almoſt like Sawce Ln or lacke by the hedge. 
The ſtalks are charged arti with many flowers 
"likethe common Ntocke Gilloflower,of a purple co- 
4 | lourwhichbeing fallen, the cotnmerh foorth 
| 2 conrexned WHBSr thine bod the [aſharpe point 
., orprickeatone ende, in faſbion nofihe Moone,and 
" fomewharblackiſh: Thiscodis compoſed of three 
" filmes or skins, whereof the two ourmoſt are « - 
"*  ouerworneaſhecolour; ahd the ithhetthoſtor 
bs Bbw he bed dakbeng rl, 
is rhinne & cleere \} | | ceo white 


Go = A on er ef iy 
F h Gat < "ru - F «lr Ri At 8 MO os bs a 4 
\ = x "i a ” ; g » 4 oP arghne* o þ WR 4 Wu i Y HI \ wa 7 $7 AF V Os © A? "= Ed $, "Fer aq > 1. 2 _ : 
Ke Ns IW LC ed'y (gb ths 29S. - 14S Np EIDGF ay Oh Ea oo ge 7. ER inn 0 FINS yo Bas. ae at 7 8 EEE. OSes. </ b PR DIE ITE OE io on 6 < CE LY  LLSDS: $a ts Ee REI NIECE $I; AWW, ny 
DEI WETTED FOO IS, LN 2 Py. Au FARE Bo TIE IR FS if, 3 BIN On IS Is RU i IE DG OT. IDEN BLN SOS nt 6 oth ON IT” 1 I os 4 nn rs => : " . I 


LE MET IORTONY 
WS OS CD 


2 The ſecoodelindh of Faotkia'd oo whlts ati 
977 We ha many and broad leaues, diene 
|. ofthegrearburreDocke: among ch tſechapa 
oe 6121p ACA OT Panos of rhe height of fower cubits, 

WIE ER Rk anofambuih greneeolor ei the 
Ne levies zbut Ht Aa, grbwe ypontheflender braunc $,of a purple colour,compa&@ 
p | of tower ſmall leaues like thoſe of the ſtocke Gilloflower, after which come things long cods of the 


fame ſubſtay eand colour ofrhe former. The rooreis thicke, whereunto are faſtned an infinite . | 
nutnberof Zi 4 Po roote dierhnoreuery yeereas the other doth, but —_ | 


ing'o Ge Arif VOTRE theroote, 


378 THE SECOND BOOKE OF!THE 


2 Viola lunaris lon Ne Sa ! , I lm, 


JA 


Long codded 


—_—_——— 
cr * SS 
=- 


"fiat Paaie fe and rening oe: o me titandin Gb betkofnntentich 
the woods about Pinner,and —_ legs Lonfloys and in iilexhorth 
abour Hornchurch. * 
.. Theſexgnd! growerh about Watordefitiere milesfrom London. - 

Thttime. | 
= 


iQ Bis, COR md k | 
af ta Mato berbagrotomarts or ane Mer | 
A "Thef beds Gf BEIondc is of remperarure hot anddrie, and 

forcetothe ſeede of Treacle muſtard : ;the & pl 

much: wy are caten n with fallads as certauns © 


a 


LL 4 | i ann 


Nv - / . 
S Mz $_— 

' Ny , 
——_—— ACT, REL Noland thy yo "Pot er ds Tr os 


ws. * _-_ ——T —_ Ln En td _— » TY” OT ATTY < Peg” > s «0 3+ {ADA er VE « LEEDS ” PY 2 >,” gf S . 
E A” 38” 
ot he EI, 4 Ion be Ay PENS SEG eto Eat Ck Lana _ 0 — _ i el . 


of he {ame ſubſtance,faſhion and colour,that hoſe are ofthe white Sattin. | 


oY 


leaves of Bolbonac and Sanicle ſtamped togither,adding thereto oile and waxe. The ſecede is great- 
jy commended againſt the falling ſickneſle. | 


Of Galert his eMoonewoort, or Madwoort. Chap. 8: 


' His & rg the number of the Horchounds, but that Galex ved itnot for akinde 
"thereof; bur for Alyſſon,or Madwoort : itis like in forme and ſhew vnto Horehound, and 
\ | alfointhe number of the ſtalks, bur theleaues therof are leſſer, more curled, more hoarie, 
and whiter, without any manifeſt ſmell ac all. The little coroners or ſpokie whurles that compaſlc 
the ſtalkes round about, are full of ſharpe prickles : outof which growe flowers of an ouerworne 
gayiſh.colour,like ro thoſe of Horeh6umd. The roote i hard.rw duc enddiogitl parted, 


2 The Getmaine Madwoorr bringeth foorth from a fibrous roote, two broad, rough, and hoaric 


leaues;herweene which riſerh vp'a hoafie brittle ftalke,diuided into ſundrie ſmall branches, where- 
upon do growe long, narrow leaues, ſomewhat ſnipt about the edges 3 fromthe boſome of which 
lawescome foorth final roundles of urple flowers like thoſe ofthe dead Nettle. 


Thaucone of Disſeorides deſetiptio proving owing in my garden, which is thought robe the true and 
q partner ing his firft py | coo bo round, and afterward mote long 

iſh, and rough, or fomewhar woollyithatideling; among which riſe vp ſmall, rough, brirtle 
ſalkes, diuided into many branches, whetcupoii do growe many little yellow flowers; the which 
being paſt, here folow flat and rongh hikes, of +whitiſh colour,inſhzpe like little targets or buck- 
ers, wherein is conreinedflatſecde, like to the ſeedes of ſtocke Gilloflowers. The Sos huske is 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ” ww 
Acertaine Chirurgian of the Heluetians, compoſed a moſt ſingular vnguent for wounds of the B 


% The 


Os it os. $97 
whe A A 20 
AE be, Ws We EY 6 
1. ID Ph ba < off Us - ate as. 
Fy \ be 4 P k - Lage ot? 


ro At WE. 
be, oo 


NT EE on po, 


RED eds 1 wr, bd On ot gerkow ethnns! Aur 
WISH YO PANTY: 


LES UPNT OE ON INC». 
LOT nt 4 28 


Rho 0Y 


Mn bt 82% Jai'W% 
Fn ASK ITS 


ER og pen” 797 01th 


DD MT 


280 THE SECONDE 'BOOKE OF | THE 


: 'iþ The place: | 


 Theſeplants are ſowen now and rhen in gardens, eſpecially forthe rareneſle of them; the ſeede 
being broughtout of Spaine and Italie,fromwhence I haue receiued ſome for my garden, | 
EE Þ  * Thetime. £4 
They flower and flouriſh in May; the ſeede is ripe /in Auguſt,the ſecond yeere after their lowing 
| | 1 | % The BHames. | y 1] 
Madwoortor Moonewoort is called of the Grecians 5» or azv-»r , of the Latines Alyſſan + in 
Engliſh Galezs Madwoort : of fome Heale dog; andir hath thename thereof; bicauſe ir is a preſent 
remediefor them that are bitten of a mad dog,as Galen writethzwhoin his ſecond booke of Coun. 
rer poiſons gin Antonize Core his compolition deſcriberh it in theſe words;Madwoort is an hetb yy 
likero Horehound, bur rougher aud more full of prickles about the flowers ; itbearcth a flower 
tending to blew, EL i 
|  *% Thetemperature and vertnes. | 
A Galenſaith itis given vntoſuch asare enraged by the biting of a mad dog, which therby areper. | 
fely cured,as is knowne by experience, without any artificial] application, or method at all, The 
which experimentif any ſhallprooue, he ſhall finde in the working thereof. Iris of remperatire 
meanly drie, digeſteth and fomerhing ſcowreth withall; for this cauſe it rakerh away the morphey 
and ſunne burningzas the ſame author affirmeth. Ld 


 Manyfabulous narrations haue been fer foorth concerning the vie of theſe Lumaries by they 


cient writers of ſorceric,with which liſt notto trouble your cares, being fitter for Cornelzws Agripe 
his booke,than tobeinſerred in our hiſtorie pf plants, | 3 


© Of Roſe Campion. Chap.ug. 


% Thekindes. | 


Here bediuers forts ofRoſc >> p21 s,ſome of the garden, and others of the field: the which | 


ſhall be divided into three ſeuer 


LychniChalcedonica. 
_ Flowerof Conſtantinople. 


% # 


Chapters; and firſt ofthe Campionof Conſtantinople, 


The deſeriptivm. 


— 0 4 A 
- IE » N q : : 
<q O AR Sore I : 


Id 


; He Campion of Conſtantinople hath fin. 
'F. drie vpright ſtalkes, two cubires high, and 
full of ioints,with a cerraine roughnes; and. 
ateuery ioint twolarge Jeaues, of a brownegreen 
'colour, The flowers-groweat the top like Sweete 
' Williams, or rather like Dames violets, oftheco- . 
' 'Jourof redlcad, ororenge tawnie, Therooteis 
2p fomcewhatſharpeinraſte, Pi 
MIS 2 > 156TH ihe 2K of 1 21, xy 
{# |, The flower of Conltaprinople is planted 
: - gardens,andis'verycommon almoſt euery where, 
4:3: 2.) Jr flowreth n 
{ | |aeririsplanced 
| fiſterhof 2.roote fi 
; andeanaway wi 


% 


S: 


[3 
K+, 
FM. h 

- 

[81 


ES 


4 * : 
$0444 $444 3557 © 


1 : 


ſ 
<< 


ar 
for which cauſe the vertues farenor yet foundour. 


, Of Roſe (ampion. (hap.12.0. 


'1 LychnisCoronaria rubyas. | 2 Lychnis Coronar js alba, 
RedRoſe Campion. | White Roſe Cawpion, 


— 


| *% T he deſeription. | | 

1 7 He firſtkinde of Roſe Campions hath round ſtalkes,very knottie and woolliez and ar p_ 
knotor ioint there do ſtand two woollie ſoft leaves like Myllein , bur leſſer, and muc 

k . © narrower, The flowers growe atthe top of the ſtalke,of aperfe red colour; which being 

paſt,there follow round cods,full of blackiſh ſeede. Therooteis long and threddie. | 

2 Theſecond Roſe campion differeth not from the precedent inſtalkes,Jeaues,or faſhion of the 


towers: the onely difference confiſteth in the colour, for the flowers of this plant are of amilke 


—_— ﬀ LI ITT ET MET 


white colour,and the other red. 
Eb ks % Theplece, 

TheRoſe Campion groweth plentifully in moſt gardens. 
| Y | — *Therime, 
" They flower from Iune to the ende of Augult. 
x | *% The names. | | 
TheRoſe Campion is called in Latin Dominexum Roſa, Maritna Roſa, Cali Roſa , Cali fos : of Di- 


brides ruxris reagents, thatis, Lychnu Coronar ia,ort Satina: Gazatranilateth avyridn, Lucernuls, 

alethe leaues thereof beſoft, and fit ro make candle weekes. acc ording tothe teſtimonie of Dz- 

f gy : itwas called Lychnisor Lychnides, that is a torch or ſuch like light, according to the ſigni+ 

of the worde,clecre,brighr, and light giuing flowers; and therefore werecailed the Gard- 

row delight,or the Gardners cie; in Dutch Chaſftes eie $ in French Oez{ers, and gerltrs Dieu: in 
$Ducch Bartenroſ3lin, and þtmmetro(lin, | - 

| * The 


_ *'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. i - 38 
and beautie which it hath in 8 dens and garlands.js for ought we know of no vic at all in phiſicke : 


285 THE SECOND BOOKE( OFTHE 


[nd $3 *% The temperature. i Seadot Hide; Sinead t, 
The ſeede of Roſe Campion, ſaith Galen, is hotanddricafter a ſort in the ſecond degree,” |, 
by pg wine is'a remedic tor them thatarc ſtung with a ſcorpion , as Divſenids 


oſe (Campions. Chap.n1. _, 
Lb þ-þ 2 Lychnis marina CAnelica, 
Engliſh Sea Campion, 


| Es % The defer DHH0R, LL -| 

9 He wilde roſe Campion hath many rough broad leaues, ſomewhat hoarie and woolh; | 

among which riſe vp long,ſoft and hairie ſtalkes, branched into many armes, ſet withthe | 

like leaues, but leſſer. The flowers growe at the top of the ſtalkes, compa of fiue ſmall | 

leaues,of a reddiſh colour. The roote is thicke and woodie,with ſome threds annexed thereto] | 

2 Theſaroſe Campion is aſmall herbe, ſet about with many leaues fromthe lower part vpward, | 

which leaues are thicke,ſomwhat leſſer and narrower than the leaues of ſea Purſlane. It hath many | 

crooked ſtalks ſpred ypon the rom ,afoatclong; in the vpper part whereofthere is a ſmall white | 

flower, in faſhion and ſhape like alittle cup or boxe, after the likenes of Behen album, or Spatling 

Poppie, hauing within the ſaid flower little threds of a black colour,in taſte ſalt, yet not vnpleaſant. 

Tris reported vnto me by a gentleman one Maſter Thomas Hesket , thatby the ſea fice in Lanct | 

ſhire,from whence this plant came,there is another ſort hereof with red flowers. F- 1 

| The third kinde being a wilde field Campion, hath leaucs like vnto the wilde red kinde, burthat | 

his ſtalkes ate hairie, and the flowers of areddiſhcolour. —« E-1 

' The fourth kinde of wilde Campions hath long and flender ſtems,diuiding trhemſclues into ſun- | 

tre other branches,which arc ful of toints,hauing many ſmall and narrow leaue s,procceding rom 
the ſaid ivints. The flowers do grow onthe top of the ſtalke, of a whitiſh colour on the inner ſide, 
and purpliſh on the outward fide , confiſting of five ſmall leaues , euery leafe hauing a cut inthe 
end,whichmakethit of the proportion and ſhape ofa forke: the ſecede is like the wilde Popp!i©3 the 

roote ſomewhat groſle and thicke. 14 | | 


= 


3 Lyiins 


3 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


by chnis {ylueftri hirta. 4 Lychnis (4 
W ide airic Campion, 


yueſtris *7 ima Clasy, 
Fon milde Campion. 


1 Pb Red 5; 


234 THE SECOND 'BOOKE OF THE F7-1] 
5 The fifrkindeof wilde Campion hath three or fower great ſoft leaues, fomewhat Cownie, ty. 
ing flat vponthe gronnde: among which rifcth vp an aſhe coloured ſtalke,diuided into divers bran | 
ches : whereupon do growe at ccrraine faces, euen in the ſerring togirher of rhe ſtalke and beau. | 
ches,{mall graſlclike Icaues,which reſemble the ſhaggey hairinefle ot a goate, but of an ouerw/grye | 
duſtie colourgas is allthe reſt of the plant, whereof ir rooke his name Hir ſata. The flowers gone F 
atthe top of the braunches , compoſed off fiue {mall forked leaues of a bright thining red cglow 
The rooreis thicke and ofa wooddie ſubſtance. | *F* | 
6 Thefixtkindof wilde Campion , hath very many long,thicke, fat, and hoarie leaues fpredypan 
the grounde, in ſhape and ſubſtaunce like thoteofthe gore Campion, bur of a veric duſtic over. 
worne colour : among which riſe vp ſmall and tender talkes , ſer at certaine diſtances by couple; 
with ſuch like leaues as the other,bur ſmaller. The flowers do growe atthe top of the Ralkes inlirtl 

' rufts,like thoſe of Hreere Villiams,of ared colour, The roote is thicke,with many threddie tins; 
faſtnedto the vpper part thereof. Fl | | a 


7 Lychnis Canlicalis ſtriatis Cluj. | 8 Lychni flueftris alba. 
Spatling Campion. A | White wilde Campion, 


HIND CHIN 
SN RE &< x 4* ©). 
OV EE” 
FAY D | S, I} EX 
V/. : 
Ca 


EA 


A” 


| The de ſer iption. 


3 % 


7 Spating Campion hath a flender hoarie ſtalke fomewhar brittle, wheruponare ſet final ſharye 
pointed leaues ſtraked withgreeticamong the hoarie part of the leafe, even as the graſle called Ly 
dies Laces are ftriped with white among rhe greene parr of the leafe, ſer wgcher vpon theſtake 
by couples, in equall diſtaunces. The flowers growe at the top of the ſinal braunches like vil? 
Cowe Baſill,or ratherlike Spatling Poppie, ofa white colour, whereupon I gave itthar name. | 
$8 Thewildewhite Campion hath leaues like vntothe Sca ſtocke Gilloflower. The ſta!kc1> hoar 


and hairie. The flowers grow atthe top ofthe ſtalkes, ofa milke white colour, The roi 15t0 
of awoodic ſubſfce, and ſome thieddie ſtrings arinexed thereto. | jk lab 


335 


ye | | 
Fethertop wilde Campion. % The aeſeripticn. | 
| 9s The feathered Ca hath a thickegroſle 
- roote, of a woodie ſuſtance, as moſt ofthe Campi-: 
ons haue:from which rifeth vp a ſtiffc hoarie ſtake, 
ſer from the bottome to the top by couples , with 
leaues like ynto Cowe Baſil: from the boſome of 
the leaues hard by the ſtalke come foorth lircle ren- 
der ſhootes, whereon do growe very fmall hoarie 
leaues, The flowers grow at the top of the braun- 
ches , in ſhape like little gooſeberries, thruſting 
foorth in one place of eche little flower a ſinall 
__ taſſell: the little knubbe ir {elfe is of a yel- 
_ lowiſhcolour, | 

&+ Theplace. © | | 
| Theygrowe of themſelues neere tothe borders 
of plowed fieldes, meddowes , andditch bankes; 

common in many places, 

The Sea Campion groweth by the ſea ſide in 
Lancaſhire at a place called Lytham , five miles 
from Wygan, from whence I had ſome ſeedes 
brought me for my garden by adiligent ſearcher 
of {imples , maſter Thomas Herketh , who hath 
harde it reported that inthe ſfameplace doth grow 
of the ſame kinde ſome with red flowers, which 


are very rare tobe ſcene. p 

3 Thetime, 
They flower and floutiſh moſt part of the ſom- 
mer, even vnto Aurumne, | 

+ The nones. [EF 
The wild Campion is called in Greeke avis 45a: in Larine Zychnis fp/neffris: in Engliſh wilde 

Roſe Campion, wu Thetemperature. —- 
The temperature of theſe wilde Campions are referred vntothoſe of the garden, 
7 | * The vertues. . | 


The weight of two drams of theſecde of wilde Campion, beaten to powder and erunke, doth | 
purgecholer by theſtoole; and is goodfor themthat are ſtung or bitten of any venemous beaſt. 


| Of Willow berbe,or Loofe flrife. Chap.122. 


| % 7 hekindes. | 
\ loſeorides and othet old writers knew but one herbe Willow,which was that with the yellow 
flower. The later age hath added three, which are baſtarde kindes; two of a purple, 2nd the 
thirdof a blew flower. Since wee haue diſcouered diucrs forts more , one of them having | 
leaues like the water VVillow , or Ofier , which ſhall be fer forth; the reſt we will leaue to a ſecond 
edition,or a further conſideration. | | | 
| | * Thedeſeription. | 
1 >5* Hefirſtkinde of Willow herbe hath long and nartow leaves, of a grayith greene colour, 
in ſhape like the Willow or Sallow leaves, ſtanding three or fower one againt another | 
_ *7 roundabouttheſtalke, which roward the top dividerh irſelfe into many other branches: | 
the tops whereof grow tufts of ycllow flowers withour ſmell z which being pat; there commerh | 
ſecde like Coriander.The roote is long and ſlender, | | | 
2 Theſecond kinde of Willow herbe in falkes and leaues is like the former, ſauing that his 
arenotſo broad. The flowers growe along theſtalkeroward the top ſpike faſhion, ofa faire 
Purple colour z which being withered, doc growe into —_— thatis carried away with the winde, 


b x | 1 Lyſzrachia 


EE SY BEER 


THE SECOND BOOKE 'OF THE 
1 Lyſanachia lute. p.-.| 2 Lyſamachta pur pures,ſ[icats. 


Yellow Willow herbe. - Ab: | Spiked Willow herbe. 
ms, 4 V &Y» p ; 1 "DF 


MY 


4 7 
> 4 1 
{47 
> 


o- 


-" 
\G >o/ 


\ 


a— 


5 
- =- 
\% #/ 
IF _ Wy 
a j* '"mnyy \ 
' —_ 


| d 3 \\ 
—_ : Y 0 | . 

3 Lyſamachia {liqunoſa. {| >| 4 Chamencrion. | 
Codded Willow herbe., | | | | _  Roſebay Willow hetbe, | 


SVN Sol 

— {SHY | MS WA 

NY Wi WT, "N/ 4 
®. WIEN { Wy; 4 Wy # £4 TO «< 
Ver WEL. IT; 


'HISTORIE' OF PLANTS, 387) 
| W 7 _—_— fron. | | | 
, "This Ly/=achia being the thirde innumber,hath leaucs and ſtalkeslike the former, The flower! 
rowerh atthe top of the {talke,comming out of the ende oft a ſmall long codde, of a purple colour, 
. nihap like rhe {tocke Gilloflower : and is called of many Felius ante P:trem, thatis, the fonne be- 
trethe father,bicaufe that the coddecommerh toorth firſt having ſeedes theringbefore the Rower: 
doth ſhewe it ſelfe abrozde,which is of a purple colour like Geranam called Doves toore. 
4 The ſourth beingthoughtby Dodonems to be a baſtardkinde, is(as Idocſeemeir ) vfallthe reit 
che moſt goodlyand ſtately planrhauing leaues like the greareſt Willow or Otter. The branches 
comeout of the ground in great numbers,growing tothe heighroffixe tgore;garnithed with braue 
fowets of great beautie, conſiſting of tower leanes a peece, of anotient purple colour,haumng forme 
5 inthe middleof a yellotv colour, The cod is long bkethe laſt fpoken ofgand full of downie 
matter which Rieth away with the winde when the cod is opened; þ:39 | | 
There is another baſtarde Looſeſtrife, or Willowe herbe, hawing ſtalkes like the othet of his 
kinde, whereon are placed long leaues fnipr abour the edges,-in ſhape hke the great Yerenica , or 
herbe F/nellen. The flqwers growe along the talkes pike faſhion,or like ynto Lavender, ofa ble:ve 
colour;zafter which fueceede ſmall cods or pouches. The roote is {maliand fibrous, Irmay be called 
Lyſmachia Carulea,or bleweWillowe herbe. . .. | Fi! 921190. | 
6 Wehavelikewiſe/another Willowe herbe that groweth neere vnto thebrinkes of rivers and 
watercourſes, This | found in awaterie lane leading from the Lord Treahurershouſe called T4;b%. 
mto the backſide of his (laughter houſe: and in other paces as ſhall be declared heereafter: which 
L Obelixs hath called Ly/ims:hia gatericulate , or) hoodded Willowe herbe, Ithath many fmalten- 
der ſtalks _—_ the grounde,beſet with divers leaues, ſomewhat ſhiprabourtheedges, of a 
| colourlike vnto-the leanes 'of Scordiwon;or water Germander:among which are placed, 
ſundrie finall blew flowers faſhioned like alittle hoode,in (ſhape reſembling thofe of Alehoone.The 
root is ſmall and fibrous diſperſing it ſelfe vnder the carth far abroad,wherby ir greatly increafeth. 


7 Lyſanachia campeſtris. 2N >! 
Wilde Willowe herbe 


F 


\ = 
' ®* A 


\ 


| k 
y 


F, >. 
'TF; \\ 


14 > 
bg . 
BE 


\ W 


- 
J 
2 
. 


" —_ 


_ 


> 
FI 
, s 
>4 
\ 


-Y 

- + 

K!) 
aw 


'/ \{ 


.. "\ 


FF 


*'2 "=. <A <ID 
CY.) 


, 


; \ iy "ol : 
= 
. % bs 4 * 2 : 
: 1 \ " / FY _ , 4 - 
. . : | = 4 
: _ - FM \4 . 4 
__— YVFSS. 
- 
. o -— $ X £ ; 4 
. »? : X 


\) 


4 
q 
Y oo 
- 
Nz 


” 


oy 


Lage gs TEL. nn Co: om 
WL TC THE Thi Tins IC11 —_— 
pts, + 8s, Jeu ” ? | 
Wh L.US19 434 
*%. þ 
'N 4 , +4 . | - « ; 1 þ A ” . - Th * as ' 
& <5! 213603 06; 4 ,240G0,d2 all nigdbo ts ATE 1 

1 


19Y 218 21996 att notcnt all 
$141 ,pv1rommn cy 4 


388. THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| | K-- % The deſcription. Wee 
7 Thewilde Willowe herbe hath fraile and verie brietle ſtalkes,flender,and of the height of ac, 
bite, ſomerimes higher : whereupon do growe ſharpe pointed leaues ſomewhar ſnipt abourthe | 
edges, ſet togither by couples. There come foorth at the firſt long flender coddes, wherejnjs 
conteined ſmall ſeede, wrapped in a cottonye or Cownie wooll, that is caried awaic with the wihde | 
when the ſcedeis ripe;at the ende of which commeth ſoorth a {mall flower of a purpliſh colour. 
whereupon it was called Filias ante Patrem, bicayſc |rhe flower doth nor appeere vntill the coghe | 
filled with his ſeede { but there is another ſonne before the father , as ha Yared declared in the | 
chapter of meadowe Saffron. The roote is ſmall and threddie. | 


| 8 Thewoode Willow herbe hath aflender ſtalke\dinided into other ſmaller braunches, wheton 
are ſer long leaues,rough and ſharpe pointed, of an ouerworne greene colour. The flowers graye 
atthe tops of the braunches,conſiſting of fower or five ſmall leaucs, of a pale purpliſh colourten. 
ding to whitenes,after which cometbngs cods,wherin arelirtle ſeeds wrapped in acentaine whie 
downe;that is caricd away with the winde. The roote is threddie. | 
"vt . | *Theplece. | bet 
The yellow Lyſanechia groweth plentifully in moiſt medowes, ves the medowes 2; 
you go from Lambeth to Barrerſey neer London,and in many other places _s England, 
| Thefecondgrowethin places of greatermoiſture, yea almoſt in therunning ſtreames,andſta. | 
ding waters, or hardebyrhem. Ir groweth vnderthe Biſhops houſe wall at th, necrethe 
water of Thames,and in moiſt ditches in moſt places of England, [| 
 Thethirdgrowerhneere the waters(butnot inthe waters)inall places for the moſt part, | 
The fourth growethin Yorkſhire in a place called the Hooke, neere vnto acloſecalled the Cor 
paſture ;from whence I hadtheſeplants, which do grow in my* garden very goodly to behold, for | 
the decking vp of houſes and gardens. | |! 9:1 + 42 by. | 
The fiftgrowerh haxd by the Thames, as ye go from a placecalled the Diuels Neckerchefeto 
Redreffe, neere vntoa ſtile that ſtanderh in your way vpon the Thames banke , among the plankes | 
thatdo hold vpthe fame banke.Ir groweth alſo ina ditch fide not farre from theplace of execution, 
called Saint Thomas Warerings. | Faw 


oY ; | * The time. 

Thele herbes flower in Tune and Iuly,and oftentimes vnrill Auguſt. 

|  t Thenames. Ar 

Lyſamachia , as Dieſcorides and Plinie doe write, rooke his name of a ſpeciall vertue that ic hathin 
appeaſing the ſtrife *nd vnrulineſſe which falleth our amongoxen atthe ploueh, if itbe putabout | 
thei yokes: butirrather reraineth and keeperh the name Ly,»achia, of King Ly/amachas the ſonce 
of Azathecle; the firit finder our of the nature and vertues of this herbe, as Pliaie faith : whichre- 
raineth rhe name of him vnto this day, andis made famous of Era/ifratas in his 25, booke, chap.7, 


Reellingwriterhthat itis calledin French Cornelic and Corneots:; in Grecke hnueger, of the Latines 
Lyſonachiun : of Plinie Lyſimachia : of the later writers Selicarza : in high Dutch UMederick; is 
Engliſh Willow herbe,or herbe Willow,and Looſe ſtrife. | [247 | 


Chameneriumiiscalled of Geſnerms Epilobion : in Engliſh Bay Willow,or Bay Willow hethe. 


i* 
. 


RO ARRES | Xn 3 *% The nature. | | 
Theyellow Zy/anachie, which is the chicfe and beſt for philicke vſes, is colde and drie, andvery 
aſtringenr. F«5 : vy QF __ | jp 4 *!7 hevertu's. F | "=: 38. By 
A The pare accotding to Dieſcorides,is good againſt the bloodie flixe,being taken cither by potion 

or gliſter., . 13>. Fe [AM MIS 0 þ RS. 
B fl is excellent good for greene wounds and ſtancheth the bloodbbeing alſo pur into chenoſtrils 


it ſto eedingatrt a 1--þ | K+ || 
C FTheſmoke of the burned herbe driueth away ſerpents, and killeth flies and gnats in a houle; 
which Plinie ſpeaketh of in his Spooky, Capt gaokes ſairh he, craull away atthe ſmell of Looſe , 
ſtrife, The ſame aurhor afhirmerh in his 26.booke, laſt chap. thatitdieth haire yellow; which is pt 
very valike to be dohe byreaſon the flowers are yellow. Ws © L391 
D The others hauenot beene-experimented, wherefore vntill ſome matter woorthy the noung 
doth offer jefelfe ynto our conſideration] will onut further to diſcourſe hereof, - -- | 


E The ivice of yellow Lyſanachiataken inwardly, ſtopperh all fluxe of blood, and the Dyſenteriat 
bloodic flixe, © | S_— |. the: SE 


z 
. 
* 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 389 
mn nut into theno zththebleeding of the ſame, and the bleeding of wounds, and F 
yr ue Sr mare an ins mate "ax vnguent or ſalue, | 


_ -qorrn . ed, that the fume or ſmoke of the herbe burned, doth driue away flies and gnats, and xx 
llmaner of venemous beaſts, 


pd 


Of Barren woort: Chap.143; | 


Epimedium. THR 2: 
—-5- His rare and ſtrange plant was ſent to me 
| from the French Kings Herbariſt , Kobinw, 


dwelling in Paris at the figne of the blacke 
head, inthe ſtreete called Dubout du Mende,in Eng- 
liſh, The end of the world. This herbe I planted in 
my garden, and in the beginning of May it came 
foorth of the ground, with (mall, hard and wooddie 
crooked ſtalkes: whereupon grow rough and ſharpe 
pointed leaues, almoſt like Aharia, thatis to (ay, 
Sauce alone, or Iacke byzþe hedge. LU Obelims and 
Dodonaws ſay, that the leaues are lomwhar like Iuic, 
but in my iudgement they are rather like Allraria, 
ſomewhat ſnipt about the edges, and turning them- 
ſclues flat vpright, as a man turneth his hande vp- 
wardes when he recciuech money. Vpon the fame 
ſtalks come foorth ſmal lowers,conſilting of fower 
leaues, whoſe outſides are purple, the edges onthe 
inner fide red, the botrome yellow. and the middle 
= of a bright red colgur, andthe whole flower 
omewhar hollow, This hate Iſeene; although Do+ 
donexs ſaith that it neuer/beareth any flower at all, 
The cauſe may be, for that the countrie where he 
ſawethe ſame doth not agree fo well with the na- 
ture of the planc,as our ſaile of England doth, The 
roote is ſmall, and creepeth almoſt vpon the vpper- 
moſt face of thecarth, Irbcarcth his ſeede in very 
k N\ ſmall cods like Saracens Confound, bur ſhorter : 
which came not to ripeneſle in my garden, by reaſon that it was dried away with the extreme and 
wmaccuſtomed heare of the ſunne, which happened in the yeere 1590. ſince which timefrom yeere 
toyecre ir bringerh ſeede to perfeRtion, Further Dioſcorides and P/inie do report, that itis without 
flower or ſecde. * Theplace..' | * 
Itgrgweth in the moiſt medowes of Italic about Bononia and Vincentia : it groweth in my 
n *% The time. | | 


It lowreth in Aprill and May when it hath taken faſt hold, and ſerledicfſelfe in the earth a yeere 
before, *% The names. | | 
Itizcalled Epimedium :T have thought good rocall it Barren woort in;Engliſh; not bicauſe that 
Disſeorides ſaith it is barren both of flowers and ſcedes, bur bicaule as ſome authors athrme, bein g 
C1t1S an enimic to conception. | 5 | | | 


62h, 45 * The temperature and vertues. by | 
| G:len:irmerh that itis moderately cold, with a waterie moiſture: we haue as yet no vſe hereof 


nophificke, | | 
Bb 3 | Of 


THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
Of Fleabane Mullet. Chap.124.. 


1 Conyea maior, 


2 Conyza minor, 


Great Fleawoort. 2 Fleabane Muller. 


i. io) | 2 He firſt and true kind of Coryze hath large 
Fi T and broadeleaues, like Ferbacumbiens 
n or black Mullet, but fomwhat narrowerpt 
a dark green colour: among which riſeth vpa ſtem 
three cubits high, diuiding it ſelfe into many other 
| braunches, which are beſerwith the like leaues,but 
| leſſer: among which and to the top,there comma 
- vp ſmall yellowiſh flowers of a ſweete ſauour,which 
doe turne themſclues into downe, that is caried 
. away withthe winde, The roote is thicke &roug), 
. haung many ftrings thereto wear, WErF - 
2 Theſecond kinde of Conyze hath leaues,ſtalks, 
| flowers, and roots like the former, bur leſſer by mi 
| ny degrees,and ofa more fragrant ſinell, | | 
3 There is a third kind of Conyzg that hath around, 
white woollie ſtalke, more ” 2s acubite highznar 
FURISSIS=-2-<4 | row and long leaues, ſomewhat cottonie or wool: 
F- RXYDaZ——- 8 atthetop of the ſtalke grow ſmal flowers like Cat 
momill, bur greater , and not onely of a yellow colour in the midſt of the lower, but in the bord 
round about alſo, * | I | Thie 


JE: 


= Ba HS © my oO 


LEM S 


| tarheare onename. InGretke tiscalled wv{:in Latine Conyee: of Plinic Canilage : of Gaza Po 


aA threddie as the oy 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 391 F 
There is a fourth and final Comp vhich differerh not from the reſt,ſaujng thar itisa grear deale | ; 
lefle,and growerh ſeldome a foorte high. The flowers be ofa datke ycllowe cotour, almott like Tan- þ 
Ge flowers,07 the midit of the flowers of Cammomill: the whole plantisof a ſtrong ſavour, 
There be threekindes more,whereof Lfinde not any thing written: x 5 which cauſe Ileaue it to 
a further conſideration: : the one is called Conyzs Hellenitis, Mellita ___ : another Conyz: Helleni- 
ty jj laciniatis : and the other Conyea Hellenitispiloſe. , 
; Ge ff % Theplace, , | 
great and jellefants Cons the chalkic g| «ps | by Derfor, three miles fb 
he Is reenhit Ntzat Grayesin Eſſex, and 


he mite, wer im cuerie waterie dach and tres Ta 
ene growerh at I{lingron by London, in the ſtrecte as ve gofromrheende 

vatothethurch , Tc, in many other h_—_ and walte places neere 
* T e Fame. | 


ous next 


- Sg __ 


gnomatera _— ERIE idering 
another herbe ſo called: burif ir were po 1ble to roote out auncient errors, I would gladly 
EE Cha calledin Engliſh Fleabane Mullet, to makea difference berweene two herbes 


luis, and Pulicaria; yetir differeth from P ſylliwomn, whichis alſocalled Pulicaria, wootr. The 
peat Comiis called Dieſer des bis Baccheri,0r our Ladies gloues, | | 


w The nature: 
Comeais hotanddriein the third degree. | 
* Thevertnes. 
- n 54 and kdbersbe good againſt the ſtrangurie,the jaundiſe, andthe gnawing or griping A 
of he be 
The ſame raken with vineger,helpeth the Epilepſi ie orfalling fickneſſe. | B 
Ifwomen doſitoyerthe decotion thereof,it greatly caſerh their painesofthe mother. ''C 


The herbs burncd,where flics,gnats Hleas,or any venemous _ are,doth crive them _ D 


Of Starre woort. (hap. 125. 


* The kindes | 
There be divers ſorts of the Aſters or Starwootrs,as ſhall be declared, 
* The deſcription. 

He firſt kinde of _LFey or Iwgninalis,bath large,broade leaues like Yerba wn, or the great 

-Comz4 : among which riſeth vp aſtalke Gon or fiue foote long, harde, rough, and hairie, 

beſet with leaues like roſe Campions, of a darke browne green colour, Arthe top of the 
ſaid ſtalks come foorth flowers,of a ſhining & S liſtering golden colour 8 ſomtimes purple: among 
theſe flowers growe fiue or fixe long leaues, tharpe pointed andrough, notmuch vnlike Sos fi 
alled Sells marine, The flowers tutne into doyne,and are caried away with the winde, The roore _ 
sfibrous,of a binding and OI 
2 Theſeconde calledlcal ralian rarrewoort, hach leaues like Conyza, among which riſe vp manie 
ſhrubbie ſtalks,veric hard and blackiſh,a foote high,bearing attherop yellowe flowers,mixcd with 
ws Bruns fer _—_— chafhe ſcales like Jace orKnapweede. The roote is fibrous,of an aſttin- 
gent and drying taſte, / 
3 Thethudkinde hath leaues ſolike Italian Starrewoort , that a mancan ſcarſelyar the ſidden 

—_—_—_ the one from the other. The ſingle ſtalke is a cubite long,vpright,and render :0n the rop 

whereof qty: yellowe flowers , like thoſe of Ents Campans , in ſhape-like a ſtarre: and the 


| Tootefmall and threddic, 


4 The fourth kinde intalnefle and floweris not much vnlike thatlaſt before ſpecificd,burin ſtalke 
andleaues more hairie, and longer, ſomewhar like our ſmall Hounds A : andthe roote fibrous 


Bb 4 | 1 Aﬀer 


HH 
an 
[UP 
[24 
© 
& 
het 
©, 
= 
a 
P 4 
© 
S 
= 
YH 
_ 
= - 
b 


HISTORIE) OFi BEANS. 30h 


- There is another fore that hath a browne ſtalke, with leaucs like the final! Coyi=s, The flowers 
” of a darke yellow which turne into downe that Gethaway with the winde like Conizr The roote 


i {|| of threds or {tri 
| 6 Thereisalfoar thathath leaveslike the great Campion, ſomewbar havicz among which 
come wp crooked cr: ling ſtalkes, Tot lamely many waics: VACIcupon dogrowtaire yellovw 
owers, ſtarre faſhion, which turne into downe that. is caried awaywithrthe winde. [Thyrocte 
long and ſtraight as a fin er,with ſome foy.ſtrings. d.ynrothe vppermoſt pare 
7 There groweth anot er kinde of Starwoort, which many oils ns, bur rhin- 


- ner,andofa more greene Colour,couered with a woolic hairines prowney ind bitter in raſte; 3 among 
whichſpringath- vp.a yoong ſtalke more than a cubire high, ofi 
with the like leaues; bue fnaller and ſharper pointedgdiuidingit \ 
branches; whercan dna flowers like Doronicwn ot Boggs... 
crooked.) 2111's > m Crt 


thanthe 
anddecke vp the ſtalke cuen to the top; ; whereupon do growe yell ow flowers ta faſhion, like vnto 


the former, Theroore is ſmall and tender,creeping far fat icmigh tily increaſeth. 
9 Clufiwchath ſer foorth a kinde tharthath anypright ſtalks, ſohatw 7s, gt wo cubires high, 
beſet with leaues ſomewhat woollic like illowes Poor atthetop —_ the ſtalke faire yellow flow. 
ers like Enads Campars , which turne into downe that is caricd away with the winde. The roote is 
thicke,with ſome' ines orthredsfaſtened thereto. ” 
10 He hath Kkewiſe deſetibed 4 ery wank fx hath leaues, talkes,fl and rootes like the 
ninthbur never _ onecubire. And themother ſtalke and flower doth neuet 
growelo higlras hit cus "= elle Herba i impia lo called, forthar te children do ouragyon'e 
cheir parents. 
rk There islikewilſe fer foorth in his Pannonicke Obſeruation, akinde of After that hath many 
ſmall hairie leaues like the common great Daiſie 3/among which riſeth vpan hairie ſtalke of a foote 
high,hauing at the top faireblew flowers inclining to purple , which curne ( in the time of ſeeding) 
mto a woollis downe ,that'fleeth away with the winde. The whole playe hath adrying, Is 
and baeer raſte, The root is chreddie like the common Daiſte, 


* T. heplace. 


The kindes of Starwoorrgrowe vpoa mountaines and hillie ed ſometimesin ds and 


merges lying by rivers ſides. ft 
e two firſt kindes do growe vpon Hampſteed heath fower miles from London,in Kent vpon 
oyaeree downes an in many other ſuch downic places,” _ 


* The time. 
Neyfower from pro the ndof Aug | 


*% T he names. 


This herbe is called i in Greeke «5ipe#au5,and alſo &0ruy; in Lacin.Qifey Ayres, Bobomiow. Sc tu whe | © 


uls;oflome AFerion, Aſteriſcon,and Hyophthalmon : in high Ducch Begerkraut : in Spaniſh, By 
bs :in French SENS fe goutremewne : in Engliſh Scajhrnont and Sharewoort, : 


| | * 7 henatuee. 
bates remperature irf cooling rw 

conlume,cſpeciall ,whide; itis yet ſoftand new 
That he wry dh yam flower or purple, is th 

of which he maketh mention in the fourth 


to be that, whichis of Firgilalled uu Ames: 
of his $9 "ot pay f 


zþ etiam flasi inpratis p__ <Amelb - 

| Fecere agricole : facilis querentibus berbs ; 
Namque wn2 ingentem tolls ae ce ſpite ſyluan : 
CAHarem ipſe ſed mn folys,que pluroma circum 


| Funtlantur ,v 


tole —_" ppore nigre. 


# 10taptec ee; £ 


8 ,Wehaue ſeene growing ypon wilde mounraines,a another for, hich bath leaves mach jel b 


_ Galen ſaith adi moderately waſte and 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
In Engliſh thus. | | 
Wis fide ſeurchr i ddowes gin allows ies be found, £ 
. Thecountric fwaines do clepe the ſame Starwoort, Our of the « 
| Onerootdoth ſprout,which ſprede broadewithbranchesthicke Sowide 
Ofcolour like the finek goldein fire thathathbeenerride.. ' 
The leaues which bud encry dh Jromkd andthickeranke' 
mh roo oaraget7 1b} berg aro | 


| a throne 51 ono 3 homo mow. £2 
A Theleaueeof 4 or 1noxinulis (t p J, and ap phedratobouches impoſtumerjandvencen Y 
Fin CET reer [th Andie, tharis, the dankeor ſhare) doth mightilyny. | 
them,whereofthis herþe After tooke the'name 7 
B  hekpecd and oltailedh again the wflammation of the fundament, and the falling foonhef | 
K,.. ur called Sacemy wentris. - | 


weep 7 pe be ginen-meochilden againſt Spanciagnd hinge, 


Of W NY | oe 6. 


Garden Woade, | i 2 1+ The deſcription, | 
| Leftwot Garden VWoade hath _ 
of a blewiſh greene colour, The | 
eth two cubites high, ſeraboutwith agrea = 
”— | number of ſuch leaves as come vp firſt, ages | 
$/-=288 ler, branchingit (e)fe at the top into many lite | 
S | twigs, whereupon doe growe many finall yelloy 
| flowers, which being paſt, the ſecede commeth | 
footth like lirtle blackiſh r&ngs 2; the roote is | 
white and{ingle, | 
There is a wilde kinde of Voade very lie | 
.vnto the former in ſtalkes, leaues, and faſhion,ſa- 
-uing that the ſtalke is renderer, {maller, andbrov- 
'ner, and the little roongs narrower; otherwik = 
thereisnodifference [ar | 
It * The | 
| 'Thetameor garden oade growerhinfend 
: fields, where itis ſowen: the wilde kinde grow- 
<thwhere the tame kinde hath been ſowen, | 
 *% Thetime, | 
( They flower from Tune to September. 
| * The names. _ | 
| , Weade is called in Greeke i=%ns: in Latine 
Iatisand Glaſtum. Ceſar in his firſt bookeof the 
| French wars, ſaith , that all he Brirons docolout 
chemſclues with Woad, which giuecha blewco- 
= >" flour? : the which thing alſo #linje in his 22. bocke, | 
| + (chap.r. dohreſttific : in Frauncerhey call it ls 
Pay widchi is like vnro Plantaine, wherewiththe Britons wiues, and their ſonnes wiucsare 
coloured all ouer,and gonakedin ſome kinde of facrifices, Iris likewiſe called of divers Guadwn: :of | 
the Italians Guado; awordasit ſeemerh; wrungourof theword Gleſtwn': in yoni and Frezed 
Paſtel: in Durch UMeet in Engliſh Woade and Wade. | 
+ The nature. © | 
Garden Woadei dric without ſharper Qonilde Woade dricthmore, andis more arp 
and biting, | 
* Tle 


C LS 14 


| 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. * 395 
| | * The vertues, | Y: | 
The decoRion of, Woade drunken,js good for ſuch as haue any ſtopping or hardnes in the mile A 
or ſpleenc,and is alſo good for wounds and vicers in bodies of a ſtrong conſtitution, as ofcountrie 
oplc,and it uch as are accuſtomed to great labour,and hardcourſe fare, 


It ſeruerh well ro die and colour cloth,profitablero ſome few, and h | 6elito many, | R 


Of Coo Baſil. Chap.n7. is 


2 Ephemerum Mathjols. 
uicke fading flower, 


| r % The defer iption. | 
2 His kinde of wilde Woade hath tart long leaues like Yalerians rubre Dodenei, ot Behen ab | 
bin : the ſtalkets ſmall and tender, hauing thereupon little purple flowers, conſiſting of 
tower leaues; which being paſt, there come ſquare cornered huckes, full ofround blacke | 
ſeede like Colewoorts. The whole plant is couered ouer with a clamme ſubſtance like Birdlime, fo | 
atin hot weather the leaues therof will take flies by the wings (as Mu{cipula doth)in ſuch maner, 
thattheycannot eſcape away, | | Re] 
2 Ephemerwn Mathjol:, hath long fat and large leaues like vato Woade,but mugh leſſer:among 
which riſerh yp a rounde ſtalke a cubire high, diuiding it ſelfe into many braunches atthe top. The 
wiichare ſer with many ſmall white flowers , conſifling of five leaues, which being paſt , there 
followe little rounde bullers conteining the ſeede; The roote is ſmall and full of fibres. 
| *% The place. | | | 
Cow Baſill groweth in my garden: but Ephemerum isa ſtranger as yetin Eaglande. 
| *% The time. | | 


=" 7 RA 0 & - 


They flower in Maic and Iune, * 


| *% The nature and VErtues. L 
findenor any thing exrant concerning the nature and verrues of Yaccaria, called Cowe Baſill, 


Fi vy wrvnr. as D#o/corideswriteth ) boiled in wine, and the mouth waſhed with the decoGtion | 


"- ; 


F 


Etaketh away che toothache. 


I 


F 
Moe ae A > ON p 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
In Engliſhthus, . 


With iede flarch in ticdowes eric Gehrit iseobe found, an 
The countrie ſwaines do clepethe ſame Srarwoort, Our of the } © 
. Onerootdothſprout,whichf broade with branches thicke & wide, 
Ofcolourlike the fineſ goldeinfire thathathbeenerride. © 
The leaues which bud on euery ſidein a round andthicke ranke' 
Mor aro corrnieedg af 6 rover 


| wth vertaer;/t $314 $2129513 5106 wt ug 
A Theleauesof 4 or / nqunl Raped and plied vntoborches,impoſtumes;and venerequs 
bubones nerf ot pd i Inuine, that the danke or tare) dothightis | 
curate and ſippurate them,whereof thi herbe After tooke the name /; f 
B Ithelpeth and prevaileth againſt the lymnnzeion of the fundament, and the falling foonhef | 
Ons EET: coor on mma noo merry ena egy | 


Of Wade. four 126. 


emer = 4 T, he deſeription. | 
_ ; X16 + Lefmor Garden Woadchathlon leates | 
of a blewiſh greene colour, aps | 
: eth two cubites high, ſer aboutwith = | 
number of ſuch leaues as come vp firſt, but ſmal. 
ler, branchingit (elfe at the rop imto many little | 
twigs, whereupon doe growe many ſmall yelloy = 
flowers, which being, paſt, the ſcede commeth | 
foorth like lirtle blackiſh r&Þngs :, the root is | 
white andſingle, | 
There is 2 wilde kinde of Woade very 9 
ynto the former in ſtalkes, leaues, and faſhion ſa- | 
ving that the ſtalke is renderer, ſmaller, and brow- | 
ner, and the little roongs narrower; otherwiſe | 
there; is no difference betwixt them, 
+ The | | 
The tame or garden oade Sonehinſenl | 
: fields, where itis ſowen: the wilde kinde gron- 
ethwherethe tame kinde hath been ſowen. | 
* 7 he time. | 
: They flower from Iune to September. | 
| * Thenames. ZY 
: Woade is called in Greeke ins: in Latine | 
Jfatis,and Gl:ſtum. Ceſar in his firſt bookeof the | 
\ 4French wars, ſaith, that all che Brirons docolout 
'themſclues with Woad, which giueth a blewco- | 
Jour: thewhich ching allo Plinije inhis 22. bookt, | 
; | +  chap.r. dochreſtific : in Fraunce they call it Gl | 
ſum, toad, whichis ike vnto Minds; wherewith'the Britons wiues, and their ſonnes wiuesae | 
coloured all ouer,and gonaked in ſome kinde of ſacrifices, Ir is likewiſe called of divers Guadwm: of 
 theltalians Guade; awordasir ſeemerh; wrungourt of the word Glaſtwn': in + nog and French 
 Paſtel:inDurch UWeet : in Engliſh Woade andWade..\: | 
4 *% The nature. | 
p ren as do without Gy 16 Nowids Woade drieth more, andis more ſh89* 
* andbiting, (ev; | 
s 7 | 


- 


WW 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 395 
* The vertues, | 


The decoRtion of Woade drunkenjs good for ſuch as haue any ſtopping or hardnes in the mile: A 


| nd is alſo good for wounds and vicets in bodies of a ſtrong conſtitution, as ofcountrie 
and fuch as are accuſtomed to great labqur,and hardcourfe fare, 
Ic ſeruerh well to die and colour cloth,profitablero ſome few, and hurrfull romany, 


* Of Gw Baſal. Chap-27. | 


2 Ephemerum Mathijoli. 
| uicke fading flower, 


In kV 1 7 AM 
.— # ) —— 


3 6 
| Ms AM 
| TEASS 


27 His kinde of wilde Woade hath tar long leaues like Valerian rubre Dodanei, ot Behen ab. 


bum : the ſtalkeis ſmall and tender, hauing thereupon little purple flowers, conſiſting of | 

* | fowerleaues; which being paſt, there come ſquare cornered huskes, full ofround blacke 

ſeede like Colewoorts. The whole plant is couered ouer with a clamme ſubſtance like Birdlime, fo 
 Vatin hor weather the leaues therof will take flies by the wings (as Muſcipula doth)in ſuch maner, 


thattheycannot eſcape away. 


2 Ephemerwn Mathiol:,hath _ t,and large leaues like vnto Woade,but mugh lefſer:among 


which riſerh vp a rounde ſtalke a cubire high, m—_—_ ſelfe into many braunches atthe top. The 


wich are ſer wich many ſmall white flowers, conſi ing of five leaues, which being paſt, there | 


followe little rounde bullersconteining the ſeede;The roote is ſmall and full of fibres. 
= FEM T9, * The place. : 
Cow Baſill groweth in my garden: bur Aba 60 isa ſtranger as yetin Eaglande. 


| * The time. 
They flower in Maie and Iune. | . 

| hrs | % The nature and vertues. / | | 
Ifindenot any thing extant concerning the nature and vertues of Yaccaria, called Cowe Baſil, 


Itaketh away che toothache. 


Ephemerum ( as D#/eprideswriteth ) boiled in wine, and the mouth waſhed with the decoction | 
| of 


OE IS no, gy 


0 8 NPY” 
ns: FE I a RE 00 ce 8; 7 On 
| OG bu Is WER. ; : SY get "_— F 
65. why 
+ , 
p4 FG, 


, h, AR get £% A 4. 4 2. 0, NG 
- —— 0 k BY 88 4 Byct 14 OY 4 LW wg 
. - " - CY MW COS x Ou ID IS. be POET 04 BED W's No - po Ay Ws Tar? © ET 4p. = 
P GEORGES Ay ER” MF : 62. art = 09 ; ; DEI AS ent. go Vo NE avg wy ae 
Ys he RR a IG EH GEN d , WER "RR ing IR, * SBI A bo be Sx V7 Wet Yo CIS 2 Bp pt ' 
OY RT OR HG! He ne 14 MA PEEt<ot us s "Wag : - - ; 
; FF Lara AE EE) NIE ; - 


ee En OS Log ng t42e 08 
NIE Eo Mr os 


ay pod BY PY 
OE bv LYN; SEE -> 


396 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Of Selamoides,or baſtard Weld or Woade,out of Dioſc. Chap.ns. 


| * The kindes. 


Here hath beene much ſaide of theſe plants, co ed vnder the name Seſamoides, about 
4 which many words haue beene ſpent, bur to finall purpoſe ; the contronerfie is as yetnorgeci. 
ded : andbicauſethis volume groweth to be: great , and much is heercaftertobe ſaide; Iamcon. 
ſtrainedto leauc it little better then nakedly ſer downe ; the beſt haue doneno more, alchough p,. 
donews bath ſet them dowric for purgers among the Helebores , yerI amnot ofhis opinion, burrz- 
ther repute them for kindes of diers Woade zor of the wilde Poppies. Th 


| «of */ jcurm 19mm, | | 2 Seſat ode 5 falgmanticum permen. | 
| catt | e Woade. 8 | Sal batzrde Woade, | 


| * | The deſeription, 


aj Seſamoides bath verylong leaues & many,flender toward the ſtalke, 8&broz | 
SoC: y degrees toward the end,placed confuſedly vpon a thick ſtiffe ſtalke: on thetop- 
#7) fil wherofdo growlittle, fooliſh, oridle white flowers ; which being paſt there do los | 
==Z==gq low ſmall ſceds like vnto the true Sefarwn , whereof it tooke his name, and isnot + | 
_ Alpiz, or Canarie ſeede that birdegare fedde withall,The roote is thicke,and of a wood | 
nce, | ji --4 | | | 

2 Little Seſamoides,as Dio ſeorides ſaith hath many ſmall hoarie leaues ſpred vpon the ground lk DH 
thoſe of Mark care; wo which riſe vp ſmall ſtalks of aſpan high: a hereof are rafts | 
of very lirtle flowers, ſomewhat of a purple colour, The middle part whereof is white, wherein FT | 
the ſcede,bitter intaſte ,apd of a yellowiſh red colour. The roote is finall and ſlender. bo | 
4 3 Seſame) 


& 


£ 


z 
- 


\&- 


BT TT e7r7 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 397 


3 Seſamnoides main Scaliger. | 4 Seſamoides paruwn M athjol;. 
Barren Velde. | Bucks horne Vet. 


*% The deſeription. 


3\ Barren welde hath a thicke wooddic roote, out of whichriſe vp Opt «3 fromthe grounde | 
indrie final braunches, ſet round about with many ilender, rough, and hoarie On like thoſe of 


Piel ,orthe great Mouſe eare : it bringeth foorr peither flowers nor leede, buris increaſed by 
eroote, 

Mow arcs: a. hoy hath many ſmooth and {ofe long le S, curvpon the fides with one or 

atgaſhes, reſembling very norablie the leaues of raw =, The ſtalkes growe to the 

teightof a foore;; on'the top whereof do growe ſcaley knops like thoſe j-5 : from the 

which doe ſhoote foorth arthe time of flowring ſuch like gbores as Wheare hath, but of 2 
blew colour. The roote is great,long and wooddic. 

* Theplace. 
Theſe do growe in rovgh and ſtonie places, I kauc had cheſecdr ſeneme from Paluain Tealie; 


The flowers do expect is preſenr yeere. | 
* The time. 


ThetimeTexpeR tobe in Tine norwithſtanding dep tercoſbuch report. 
* The names. | | "PE; 
Ldoenorfinde in/any author that hath written heer-of xrname vi 
eyreſſe, OE THe haue called chem in rocks ont he whichname Se 
{aniderwe dareraine. WT - L- be 
; i Econ nega 
Galmattirmerh that PR feedec conch in it —_ a Ger qu pndfaha i hemethbre: 


th,andſcoureth, L 


= 


w_ 


The vertues. 


© Doſeardes affirmerh that the OT: of a halfe pennic ofthe ſeede {edrunke with meade, or honicd A 


Xt purgeth flegmeand choler by the ſtoole.” 


| Relanehemy Fr vg harde kyors __ ſwellings. | B 


:. 1 of 


We ob 


RR 


-_ "yp D. OOt'1 Ls bp 
eg da WIRES" SRI: Lun $0098 
+ wwe "R . 8 x WE" 
- 


—_—_ 


398 THE SECOND. BOOKE/ OF THE 
Of Diers weede. Chap-129. 
Luteols, Diers weed,or yellow weede, | | | % The deſeriotien. 1 
| Re, "ah | | Ters we:de hath long, narrow, and blackif 
AS. |} leaucs , notmuch vnlike to Woade , but 4 
,great deale ſmaller and narrower; from 
1 among which commeth vp aftalk rwo'cubirs hioh 
| beſet with lietlenarrow lcaues: amog which leaues 
' euen tothe toppe of rhe ſtalke come foorth ſmall 
: pale yellow flowers,cloſely cluſtering togitheron 
' abouc another, which co cturne into | buttons, 
/ cutas/it werecroflewiſe, wherein the ſcede is con- 
' tcined.Therooreis very long and fingle, 
Fi 7  t** The place. | 
Diers weede groweth of it ſelfe in moiſt barren, 
and vnrilled places, in and abour villages almoſt 
cuery where. | 
Eh, *% The names. | 
Pliny in his 33.booke cap.s.makerh mentionhy 
the waie of this herb,andcalleth it Zatea:V itrauity 
in his 7. booke Zatwn : and likewiſe Y;rgjl in his 
Bucolickes, the fourth Egloge : in Engliſh Welde 
and Diers weede. ; 
I-73 *% The time. 
'Thisherbe flouriſheth in Iune and Iuly, 
BY - *% The natwre. 
Tris hot and drie of temperature, 


: Of Staues aker. 'Chap.1z0. 
"THR" * The deſcription. | 
C? Tauesaker hath ſtraighr ſtalkes ofa br 
colourvith leaues clouen or cur into ſundt 
...* ſeQions, almoſt like che Icaues of thewilke | 
Vine. The flowers' doe growe vpon ſhort ſtems, | 
faſhioned like vnto, our I Les. Monks hoode, | 
| © ofaperfedblew colour z, which being palkthere | 
.*._ Tuccecde welted hnskes |Tike thoſe of . Walks | 
_ ©. bane, wherein is conteined triangled black ſeede, | 


[The rootjs of wooddic ſubſtance,and peril 
when it hath perfeCtedhis ſeede, | 


' Tris with great difficulty preſerved in ourcv | 
...counxzies, Their 12 ſome milde winters I have | 
* : ; . kept itcoucredouer witha little ferne to deſes 
14 few the infuric of the March winde, wit 
boo OOOTE BArnes one Ks that coms fe 
in &: FR FORrR Pty Fo the greateſt trol 


Fig 
: 4 
a 

20: 14.3 
: 1 


» # 
LY 


«5 


OWE. Oh 5 ob | 
=> It gowrerh in Iune, and the ſecede is ripe wi” 
WE >|, + condyeere of his ſowing... EL th at | 


k «6 
© 4 $ ” 


| Itis called in Greeke =:2; 4/2, in Larine lerbs 


by 3 
£4 ; 


»'| 411; denn, cond Pedamewlaria, a5 Decree repo; 
WH ous bhgpr Ley 
'_ +: _ nameit Vos 7am: of lomic Hm ee 
14 SCz nid dhe iT Lo II. ERTIES. $044 
n-4 Paſſuls montana : mn ſhops' Sraphiſeer4: : M7 
' © niſhTerma projenta : in French Herb: anx yo 
|” 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 399 
in hi h Dutch Lens kraut þ4 in Lowe Durch Luyfcrutt : in Engliſh Stauelaker, Lowſcwoort, 4 


nd Lowlc powder. | 
*% The temperatare, | 


” 


The fecdes of Staiteſaker are extremely hot, almoſt in the fourth degree, ofa biring and burning 
* qualitiE, | | 
1 | * Thevertues, © 

Fifreene ſeedes of Stauefaker taken with honied warer, will cauſe one to vomit grofſe legme A 
and{limic matter,bur with great violence;and therefore thoſe that haue taken them,ovght ro walke 
without ſtaying,and drinke honied water, bicauſe it bringeth daunger of choaking and burning the 
throte,as Dfoſcor#4esnoteth. 'And for this cauſe they are rejeted, and norvſed of the phiſitions ci- 
therin prouoking vomir,or clic in mixing them with ocher inward medicines, 

The ſeede mingled with olle or greace,driueth away lyceftom the head beard,and allother parts B 
ofthe bodie,and curerth all ſcuruic itch and manginefle, — * | 

The fame boiled in vineger,and holden in the mouth afſwageththe tooth ache. | C 

The fame chewed in the mouth draweth foorth! much moiſture from the head, andclenſeth the D 
braine,eſpecially if alittle of the roote of Pellitorie of Spaine be added thereto. | 

The ſame tempered with vineger,is good to be rubbed vpon lowſie apparellto deſtroy and driue E 
away lice. |; | | 

The ſeedes hereofare perilous to be taken inwardly without good aduiſe, and correfion of the E 
fame.Therefore I aduiſe the ignorant not to be ouer bolde to meddle with it, fath it is fo dangerous, | 
tharmany times death-nſuerh vpon the taking ofr. 


4 ' Of Palma(hbriſti. 'Chap.1g1. 


I Ricinw. | 2 Riciniw Americus. 
Palma Chriſti. | Palma Chriſti of America. 


Hl C8 27, 
's® = \y l ah 
» #F\,4s 

*,u»\j \ 


34 


At 
Is 7p 


|, 


* The 


GP PF, 


5 
ms 
> 
2x4 
'F 
7 
& 
Rr 
55d 
£4 
+4 
+ 
£5 
L vY 
EF 
45 if 
fs. 
1 
: ; 
54 
© 


400 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


* The deſcription. 


I cinw,Palma Chriſti,or Kik,hath a greatround hollow ſtalke five cubirs high, of a brome. 
colour,died with a blewiſh purple vpon greene. The leaues are great andlarge,parteding 
ſundric ſeftions or diuiſions, faſhioned lk the leaues of a Figge tree, bur greater, ſpredg | 

wideopen like the hand ofa man; and hath toward the top a bunch of lowers, cluſtering topgt.. 

like a bunch of grapes, whercofthe loweſt are of a pale yellow colour, & wither away without bez. | 
ring any fruit zand the moſt are reddiſh, 6 1-57, FA three cornered huskes, which con. | 
 taine ſeede as big as a kieney beane , of the colour and ſhape of acertaine vermine which haunteth 
cartell.called a Tike, We We | | FT | 

2 ThisPalma Chtiſti of America groweth vp to the height and bignes of a ſmall tree,orhey 

ſhrub, ofa wooddie ſubſtance, whole fruit is expreſſed by the Cares being of the bignes of a grea | 

beane,ſomewhat long,ofa blackith colour, rough and ſcalic, 7 TO 


| | | %* Theplare. Le Ee 
Ricinus or Palma Chriſti,growerh in my garden,and many other gardens likewiſe, 
Y : + Thetame. | 
Ricinss or Kik muſt be ſowen in Aprill,and the ſeede is ripe in the end of Auguſt, 


| * The noneand cauſe thereof. VY 
Ricings,whiercof mention is made in the fourth chapter and (xt verſe of the prophecic of 1w« 
was calledof the Talmudiſts, >> Xk,for jt the Talmud we reade thus,» jov2 un Yelo be/chemen lit. | 
 thatis inEngliſh, And nor with the oile of Kikz which otle is called inthe Arabian toong Albers, © 
—as Kabbi Samuel the ſonne of Hophni teſtifieth. Moreouer, a certaine Rabbine mooueth a queſtic 
laying, whatis Kik > Hereunto Reſeh Lach;ſhmakerth' anſwer in Ghemara , ſaying , Kik is nothing 
elſc but ones his Kikathon. And that this 1s true, it appeereth fy thatnamekiz,, which the ancient | 
Greeke phiſicions, andthe Acgyprians ſed; which Grecke word commeth of the Hebrewward | 
X;k. Hereby it appecreth,that the old writers long ago,though vnwirringly,called this plantbyhis | 
true and proper name. Buttheolde Latine writers knew it bythe name Cicurbits, whicheuidenty | 
is manifeſted by an hiſtoric, which Saint. Aage/zne tecordeth in his Epiſtle to Saint /erome, where | 
in effe& he writeth thus ; That name Kikeyon is of ſmall mometir, yer ſo finallamarter cauſeda | 
great tumultin Africa. For on a time a certaine Biſhop hauing occaſion to intreat of this whichis | 
mentioned inthe fourth chapter of 7o»as his prophecie (in a collation or ſermon, which he madein | 
his cathedrall church or place of afſemblic)ſaid, that this plant was called Cucarbita,a Gourde, bi | 
cauſe it increaſed vnto ſo great a quantitie in ſo ſhort a ſpace, orelle (ſaith he) itis called Hedrra, | 
Vpon thenoueltic and vntruth of this his dorine, the people were greatly offended, andrtheteof | 
ſuddenly aroſe a great tumulr and hurly burly ; ſo that the Biſhop was inforced to goto the ewes, 
to aske their judgement as touching thename of rhis plant. And when he had receiued of them | 
the true name, which was Kikagon : he made his open recantation,and confeſſed his error,and was | 
juſtly accuſed for a fallifier of the holy ſcripture. | FP: | 
| C ' ** Then:ture. 
The ſecede of Paltna Chriſti,or rather Kik,is hor and dric in the third degree, 


| | *+ The vertues. LU; 1 
Ritinus his ſeede taken inwardly, openeth thebellic, and cauſeth vomit, drawing ſlimicflegine | 
andcholer from the places poſſeſſed therewith. | 


\ 


B Thebrothof the meare ſupped vp, wherein the ſceedehath been ſodden, is good for the collicke | 
andthe gowte, andagainſt the pain in the hips called Sciatica, it preuaileth alſo againſt the iqut- | 
diſe and drophie, | * Ts | | [| 

Theoile that is made or drawen from the ſecede, is called Oleam Cicinwn : inſhops it is called | 
Olewn de Cherus : it heateth and dricth, as was ſaid before,and is good to annoint and rub all rough | 
hargnes and {curuineſle gotten by itch, | © | : 


D Thisoile,as Rabbi Danid Chimehi writeth,jis good againſt extreme coldnes of the bodie. 


X 
; 4 
f ! 1 5 
6 ? I 
: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. you 
Of Spurge. | ((hap.132. 


% The kinds . 


Jerebe divers forts of urges accordi to Dioſeorides,Plinie and © Apuleine , whereofſome 
T = Tp the ſea, ſome be A _— and others of the fielde :allwhich ſhall 
bedeſcribed in this generall Chapter , eſpecially bicauſe they are nor all of them vſed in Phiſicke, 
ereforeto froccal y,it were bur totell one tale oftentimes ouer, 


2 Tithymalas Helioſcopim. 
Sunne Spurge, - 


. Wi 4 _ 5 Pe; O14 , 
, Lg, GAY LI 
F »# Os "14 5AC 
SS," 2D 49-57; 
Vo 8,0 Y c 0> 


\ 
\ 


_ _ 
—— 
ws 


on 
: Wu 
- « . _- 
. p 2 hs! 
- x F7 
LY 
—_— +, 
 OO— - », / 4 wy 
" ——— - , 
a A _ - pans = bal - * G - L's 
: | — - 9: 
— =. ——_ —__ = ”X. \. » 
by — 
2 
; WF 
(I 


_ 
— 
V. 


ene PE... —_— 
« COX” 


— 
= = —_ 4 


— 
— - - 
o— 
_—— 
IO = 
% 


« 
> _— 
- - af 
- 0 


Ls . >. mY 


is % The deſeription. = 
{ He firſt kinde of Sea Spurgeriſeth foorth of the ſands, or baich of the ſea, with ſundry red- | 
|  diſhſtems or ſtalkes ing vpon one ingle roote , of a wooddie ſubſtaunce:/andthe 
| . Ralkes are beſet with ſmall, fat, and narrowe leaues like vnto the leaues of Flaxe, The 
lowers are yellowiſh and growe out of little diſhes or ſaucers like the common kinde of Spurge. | 
After the lowers come triangled ſeedes,as in the other Ti | (OO 8 | 
2 The ſecondekinde (called am, or Soliſequime; and in Engliſh,according to his Grecke 
name,Sunne $ , ortime Tichymale,of turning with the ſunne) hath ſundrie reddiſh ſtalkes of |: 
foote high : ib cqratibe vnto Purtlane , bur not fo great: the flowers yellowiſh and grow- 


Ss | : | 
:thirdekinde hath thicke, fat,and ſlender braunches trailing vpon the grounde, beſerwith | 
ues like Kneeholme,or the great Myrtle tree, The ſeede and flowers are like ynto the other of his | 


4 The fourth is like the laſt before mentioned but it is altogither leſſer and groweth more | 
otherwiſe alike. EE; , | = 1 _ of 
| | LL ES ny” Tithymalus 


_ my . ”a my _ 
_ - hi 4 ”— . W 
* SPE, - ; « 
"- j ff p » Lo . , 
a> ” ” ie - 
= * » 
£ a 2 
% : a 
. \ . | 
| Q N Q 
Pg A. - k ” - \ 
4 4 *s- -; X : A 
- A 
# 


6 Tithmaulue Pines, © 
Pine Spurge. 


_ bor wap x (yr ſanitic. 
Philicke Spurge. 


on anus 


D 'BOOKE"OF'/THE 


: 
: 
[1 


S 


hymalus valus Capreſſinus. | 
purge. 


ypres 


®) 
© 
| 6K) 
tv 
m1 
_ 


thymalus Myrtifolime. 
3s. be. 


3 Ti 
Ti 
C 


DO! 


_ LES PEO 


"RF 


5 


> o 


— 
ka 


+ HHISTORIE)OF/PLANTS AHT oy) 


Tichyws, 5x gp 
7 I, 6 9 


ON «} | ;5Foeres and {i 


'% Tit hnala LE Maonſel. 
See m_ SR 


"'% T AO RET ON - > | 
5 C ces Tichymale ro ſalkes 
=— Fs... high, ſet "Donn > the great 

s tree leaues etl e and roote 

I 8 -! 
pf ; Thefixtis like qe > in flowers, ſalkes, | 

anddi in thar, thatthis | 


'kinde hath o *nqe>7 pag: vers | 
like. = ent LY 

F |. Li There is ſet Ne bel ano by | iſe, that | 
| "þ rn a round e the firſt | 
cof Mirtle Ti ar longer ; | 

de, flowers ST others, | 

Mets is I} that groweth to the | 

ightof a man; the ta is lkeche laſt mentio- | 


 Ned,and ſomewhat hairiep0t red as the others,but | 
white 3 the leaues be long and narrow : in other | 
bes like to the other of his kinde, | 


494 THE -SECOND* B 
— . 20 TithymalusPlataphyles, 
yoo oO, SG 


UE 


F © were - 
: \. ſ/ Ci 
4 = l 
x * . % TFF 


2 


| | 96. The ninth is like the former, bur his leave, | 
be longer, and more like to the leaues of an Al. | 
mond tree,and is withour ſmell. | i | 
x0 Thertenthkinde hath great broad leaves like 
| |,” Ferbaſcumnſetroundabout a ſtalke ofa foote high, | 
| | |... in goodorder; onthe top whereof growethe flow. 
| | © ers in ſmall platters likethe common kinde, of a 
| * felow colour declining to purple. The whole | 
'Y Re OR 00 ereſt beforeſpe. | 
- .. There is another kind of Tirhymale;raken omof | 

the Emperors bookegthat hath a ſtalke of the big. 
'nesof a mansthigh , Spring like atree vntothe | 
height of two tall men,duuiding itſglte into ſundry | 
armes or branches toward the top, of a red to- | 
lour. The leaues are fmall and tender, much like / 
ynto the leaues of Ayres : the feede is likemito | 
that of wood Tithymale, or Cheracias, accordng | 
to the authoritie of Peter Belone, © | 


12 E/ula minor F % 
1s pl or 


1 HISTORIE (OF PLANTS. v2 405 | 


Ay 0) Aa. Ax. Ls Ae We L 
| T ic 90211 % The deſorption. ths $27, af} | 
Fn There is a kinde of Ch called Z/alx maier , which Airtingh ulindei hadin great ve- | = 
neration,as his extraRion he vied for many infirmiries ( may , and dorh appeer arlarge in his booke | ' 


intieuled Cara8:077mmm ——_— , dedicated vnto the Duke of Bauitre. ) This plant of R4/2n- | 
&asbath verie great and many rootes, coueretQuer witha-thicke barke, plaitedas it were with | 
igs, fromwhichtiſc ſundrie ſtrong and large ſtemmes ofa fingecothickneſſ>, 


cioht two cubirsbeſet wich leaues like = 4" Bt; "wy 
The ſeec and flower are not much wilike the ocher Tirhymales. T SY 


ngekinde of E/a/s ( in allianceand; 

inſavicd among the Phyſicians and Ap: 
ir BenedreZs,and Carartick pillesnſt 

0 cubits high , diuiding tt 


wi ED icorice, ere gt GAS up R 
dulous,hanging theirheads like ſinallbels, of's ppeeonY d wi 
Slate 2r Phi ende ; i (RE 
I3 Lathyris ſeu Cataput is maior. I4 Cats LS 
| * GardenSpurge, — | _— 


an Ny EE CCC Cee 


tm 
a » hk - ” - # EF , 
\ .T l \ bm _—_—— , "= # © 
JL L «&}- "1 (4d ©* . - - 
Q\ jy B, . 
\*TY : f ” 1) F, = - 
' : i, _ . 
G17 : 4 gIgf , j ” 
wy MM : $ 
- V MP = 
o : o = _ of _ . 
# þ - 4 "FL, ” = , 
- , # - ” my 
b5 k - 
- | 
= =” 4 e a> w— 
A - o 4" "1 
, : 44 +. \ 
- "FF, » — 
- : p 
\ WV =. —_ \ 4 
: 
, - 
Li . 
: - vs # * 
T vo. «4 4:7 - : . 
- . "4 
#4 #2: i *2 
AM - 
” 
\ : 
= _ l 


© 
\ 


+ The debriotions 


fn abour \ rag GIN rn ceftand moſt vie; wherefore Twill not | 


14 Theſmall kinde of Cataputts is like vnto the ' eat but much leſſer, whereb; 
Tiny likewiſe ſowell knowne vnrg al, ch 5 Iiballnojneneiadet pier _E 


THE SECOND BOOKE'OF |THE 
Is Þ wands. | || u6'p 
5 Pet ning , ' he wn Tipe: 


LO 
=» 


: 


SS 
MW 7-9 
& & \ bs _— f 4 - 
5 Lo vu -_ 4 . CS n 


43 -” 
- LOL Ys 
AEST -_ *,, 
— v— 
1D 
's AS i” 


% The deſcription. 


15 Thefifteenth kinde (called Peplus,of the purple outfide, or murrey redde colour) hath alot 

ſmall, and fibrous roote, bringing foorth many fruirefull braunches two handfuls long , burli 

andtender with leaues like the ſunne Tirhymale,growing two and two togither and ſmall yellow 

flowers: which go: tv there appeererh a ſlender pouchet , three corneredlike the other TH 
i 


thymales having within it a verie medullous whitiſh ſeede like Poppie, the whole plant yeelding a 
milkie juice,which arguerh itto be a kinde of Tirhymale. ; Fa 
16, As innameſoinſhapethis 16.reſembleth Pep/us,and commeth in likelihood neerer the ſigni | 
fication of Peplums, or Flammeolumthen'the other : therfore D ioſcorides affirmeth itto be Thou | 
amphilephes, tor that it bringeth forth a greater plentie ot braunches, morecloſelyknit and wound 
rogither,with ſhining twiſts andclaſpers an handfull and ahalfelong. The leaues are leſſer then 

' Peplwn, of an indifferent likeneſle and reſemblaunce berweene Chameſice and wilde Purſlane, The 


ſecede is great,and like that of Peplus,the roore ſmall and ſingle. ; 
17 The17.kinde maycaſily beknowen from the two laſt before mentioned,although they beve- 


ric like, Ithath many braunches and leaues creeping on the grounde of a pale green colour, notw- 
like to Hern4ar7e, hut giuing milkeas al the other Tichymales do, bearing the like ſeed, pouch, and 
flowers,bur {mallerin echreſpe&. |. | Li 
18 The 18 kinde of Tirhywale hath a rounde roote like a imall Turnep , as every author dothre- 
port : yermy ſelfe haue rhe ſame plant in my garden which doth greatly increaſe , of which] haue 
given diticrs vnto wy friendes whereby.I haue often viewed therootes, which do appeere vnto me 
lomewhat tuberous,and thercin nothing anſwering the deſcriptions which Dzſcorrdes , Pene,and 
others,haue cxpreſicd and fer foorth. This: argueth'thar cither they were deceiued and deſcribed 
the fame by heareſaie ; orelſe the plant doth egenerate being brought from his natiue ſoile; The 
leaves are ſet a!l along{t a ſinall nbbe like Frexmmels, ſomewhat ares + greenc abouc, and recdiſh 


vnderneath, The ſeede growerh among theleaues like the ſeede of Peplae. The whole plantis fullot 
milke like rhe other Tuhymales. [8 as 


17 Chand 


 tharacias. The firſt is called in Engliſh ſea Spurge, or ſea Wartwoort; the ſeconde Sunne Spuge ; 


| foweneenth Quackſaluers Spurge ; the 


* 
ve 
ne 
, 
a 
of 


NTS, 
18 <A/os vera. - | 
. - KnobbedSpurge. | 


| __*% Theple. | 
oweth by the ſea fide vpon the rowling ſande and baich, as atLeein 
tagainſt Harwich, at Whirſtable in Kent,and many other places, 


/ The firſt kinde of Spurge of 
Eſſex, at Langrree point rig 

. Theſeconde groweth in grounds that lie waſte,and in barren earable ſoile. 
. Thethirde and fourth growe in my garden,but not wilde in England, - 
* The Spurge called Characia# groweth in moſt woods of England that are drie and warme. 
 The14.and15.groweinſalt marſhes neere the ſea, as inthe ile of Thaner by the (ca fide, be« 


twixt Reculuers and Margate in great plentie. | 
* The time, 

Theſe plants flower fromIune to the ende of Iuly. | 
bk. 6-2 *% The names, | | 
Sea Spurge is called in Latine T.thymalus paralius : in Spaniſh Leche trefus : in high Datch 

Wolfes wilch, that is co ſaie, Lupinwn lac, or Wolfes milke : Wood Spurge is called 7/thymalus 


: 


thethirde and fourth Mirtle Spurge ; thefift Cypreſſe Spurge, or among women, Welcome to ou 
houſe 3the ſixrPine Spurge 3 the Gr ſhepb Spurge 3 the cight tree Mirtle Spurge ; the ninth and 
tenth Wood Spurge; the eleuenth tree $ urgezthe twelfe Broad leafed Spurge; the thirteenth and 
| fifteenth Venice Spurge; the ſixteenth and ſeventeenth 
common Spurge; the cighteenth and nineteenth Petic Spurge; the twenty Spurge time; the one 
and tventie True Aptos or knobbed Spurge, | | 
The temperature. | | 
Allthe kindes of Tithymales or Spurges,arc hotand drie almoft in the fourth e,of a ſharpe 
and biring qualitie,frerting or conſinning. Firlt the milke and fappe is in ſpeciall ve, then the fruit 
andleaues,butthe roote is of leaſt ſtrength, The ſtrongeſt kinde of Tirhymale,and of greateſt force 
Cn tbethn, ha hes 2295 | _ 
write by report of others that ir inflamerh exceedingly, but my ſelfe peake by 6xSerience, 
forwalking wr the ſea coſt ar Lee inEflex, witha need called? Maſtes Rich deelihe in the 
lametowne, I rooke but one drop of itinto my mourh; which nevertheleſſe did ſo inflame and ſel 
inmythrore that I hardly eſcaped with my life : And in like caſe was the gentleman which cauſed 
vs totake our horſes , and poſte for otir lines ynro the next fatme houſe to drinke ſome milke to 
quenchrhe extremitic of ourheate,which then ceaſed. R Hora | | 
7 Wes * Thomas, OTE 6 Lore 
Theinice of Tithymale, I do normeane ſea Tithyale, is aſtrorig medicine to open the bellie; A 


| mdcauſing vomite, bringerh vp tough flegme and cholericke humours, Like vertue is inthe ſecede 


Cc 4 _ and 


# 


# IX 


w Ls 
+ os __ 


408 THE SECOND BOOKE'OF THE 
and roote, which is good for ſuch as fall intorhe drophe, being miniſtred with diſcrerion and good 

aduiſe offome pat fon hiftion,and preparedwith his correQorics by ſomehonieſt apotheearic 
B Theinicemixed with honic » Cauſeth hauce to fall from that place whichis annointed therewith, 

if tbe done intheſunne. - ENT et 6s, | [=] 
C Theivice ormilke is good to ſtop hollow teeth being pur into them warily , ſo thatyou routh 

neither the gums, nor any of the other teeth inthe mouth with the ſaide medicine. | 
D Theſamecureth all roughnes of the skinne,mangines,lepric, ſcurffe, and running ſcabs, andthe 
white ſcurf of the head. It raketh awaie all maner of wartesknobs,8&the hard callouſaes of Fiſt. 

laes,hot ſwellings,and Carbuncles. | _ *, FH 

E - Itkilleth fiſh, being mixed with anything that they will cate, Fol 
F Theſcherbes by mine aduiſe wquidnot be receiued intothe bodie , conſidering that there beſp 
many other good arid wholeſome potions to be made with other herbes,that = raken withour 


: 


health is deere bought which is procured with ſuch danger, 


. Of Herbe Terrible. Chap.133- 


2 Tarton Raire Galle-provincia, 1 


perill, remembring the old worneprouerbe , Deareis the honie that is lickt out of thornes & tha 


I CAhpummonticceti, 
Hetbe terrible. 


Fig | | % Thedeſeription, TY 
1 Erbe Terrible is a ſmall ſhrub ryo ar three cubirs high, branched wich many ſmall « 6 
hauinga thinne rinde, firſtbrowne, then purple , with many lirtle and thinne leaues1 
_ ** *” Myrtus. The flowers are rpugh like the middle of Scabious flowers, of a puplocnſs | 
; Theroote is two fingers thicke prope oct and - derway's ſubſtance : the who! plant 
very bitter,and of an vnpleaſanttaſtelike Chameles,yea ſomewhat ſtronger, F79 
> | anattel called Engliſh Gutwoort , which groweth by the ſea , andis Catharricall90t 
of any long continuance among vs, and a ſtranger , very goodly to beholde, and thereſoreintis 
mother toong of the Maſſilians,, is called Tartonraire, 4, thatabundant and vnbridcled facultie 
purging , which many times doth procure Dy/enterce, and ſuch like immoderate fluxes, cſpech' 


| —_ ———_ 
a 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. hos 
when one not skilfull in the vſe thereof, ſhall drinke the powder of the leaves, delaied in any 
oor, This plant growerh in maner of a ſhrub, like Chameles, and bringeth foorth many ſal], 

gh and pliant ewigs , ſet about with a thinne and cortonie hairinefſe, and hath many leaues of a 
gliſtering filuer colour,growing from the loweſt part cuen to the top, altogither like A/ypme before 
mentioned: and vpon theſe tough and thicke branches ( ifmy memorie tailenot) do growe ſmall 
gowers, firſt white, afterward of a pale yellow: the ſeedeis of a ruſſet colour : the rootehard and 
woody.not very hot in the mouth, leauing vpon thetoon = of his inbred heat &taſte,ſorwhar 
reſembling common Turbith and alrogither without milke, | 

| | % The place. | 
| Theſeplants do grow Yn 6p In + in Fraunce,andother places in the grauelly grounds, 

t ſtrangers in England, | FRE | 
«/ 6 Vo iro: % The time. 
flouriſh in Auguſt and September. | 
ihe | , ”7 %* The names. | 

There are not any other names appropriate vnto theſe plants more than is ſet foorth in theritle, 

| *% The temperature andwertues. | | 

There is nothing either of their nature or yertues,more then is ſer forth in thedeſcriptions, | 


Of herbe «A loe, or Sea Houſleeke, (Chap.134. 


Moe folio mucronato. | 

Hetbe Aloe, or ſca Houflecke, | * The deſcription. BY 
* | H Earbe Aloes hath leaues like thoſe of Sea 
Onion, very long, broade,ſmooth , thicke, 
bending backwardes, notched in the edges, {ct 
with certaine little blunt prickles, full of rough 
and clammie iuice like the leaues of Houſleeke. 
The ſtalke, as Dioſcorid-s ſaith,is like to the ſtalke 
of Aﬀodill:; the floweris whitiſh: the ſeede like 
| thatof Aﬀeodill:the roote is ſingle,of the faſhion 
of a thicke pile thruſt into the ground. Thewhole 
herbe is extreme bitter, ſois the ivice alſo that is 

gathered thereof, | 1 
There is another Herbe 4/# that growerth like- 
wiſe in divers, prouinces of America, the leaves 
whereof are broader, greater, and ſharpe pointed 
like a thorne, andhath on the edges farre harder 

prickles, | 


*% The place, | 


This plant groweth very plentifully in India, 
& in Arabia,Cceloſytia, & Egypt : from whence- 
che juice put into skins is brought into Europe, 
It groweth alſo ,as Dioſcorides writeth, in Afia/on 
the ſea coaſts,and in Andros, butnor verie fit for 
juice to be drawne our. It is likewiſe founde in 
Apulia and in divers places of Granadoand An- 
daluſia, in Spaine not fromtheſea: the iuice of 
| |  thisalſois voproficable. | 
| *% The time. | 
 Theherbe is alwaics greene , and likewiſe ſenderh foorth braunches, though ir remaineout'of 
theearth ,cſpecially if the roote be coucred with lome,8& now & then watered: for ſo being hanged 
onthe ſeelings and vpper poſts of diningroomes, it doth not onely continue a long rime greene, 
but italſo groweth and bringeth foorth new leaues : for it muſt haue a warme place in wintertime, 
byreaſon ic pineth away if it be frozen, | fs | | 


\ 


. g 4 
4 > - CZ” 14Þ, # 
. boy ” - 
=> - 
©. . xt = 4 - ' +\ 
- \ = 3 X 14 N 
i mw ** 
KS . - - -- _- 
| _, _ h - 
F l 4 « . 
- af = IWR —_—_—O- < 
. : = YT e th. SF. . 
SN < 5 .r- I 
- _- : I SY 
EY \ x J =, d. 
- 


' 
FIN. 


* The 


416. THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


- The herbe is called in Grecke<»:in Laine and in ſhops alſo Abe : and fo is likewiſe the juice; 
The plant alſo T: named «u7ifor, nely 240, tppurory Te E148 95 3 but they Arc baſtarde wordes b it is Called 
«ico, bicauſc ic liuerh nor onely inthe earth , bur alſo out of the earth, It is namedin French 
Porroquet : in Spaniſh ſzeaar, and Tera bawoſ4: in Engliſh Ales z herbe abes; Sea houſclecke, 
Sea &igrene, | LA $6375; | | bY 
The on is called of the later Herbariſtes oftentimes Semperwinum , and Semperniuwn m arivem, 


bicauſe itlaſterh long after the manner of Houilecke, It ſeemeth alſo that Colwmelis in his 10 books 
nameth it Sedww, where he ſerterh downe remedies againſt the cankerwoormes in trees: | | 


| Profuit & plantis latices infundere amaros 
| Marruby qnultoque Sed cotttingere ſucco. 
In Engliſh thus, 
Liquours of Horchound profit much b'ingpowr'de on trees; 
The ſame ctfe& Sea Houllecke works as well as thees, 235 
For hereciteth the juice of Sedgwor Hguſlecke among the bitter iuyces, and there is none of the! 
Houfleckes bitter but this. | | | 


&+ The temperature. | 


Moe thatisto fay,the juice which isvicd in phiſicke, is goodfor many things. Iris moderately | 


hot,and that inthe firſt degree, but dric in thethird, extreme bitter, yet without biting: iris alſoof | 
gn emplaiſticke orclammic qualitie,and ſomething binding, | I | 

| | Thevertues. ZE 

A ltpurgeth the beily: andis withall a wholeſome and conuenient medicine for the ſtomacke, if | 
any at all be wholeſome, For as Paulus Aegineta writeth, when all purging medicines arc hurtfull | 
to the ſtomack,Alot#zonelyis comfortable. And it purgeth more effectually if it be not waſhed zand | 

if it be,itthen ſtrengtheneththe ſtomacke the more. F--1 

B HItbringeth foorth choler , but eſpecially ir purgeth ſuch excrements as be in the ſtomacke, the | 
firſtvaines,and in the neereſt paſſages. Forit is of the number of thoſe medicines, which the Gre- | 
Cians call:«z-2ez773,of the voiding away of the ordure; and of ſuch whoſe purging force paſlcrhnot 
far beyond the ſtomacke; Furthermore Ahoes is an enimic to all kindes of putrefactions ; and * 
defendetlt the bodie from all manner of corruption, Ir alſo preſerueth deade carcaſes from | 
purrifiyng ; it killeth and purgeth awayall maner of woormes of the-belly. Iris good againſta | 
ſinking breath proceeding from the imperfeRion of the ſtomacke : it openerh the piles or herpor- | 
rhoides of the fundament : and being raken ina ſinall quantitic, itbringech downe the monethiy | 
courſe: it is thought to be good and profitable for obſtrutions and ſtoppings in the reſt of the in- | 
trals.Yetſome there be who thinkezthart it is not conuenient for the liuer. | way 


- C Onedramther.of giuen,js ſufficient tg purge/Now &then halfe a dram or little more is ynovgh. | 
D Ithealethvp greene wounds and deepe fbres,clenſerh vicers, and cureth ſuch ſores as are wy | 
tobe helped, eſpecially in the fundament and ſecret partes. It is with good ſucceſſe mixed with | 
2/4216, or medicines which ſtanch biceding, and with plaiſters that be applied to bloodic wounds; | 
for ithelpeth them by reaſon of his emplailtike qualitic and ſubſtance, Ir is proficably pur intome- | 
dicines forthe cies,foras much as it clenſeth andedrieth withoutbiting, | + 

E Driofeorides ſaith,that itmuſt be torrifiedgor parched atthe fire,in acleane and red hot veſſe!land | 
continually ſtirred witha Spatelaor iron Jadle, till ie torrificd inall partes alike : and chat itfult | 
alſo be waihed; torhe cnd,thar the vnprofitable and ſandy drofle finke downe to the bottomie;and : 
that which 1s ſmooth and moſt perfe,be taken and referued. | FR 

T* Theſame author alſo reacherh,that mixed with hony ic taketh away black and blew {| pots,which | 
come of {tripes :thatir helper the inware ruggidnes ofthe eiclids,and itching in the corners ofthe | 
cics : it remedierh the headache, if rhe temples and forehead be annointed therewith, being apart 

- with vineger and ojle of roſes : being tempered with wine, irſtaierh the falling off of rhe aife,if | 
the head be waſhed therewith :and mixet with wine and honie, it is a remedy for the ſwellingot | 
the Vaula,and ſwelling of the Almonds of the throte, for the gums,and a!l vicers of the mouth. 

G Thetuiceof this herbe Ale, (whereof is mage that excellent and moſt familiar purger, called | 
Aloes Suctorrins , the beſt is that which\C6th neereſt come wnto the colour of aliver, clecreans! 
thining, of abrowne yellowiſh colour) 6pencth the belly, purging colde,flegmatike,anG _— 

it | z 


' 
'n 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 41t 
humors, eſpecially in thoſe bodics that are furchargedivith ſurferring, either ofmeate or drinke, 
and whoſe bodies are fully repleate with humbrs faring daintily,and wanting exercite, This _{bes 
Ga in4ſmallquanicie after ſupperin a ſtewed prune,or in water the quantitic of two drams 
| __ morning, is a moſt ſoueraigne medicine for to comfort the ſtoinacke, and toclenſe and driue 
foorth all ſuperfluous humors. ' Some vſeto mixe the fame with Cinnamon, Ginger, and Mace, for 
thet aboue ſaid; and for the iaundies,ſpiring of blood,and all exrraordinaric iflues of blood, = 
oper vſedinvicers,eſpecially thoſe of the ſecret parts or fundament, or made intopowder, H 
and ſtrawedon freſh woundes, it ſtaicth the blood,and healcth the ſame,as thoſe vicers before ſpo- 


p& 4 icefiine?  PONOCT Ats | | a | 
te ſame taken inwardly cauſeth the Hemorrhoides to bleede,and being laid thereon it cauſeth I 
themroceale bleeding: |» + | d 95f 4 0421429) ; 

\_ * Of Houſleeke,or Sengreene. (hap.1n5. 
ngreenc,as Dioſeoridesyvriterh op he hinde parc abalceber Rua axdabe th I 
 C Engpreene,as Dzoſcorides writeth,is of three forrs,the one is grear;the other {mal thicde.is. 
d that which is Oe [hecebra, biting ſtone Crop,or Wallpepper. | 
| , Great | 


Houflecke., Ee *%* The deſcription. | 

ado my |. He great Sengreene which in Latine i 
| T commonly called Jauis barbs, Iupitcrs 
| "7 bearde, bringeth foorth leaues harde ad- 
 loyning to the grounde androote, zhicke, fat, full 
of rough iuice, ſharpe pointed, growing cloſe and 
| harde togither,ſet ina circle infathion of an eie,8& 


| bringing foorth very many ſuch circles, ſpreadin 

it felted _ all x oftentimes ad lender 
foorthſmall ſtrings, by which it ſpreadeth farther, 
and maketh newe circles; there riſeth vppe often- 
times in the middle of theſe an vpright ſtalke about 
a foote high, couered with leaucs growing leſle 
andlefle towarde the points, parted atthetop in- 
to certaine winges or braunches, about which 
are flowers orderly placed of a darke purpliſh co- 
lour: the roote is all of ſtrings. << nxt; 
2 There is alſo another great Houſleek or ſergreen 
(furnamed tree Houſleeke ) that bringeth foorth a 
ſtalka cubice high,ſomtimes higher,& often two; 
whichis thicke,harde, woody,tough, and that can 
hardlyþbebroke,parted into diuers branches, 8 co- 
ucredwith athick grofle barke, which in the lower 
part reſerueth certaine. pring or impreſſed markes 
MOMMY of the leaues that are fallenawaie. The leaues are 
\ (dQ fat,well bodicd,full of iuice,aninch long and ſom- 
Ani W—- Vl whatmore like little toongs,very curiouſly minced 
inthe edges, ſtanding vpon the toppes of the braunches, hauing inthem the ſhape of an eic. The: 
flowers gxow our ofthe braunches,which are digided into many ſprigs, which flowers are ſlender, 
yellowe, Lore like a ſtar 3in their places commeth vp very fane ſeede, the ſprigs withering away : 

Weroote is parted into many ofsprings. This plant is alwaies greene, neither is it hurt by the colde| 
0 winter, growing in his natiue ſoile; whereupon itis named «ever, and Semperuiuzm, or Sen- 
ccne, | | | 
3 Thercis alſo another of this kinde,the circles whereof are anſwerable in bigneſſe to thoſe of the 
tormer,bur with leſſer leaues,mo in number and cloſer ſer , hauing ſtanding on the edges very fine 


haires | 


412. THE SECOND BO OKE OF-THE 
haires as itwere like foft prickles, This is ſomewhat of adceper green : the ſtalke is 6 honer nth 


flowers arc of apale yellow. 

Therc is likewiſc a third to be referred hireunto the flowers whereotbe of a whitiſh greene, a | 
are very curiouſly nicked round abour. | © 

There is alſo a fourth, thecircles whereofare leſſer, the Jeaucs ſharpe pointed, retyclokl 
of adarke red colour on the top, and hairie| inthe exiges : the flowers on wan {prgnareed a oY | 
purple colour. wy 


F 


(The plare TH 25:>630 has þ 
x Thegreat « Shagreive is well knowen not;onely in Italic, but alſo in | Fraunce, > 2a (Y 
mia, andthe Lowe countries; It growethon ſtones in mounraines; wals; andantieae | | 
buildings e{pecially ypon the tops of houſes, The forme hereof doth difter according torhenatye 
of the ſoile : for in lone places the leaucs are narrower and lefler, but mo in number; and haveoge | | 
onely circle : in other ſoine they are fewer, thicker, and broader; they arc greene and of a deeper | 
greene in ſome places; andinothers of a ighrer greene? forchoſe, whichwe haue deſcrided,grow | 
not in one placeyburin divers and ſundrie, | |. | 
2 Great Sengreen i is found fs of it ſelfe onthe tops of houſes, old wals &ſuchlike Placesin | 

very many provinces of the Eaft,& of Greece, andalſoin the Iands of the Meditertaneinſed; in | 
Crere,which now is called Candice Rhodes, Zant, antlothers; neither is _—_— without ic: f br a 
C.Clufyres witneficth)it growerh in many places in the kingdome of Portingale; £4 ovenvile it is che. 
riſhed incarthen pots. In colde countries, and ſuch as lie northward, as in thth e Germanies, i | 
neither groweth ofitfelfe, nor yet laſterhlong, though it be carefully planted; Af diligent! "_ 
5 ked vnto,but through the extremitie of the weather, andthe overmuch cold of jo mecca, 


ST behave, ; Ys 

The ſtalke of the Git doth at length flower after the SommerSolſtice, » 

Saint Barnabjes day Jand now and then in the moneth of Auguſt;'butin Apri | 

the @quinoGtiall inthe ſpring, which is about a moneth after the ſprings 2 Theregrowtou | | 
of this among the leaues ſima!! ſtrings, which arethe groundworke of thecircles: z by OG | 

Is  arlengthfull growne, it ſpreaderh)ix ſelfe into very many circles. 

2 Houſlcekethat growerh like a tree, doth lower in Portingale at the beginning of the yeerpſs. 

ſcntly after thewi inter Solfticegwhich is n December about S. Lacies day, | 

\wThepnonres. | 

Thefirſt is comtnþnly called outs barbs, or Inpiters beard, andfo it is clamed of the Apothers | | 

ries: the Gerwans call it Panſ5wnrt3, Gtofp Denderbar: theyof the Lowe countries Dgtv | 
derbaert 2: the Hollanders Pupfoack tte French men /eubarbe : the lralians Sempreuinomug- | 

etorg,; the Spaniards Siempreu'ns, yerua puntera : the Engliſh men Houſleeke, and Sengreene, and | 
Aygreene : of ſome Iupiters eie,Bullocks eie,and Tupiters beard: of the Bohemians 7 errecke. Many | 

take it to be Cotyledir a/tera Dioſeoridbs; but we had rather haue it one of the Sengreenes: foritis | 

continually greene and alwaies Rouriſheth,and is hardly hurt by the extremitic of winter, | - || 

| _ © Theotherwithout doubt is D#oſeor;des his ce/7nor wie, tharis Semperuinum magnum, or Sedamne | 
5 +» ' - 55,greatHouſllecke, or great Sengreene : palin callcth ir Vitaiis, and Seger Joyraw : it Wale | 

nained id Cached ith £37 IGARE, b-- | 


The temperature. | | 
The grear Houſleckes are cold in the third degree: they arc alſo POP burnot much by wy 
the wateric eſſence that 1511 thern. | 
* The: Vertucs. | 
A They aregood againſt Sairit Anthonics fire, the ſhin gles, and es creeping Miberitind fan: 
mations, as Gales {aith, that proceede of rNeombs and fluxes: and as Dio ſcorides teacheth, againſt 
thein Hammarioes or firie heate in the eies; theleaues ſaich Plinie , being applied, or the iuicc ade 
on,arca remedic fot rheumarike and watering cies. 
B Theytakeawavthe fire in burgings at and ſcaldin gs, andbeivg applied with Barly meale tid, ” | 
take away the paineof the gowre. 
C Dzofcorades teacherth, that they are oil ro them thar are troubled with a hotlaske: ;thathe 
likewije dciue foorth woormes of the belly if they be drunke with \ wine. 
D Thetuice pur vpinapeſlarie doſtay the frxes in women, proceeding of a hotcauſe: the leaves | 
held in the mouth do quench thirſt in hox urning {cuers. * : =Y 


' 


/ HISTORIE| OF-/ PLANTS.” arg 
| The iuice mixed with Barly mealeand vine; gainſt S, Anthonies fire, allhotbur- 


.- o and frerting vicers,and againſt ſcaldings, burnings, and all inflammations, and alſothe gowte 
* Theiuice of Houſlecke,Garden Nighrſhade, and the buds of Poplar boiledin Oxungiaporci,or F 
hogs greaſe,maketh the moſt fingular Populeon CCS EE 
|  Fhe nice hereof taketh away comes fromthe toes and feere; ifrheybe and bathedther. G 


with and euery day and nightas it were implaiſtered-with the gkin of the ſame Houſlecke, which 
certainly rakerh them away without inciſion, or fuch like, as hath beene experimented by my very 
d friend M.Nicholzs Beſſon, awan paintulland curious in ſearching forth the ſecrers ofnarure. 
The decoRion of Houſlecke, or the juice thereof drunke, is good againſt the bloodie flixe, and H 
coolerh the inflammarion of the cies being dropped thereinto, and the bruſed herbelaid ypon, 


Of little Houſleeke or Stonecrop. Chap.136 . 
* The kindes. $4: 


| PT Herebetwo kindes of lictle Houſlecke deſcribed by the ancicnt ; thenew writers haue found 
| * many moe. | 


1 Sedum minus hamatoides. | | 2 Sedum minus officiMarums. 


Stonecrop. | Small Stonecrop, 


! - % Thedeſeription. 5 

1 FT Hefirſt of theſe is a very little herbe, creeping vpon the ground with many ſlender ſtalks, 
| whichare compaſſed [s with a great aus. of leaves, thar are thicke full of iointes,  - 

little, long, ſharpe pointed, .inclining:to a greene blew, There riſe vp among theſe, lictle 

©5,2 handfull high,bringing foorth atthe top,as it were a ſhadowie tuft; adinebefifns yel- 

low flowers : the roote is full of mgs. $y: FIR | | 

2 Theother little Sengreene is alſo a ſmall herbe, bringing foorth many ſlender ſtalkes, ſeldome 
abouca ſpan high; onthe tops whereof ſtand little Bowers like thoſe of the other, in ſmall _ 
— | rcS « 


414 THE SECOND 'BOOKE OF. THE | 
rufees; but they are white and ſomething leſſer : the leaues abour the ſtalkesare few and little typ 
Jong þlunr, andround, bigger than wheatencornes, ſomething lefler thanrthe kernels of the Pine 
—_ otherwiſe notvnlike ; which oftentimes are ſomething red, ſtalkes and all: the raotecree.. | 
perch vpon the ſuperficiallor yppetmoſt part ofthe carth |Cndmg downe {lender theeds. [+ 
There is a ſmall kinde of Sronecrop, whichthath little narrow leaues, thicke, ſharpepointed ava 
_ renderſtalkes, fullof fatric juice; on the top-whereof do growe ſmall yellow flowers, ftar faſhion, | 
The roote is ſmall andrunning by the ground. | | We 24 
There is likewiſe another Stonecrop called Frog Stonecrop , which hath little tuftes of leauss 
riſing from ſmall and threddic' rootes, creeping ypon the i like vnto X44, or Fr eraſe; | 
from the which tuftcs of leaues rifech aſlend ſalke,ſer with a fewe ſuch like leaues, bauingarthe | 
top {mall yellow flowers. _ 14" 129i _ wks (© 
Many ignorant Apothecaries haue beene deceived in gathering this great Stonecrop, called | 
Vermicularis ſine HMecebra maior, forthe truc Prickmadam, and the rather, bicauſeit doth growe | 
where the other doth, and ſomewhat reſembleth che ſame, and yer of a contrarie facultie, 
of heating & vicerating; neuertheleſle the difference is diſcerned by the ſmal round hates al 
arc ſmoorh,long, and more oleous, and crookedly rumed aboue, 8& arc ſharpe pointed, like worny 
comming foorth of the ſtalkes,and hanging downe. The flowers are of a pale yellow colour: ak | 
plant doth reſemble the ſmall kinde of Stonecrop, FER E | 
There is another > 00s ,or Perrilly Prickmadam called © £2007 Scor pioides , which is alt. , 
gither like the great kinde of Stonecrop, and differerh in that, that this kinde of Ston crop te 
Prickmadam, hath his tufrof flowers turning againe, not much vnlikethe taile of a ſcorpion,reſeq. 
bling Myoſitis Scorprojdes,and the leaues ſomewhat thicker, and cloſer thruſt togither. The rooteis 
{mall and tender. | | 
Thereis a plant called Sedwn Portlindicuwmn, or Portland Stonecrop, of the Engliſh Tland call 
Portland, lying in the fourth coaſt, which hath goodly branches & arough inde. Thelcaues imitate 
Laureola,growing among the Tithymales, but thicker, ſhorter, more fat & render. The ſtalkis ofa | 
wooddy ſubſtance like —_ n_g of the kindes of Craſſs/s, Semperuizum, and the Tirhy- 
males whereof we thinkeit to be a kinde, yetnor daring to deliver any vacertaine ſentence, itſhall 
be lefle preiudiciall to the truth,to account iras a ſhrub, degenerating from both kindes, _ | 
- Theres aplant which hath recciued his name Sedwn Perrewm, bicaule it doth for the moſt pare 
=P ypon the rockes, mountaines, anduch like ſtonie places, hauing very ſmall leaues,commit 
 foorth of the groundin tuftes like Pſeudo Mohy, thatis, our common herbe called Thrift : amongſt 
the leaues come foorth ſlender ſtalks an handfull high, loden with ſmall yellow flowers, likemto 
che common Prickmadam after which come little flat cods like Thisſpr, or Treacle muſtard, which 
conteine the ſeede, ff | [= 
| | * The place. | 
The former of theſe groweth in inthe Lowecountries: in other places vpon ſtonewals | 
and tops of houſes, in England almoſt euery where. | EET 
The ather groweth abour rubbiſh,in the borders of fields,and inplaces that lic opento the ſun, 
: | K&Thetome, | | 
They flowerin the ſommer monethes,' * | 
| *% The names. | EÞ- 1 
The lefferkinde is called in Greeke <0» £-xp3r: in Larine Sedan and $ am minus : Of d- | 
} urs &vivor ulpimer, Ceranunia, Vitalis : of the Germans Kleyn Donderbaer, and Klepn Haulz- 
wurt3 : of the Italians Semperuino minore ; ofthe French men Tricque Madame: of the Engliſh men 


Prickmadam. | 


- 


The ſecond kind is named in ſhops Cre//a/a mizor, and they ſurname it Minor for difference be- | 
tweene itand the other Craſ/ula, whichis akinde of Orpin. 1 is alſo called Yermiculari: 1n leahan | 
Pignola,Graneloſa, and Grefell : in Lowe Dutch Blader looſen; in Engliſh Wilde Prickmadam, 
great Stonectop,or Vormegrafle, | ' | 4, 

* Thetemperature andwvertues. KY 

A TheOrpinesate ofa cooling nature like vnto the great ones, andare goodfor thoſethingstim | 
the others be. The former of theſe is viedin many places infallads,in which it hath a finercliſÞ,and 
a plealantraſte: it is good forthe hart burne, | my ey Aoss FAM of 


- 
- 
_ cu 


'"HISTORIE or PLANTS. || by 
of the ſnale# Stonecrops, called wall Pepper: Chap.137. 


% Th hindes. 
0 x theſe final Stone cro __ be diuers forts , their —— aeſeipions cnn ſet downe 


with their names for diſtinRions ſake. 
Vermiculart ſize Tecebra. | 
His is a lowe Thea apa. : the ſtalkes be 


Wall Pepper. 


{lender and ſhort : the leaues abour theſe 
| ©” Rtande very thicke and ſmall in growth , full 
bodied ſharpe pointed and full of juice: the flowers 
ſtandonthe top,and are marucllous lirtleyof colour 

yellow & of ao bicing taſte:the root is nothing 
t ſtrings. . + The 
It groweth euery wherein ſtonie and drie places, 
and in chinkes or crannies of olde wals: it is al- 
 wates greene,, and therefore iris veric fitly placed 
among the Sengreens. | 
| Thetime. 
It flowreth in the ſommer moneths. 
| $7 henones. | 
| Thisis rertium- Semperuinum Dioſcoridis, or Diof+ 
corides his thirde Sengreene, which he ſaith is cal- 
led of the Grzcians d!Yggxmanye, and 7wipior :and of 
, | | the Romaines 1lecebre. Plinie alſo witneſleth that 
te Lathes name x tlecebra. Yet there is another arJe2;»% 45eis, and another 7:2ipuer: the Germains 
call this herbe aurpfeffer, andRatzentreuble ; the French men Pain d oiſeas : the Low coun- 
riemen MPuer Pepper : the Engliſhmen Stonecrop and Stonehore , lirtle Stonecrop , Pricket, 
of ſome Prickmadam, Mouſcraile,wall Pepper,countrey Pepper,and Lackeof the burrerie, 
% Thetemperature, | 
This linkcherbe i is aw biting,and veryhor, Being ourwardy pornce it raiſeth bliſters, 
andatlength exulcerater 


*% Thevertues. | 

It waſterh away hard kernels, and the kings cuill, ifitbe laide-vnto them, as Doſcorides writeth. 

-  Theiuiceheereof exrraftedor fey 6  &rakenwith yineger or other liquor,procurcth vo- ; 
mite, and brin ingech, vppe groſle and fl matike humours, andalſocholericke; and doth thereby of- 
tentimes cure & 2 ague and other agues of long CONTUpAcey na giuvenin this Mancr it 

1saremedic againſt poiſons inwardly taken, | 


Of Orpyne., Chap. 8. | 
* The deeription 1.2% 5} 


He Spaniſh Orpyne ſenderh foorth roung ſtalks, thicke, Qippyrie.havings as itwere little 
þ ora eggs forged then about the roote :-the leaues in po eg whe arcthicke, 
moo gralle,t of tough juice, ſometimes ſlightly nicked in the edges, broader leafed, 
&preater then thoſe of urflaine,otherwiſe notmuch unlike which by mon en ſcroppoliteone 
againſt another vpon cuery ioint, couering the ſtalke. in order by two and ewo: the flowers in the 
Tounde tufts are of a pale ycllowe :the toore groweth full ofbumpes like vnto Ins Waxing 
©towarde the point: theſe kernels be white and haue ſtrings growing foorth of them. - 
he ſeconde which is our common O likewiſe riſe vp with very many rounde ſtalkes 
tare ſmooth, butnot iointed at all : the leaues xegroſle or corpulent;thicke, broade,and ofren- 
times ſomewhat nickedin rhe edges, lefler then of the former, placedout of order: the flo+ 
wery 


2 


5 THE SECOND BOOKE OF | THE 
wers be eitherred or: ellowe, orelſe whitiſh: the roote is white,well bodied, 8& full pmck, This | 


plant is very full ; the ſtalks ſet oficly pig caigoomtinneges cencalong time,and if th 
and then watered they alſo growe. Ve haue a wilde| aeharofehe 3 growing in corne Uh | 
ſhadowic woods in moſt places ofEn - Jn ik HO of the OT A. es 
altogither leſſer. || - 
I Cr blenkaver Hiſpanics. [| | | 2 Gil fine faba inuerſa, | | 
Sy Orpyne. i | 4 CORO 4 FE | 


1/41 WSTS 


* _ place. 
They hrs beſtin ſhadowie and ſtonje the. in old wals made of Jome or ſtone. orih 
7 Gith that they grow in vineyardes and tilled places. The firſt oweth in gardens: the other! 
| where: the firſt is much founde in Spaine and Hungarie ; neither is Germaniewithour it; forit; 
weth ypon the bankes of the riuer of Rhene neer the vineyards rough and ſtonie = 
at all differing fromthat which is founde in Spaine, + 
The ſecondegroweth plentifully bothin Germanic, Fraunce, Bohemia, Englande, andinaber 
countries among vines,inolde lomie daubed,and ſtonie wals, 
* The time, 
The : Orpynes flower about Auguſt or before. 


Thenames, 

Thefirſtis thatwhichis called ofthe MA enrol & del2woy Hyewr: of the Latines Telqhien 
& Semperuinum ſilueHre 3 and HMktebra : but Hecebra by reaſon of his ſharpe and biri ring qualitie doth 
much differ from it, as we haue declaredin the former chapter. Some there _ name it«/(94n, 
or Portulacs fulueftris: there is alſo another Porpulace #ris, or wilde Purſlaine, liket wa 
which arms in gar nia oe Spaniſh Orpyne; Orpyneof 

,or lointed Orpyne, 


The ſecondekindz of O eiscalledin 1d Craſſuls Fabaria,and Cr ofpladitn 
that it may differ from that which is deſcribed i ae arent of lictle Houſlecke : roflatr 
_ Faberie: high Dutch Punvirant, it, Foztzwang,and Fotzwem:in Icalian Fs 


gi 


417 


F in French Jonbarbe des wienes, | 
+ : in EngliſhOrpyne; allo Liblong Pomet 
|  % Thetemperature. 
The Orpyns be colde and drie,and of thine orſubtile parts, 
* TD TIYIES + 0 warms 4-4 ci En 
Dicorides(aith,that being laide on with vineger : Galen faith A 
teblackealGarhichehingic doth by reaſogobia qualitierhatitharh:wher. 
upon Galew attributerh vnco it a iethough the raſte ſheweth the contrary, which foreſaid 
Gnntag pal that the other two alſo be likewiſe colde. But ings may as well 
| p | | | 


of temperarure,and thinnes of eſſence be ioined withall. 


Of; the ſmaller Orpins Pe C hap.13 9. 
> Telphionſe 


' . 


T He Orpin with purple flowers is lower and lefſer than the common Orpin : the ſtalkes be 
 lenderer,and forthe moſt partlie al, ypon the ground, The leaues are alſo lefler,coun- 
der,of a more blew greene, groſle,well | ſtanding thicker belowe than aboue ; con- 
fuedly ſer alcogither without order. Theflowers inthe tuftes ar the tops of the ſtalks be of a pale 
made, p1. ng co purple, The rootes be notſet wich lumpes or knobbed kernels, bur with a multi- 
L This ſecond Orpi ,as it is knowen to few, ſohathit found no name, but that ſome Herbariſts 
callit Telephiwn ſemperviuum Or virens; for the ſtalkes of the other do wither in wineer, the | 
heret, —aineth greene:: but the ſtalkes and leau-s ofthisindure alſothe ſbarpneſie 6f winter, and 
fore we maycallitin Engliſh Orpin euerlaſting,ornever dying Orpin. 
| Dd 1 | 


* The. 


418: THE SECOND BOOKE” OF THE 
134 bas ea3I994 THT want bf "ol 7 nn | itietie nJ 
The firſt groweth not in Englande. The ſecond Lhaue in my garden;, where:irflouriſheth azhe. 

fore ſpecihed. 4M ' | | 


_ 
P + 


| Rs 
They flower when the common Orpin dothao4n -- 1 | 
' -Thenamesare ſpecified intheir feucrall deſcriptions. £0), Es SOESLNT 


2] 


Their cemperature and faculties mworking atcreferred varo-rche common Orpin, 
ADM of 19145 bo 2: DOS T2) 14s 
Of Purſlane. Chap.14.0. 
tl Poe © \ qa an a RR RES 
” Herebe divers forces or kindes of Purſlane; one of the garden,and another wilde :and alſo / 
of the ſea; one philicall;the other a baſtardkinde. ” val 
1 Portulacs dameftics. Lt 2 Portalacaſyluefris. 
Garden Purſlane. 6. WildePurſlane, 


« . 


a 


\ 


I T He alkes of the great Purſlane be rqund, thicke, ſomewhat red, full of iuice, ſmooth, gli 


tering, and parted into AF rw trailing vpon the ground : the leaues be anne 

long,fornething brode,chicke, far,glib, ſomewhat greene,whiter on the neather ſide: 

flowers are little, of a faint yellow, and growe our at the bottome of the leaues. After chem {pr 

geth vp alittle huske of a greene colour, of the bignes almoſt of halfe a barly corne, in which 

ſmall blacke {cede : the roote hath many ſtrings. ; | Tk 
: 108-- | 2 


o 


HISTORIE: OF PLANTS. 41s 


, Theotheris lefler,and hath like ſtalkes,bur ſmaller, and it ſpreadeth onthe ground: the leaues i 
belike the former in faſhion,{ſmoothnes,and thicknes, but far leſſer, | 
| * Theplace, | 
The formeris ficly ſowen ingardens,and in the waics andallcis thereof being digged & dunged; 
ir delighterh to growe in a fruitfull and tatſoile nor drie. | | 
The other commeth vp of his owne accord inalleis of gardens and vineyardes, andoftentimes 
arocks: this alſo is delighted with waterie places being once ſowen, if it be ler alone tillthe 
{cede be ripe it doth caſily ſpring vp afreſh for certaine yeeres after, 
| | e Yen *% The time. | : 
It maybe ſowenin March or Aprillz ittiourttheth and is greene in Tune, and afterwardes even 
yntill winter, | t 


% The nones. | ot 
Purſlane is called in Greeke J77v:in Latine Porrulaca tin high Durch Burkelkrauttin French 
payer 4in Italian Procacchia :in Spanith Yeraafegas : in Engliſh Purflane and Porcelaine, ' \. 
4 WOE HAT 7 The remperature, by ; | | 4 
Purllane is cold, and that in the third degtec, and moiſt in the ſecond; bur wilde Purſlane is noe 
ſmoilt, | / 7: | <- | | 


| \ 
lis ee t% Thewvertnes..._ + | \ 2 

Rawe Purilane is much vſedin ſallads with oile, (alt, and vineper : it cooleth an hot ſtomack;and A 
proucketh appetitez but thenouriſhmene whiclicommeth heregf js little, bad, colde, groffe, and 
moiſt; being chewed it is, good for tecth that are ſet on edge. oraſtonicd; the iuice doth the fame = 
being held inche mouth,and alſo the diſtilled water, _— NY 1 ; 

Purſlane is likewiſe commended againſt woormes in yoong children , and is ſingular goodeſpe. B 
cially if an ague be ioined : farit both allaiesthe ouer much heate,and killeth the woormes : which 
thingis done through the ſaltrnes mixedtherewith, which is notonely at-enimie to woormes, bur 
alſo roputretations. _ - ko Ws Pw: j | 

Theleaues of Purſlanecither rawe or boiled, and eaten as fallads, are good for thoſe that have C 
great heate in their ſtomacks and inward partes , and doth-eoole and temper the inflamed blood, 

The ſame taken in like manner is good tot the bladder and kidneies, x « allaieth the outragious 
luſtofthe bodie: the iuice alſo hath the ſame verrue. | 

The iuice of Purſlane ſtoppeth the bloody flixegrhe fluxeof the hemorrhoides,montlily rermies, D 
þitting of blood, and all other fluxes whatſoever. -: 10 1: -- | * CUNT! \ 

Theſamethrowen vp with a miother firing, cuteththe inflammarions, frettings, and vicerations E 
- themarrixz andpur into the fundament with aclifter pipe, helperh che vicerations and fluxe of 

SUtS. ; f it, - | | | 
, Theleauescaten rawegtaketh away the paine of the teeth, and faſteneth them; andis good for F 


teeth thar are ſet on edge with cating of (harpe things. [107 will Ht, 291 
The ſeede being taken,killerh and driucth foorth woormes,and ſtoppeth the lake. © +/+ + G 


Of fea Purſlane, and of the batarde grounde Pines, Anthills,, / 
q or ſtinking ground Pine. (hap.141. 
T9  % The deſcription. 1 | 
1 (Q EaPurſlaneis not a herbe as garden Purſlane;but a littleſhrub : the ſtalkeswherof be hard 
and wooddie : the leaues far, full of ſubſtance; like in forme to common Purſlane, bur 
whiter and harder: the flowers ſtande roundabout the vpper parts of the ſtalkes, as do al- 


moſt thoſe of Blyre, or of Orach : neitheris the ſeede vnlike being broad and flat : the roote is | 
hoody, long laſting, as is. alſo the plane, which beareth out the winter with the loſle of a few 


There is another ſea Purllaine called Halimms , or after Dodoneus Portulacamarying, which hath 
| like the former, but much whiter (as though meale had beene ſtrewed ouer them) and 

mewhar longer, not much wnlike the leaues of the Oliue tree. The branches are much greater, 

tlic flowers of adeeper ouerworneherbie colour. | 


Dds |: 1 Porth- 


| & The de ſcription. 
There is founde another wilde fea Putſl;ne 


whereof I haue he to make ment;. 
on; which doth refenle arvir of Altbe, | 
The firſt kinde groweth vprighe with a trunks. 
like a ſmall tree orſhrub, hauing many vprigh 
woodie braunches,of an aſhe colour, wit —_ 
nic thicke, darke , greeneleaues like the fm 
Stone crop, called Yermicu/ar: the flowers xe. 
of an herbic yellowiſh greene colour : therooy | 
very harde and fibrous :the whole planths of, 
falr cang taſte, andrheivicelike thatof Kaly,” | 
Thereis another kinde like the former, an4 
differerh in thar,thisftrange plantis greater the 
leaues more ſharpe and narrower, reſembling 
the common Chameprtys, and the whole plant 
more woodie, and commeth neere to theforme 
of a tree. The flowers ate ofa greeniſh colour, 
* The place. þ4- 
The firſt ſe3Purſlane groweth in the falemzr. 


o 
s 


ſhes neere the ſea ſide, as you paſſe overthe 
Kings ferrey into the lle of Shepey, ging to 
Sherlande houſe, (belonging ſometime'to the 
Lord Chejny, and in 1590. vntothe rightyor. | 
ſhipfull fir Edward Hobby) faſt ditches 
ſides of the ſame marſh : it groweth plentifully | 
| inthe Ile of Thanet, as yee go from Margate 
F | ' | | to Sandwich, and inmanyotherplaces along 
the coaſt. The other ſorts growe vpon bankes and heapes of ſandeon the ſea coaſts of Zelande, 
| Flaunders, Hollande, and in like places in other countries , as beſides the Ile of Purbeckin Eng- 
lande zand on Raven-ſpurnc in H ic ” -_, ſelfe haue ſeene. a: 
| | 1 © We Therime. 


—— 


Theſe flouriſh and flower eſpecially in July, There be alſo founde other kindes heereof withwhi- 
ter leaues,longer, and like almoſt to Oliue leaves ;and many times they be higher, and with tende-1 
rer braunches, ſuch as Clu/ae writeth that he himſelfe ſawe and obſerued in Portingale , andinthe 
kingdome of Valentia in Spaine, | | - | PF: | 


| [| * The names. | Fr 
Sea Purſlanc is called Portu/acamering: in Greeke 4p: itis allo called in Latine Helamw: 


' Dutch Zee Pozceletine : in Engliſh SeaPurſlane. . 4 
The baſtard ground Pincs art called of ſome Chamepitys vermiculats, Halimae, and Anthili 

in Engliſh ſea ground Pine. * fs | | FT 1 
'* Thetemperature. Ss 

Sea Purſlane is(as Galew ſaith) of vnlike parts,but the greaterpartthereof is hotin a meane,vitd 
a moiſture yncancoed,and ſomwhatr windie. FF 1 

ed tobe caten-a dramme waight of the roote ben  drunie 


A Thelcaues (faith D;oſcorides) are be 
with meade or honied water, is good againſtcramps and drawings awrie of finewes,burlti 1g5, 20d 
gnawings of the belly: ir alſo cauſeth nutſes to haue ſtore of milke. The leaues be in the Lowe cour 
rries preſerued in ſalt or pickle as capersare, and bee ferued and caten at mens tables in ſteede « 
them; and that without any miſlike of taſte, to which iis pleaſant. Galen doth alſo reportthattl 


yoong andtender buds are woont in Cilicia to be caten,and alſo Jaide vp in ſtore for vic. | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. qat 


Of berbe 1ue, or ground Pine. Chapaga. . 


1 Chamepitys mas. | 2 Chamepitys famins. 
The male ground Pine. | The feinale ggound Pine, 


At WS — 
. = V9 ON 
I DY . 


"> _ 
R... 


* The deſcription. 


1 4 Hecommon kinde of Chamepitys or erounde Pine, is a ſmall herbe and verie tender, cree- 


ping vpon the ground, hauing ſmall and crooked braunches trailing about, The leaues | 


* beſmall,narrow,& hairie,in ſauour like the firre or Pine tree: but ifmy ſence of ſmelling be 


rict, methinkes ivis rather like vnto the ſmell of hempe. The flowers belittle and of apale yel- 


v colour,and ſomtimes white:the roote is ſmall and fingle,and of a wogdie ſubſtance. 


2 Theſecond kinde hath in like maner ſmall and tender braunches, browne and hairie, verie like 
mno the former: from which grow ſmall hairic leaues, much clouen or cur,almoſtlike iagged Ger- | 
mander, The flowers ar. of a purple colour, and groweaboutthe ſtalkes in roundles like the dead. 


Nette!l, The ſeede is blacke and rounde,and the whole plant ſauoureth like the former, 


3' Thiskinde ofherbe luc; growing tor the moſt part about Montpelier in Fraunce , is the leaſt 
of allhiskinde, hauing ſmall,white,and rough leaues and yellowe flowers, in{mell and proportion 


lkevnto the others,but much ſmaller. 


. There is awilde or baſtard kde of Chanepirys,or ground Pine, that hath leaues ſomewharlike 
mtothe ſecond kinde, but not iagged in that manner, only diuiding themſelues intodiuers ſlender 


«alks,The roote is omewhat bigger,and like vnto the roote of Succorie, 


There is a ba(tarde kinde of Chamegitys thatharh long and ſmall braunches, diſperſing it ſefe far 
abour Ypon the ground. The leaves are Ces broader then the laſt mentioned, being of a ſtrong 
imell and bitter raſtc:the ſeedes (to the view)like vnto the ſeeds of Chanelea Tricoccos,or Widowe 

g fower in number,and (ct in good order within alittle chalice; the roote is greater then 


Watle bein 


Wy ofthe reſt, 


— 


Dd 3 | | There. 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
3 Tut Muſcata menſpeliaca. | | | | 
Herbe Iue,or grounde P.ne, } | *% The aeſeription. | 
Wo, \. | Thereisanotherkind that hath many ſinall &yreq. | 
der branches, beſet with little leaucs tor the mop 
part three togither, almoſt like the leaues of Roſe. 
marie: at the top of which braunches growe flen. 
der white flowers , which being tuned outward: 
| (thatthe inner ſide way be ſcene) do fomewhar te. 
{emble the flower of Lamimm : the ſecede is likethe | 
ſecede of Spur ia alterg. | k 
{ There growerh in Auſtrich a kinde of Chamgyyri, 
which is a moſt braue & rare planr,& ples, | 
tiezyet nor once remembredcither of the auncien; | 
ornewe writers, vntill of latethat famous Ceraly | 
Cluſaus had ſetir foorth inhis Pannonicke:rauels, | 
who for his ſingular skill and induſtric hath wanne | 
the garlande from all that haue written beforg his | 
time. This rare and ſtrange plantThauc inmy.ga. 
den , growing with many ſ{quareſtalkes of halfea | 
= vV* footehigh, beſeteuen fromthe bottome to thetop | 
with leaues ſolike our common Roſemarie,thatit is hard for him which doth not know it exaQtyto | 
* finde the difference; being greene abouc,and ſomwhat hairie and hoarie vnderneath:among which | 
come foorth rounde about the ſtalks(afrerthe maner of roundles or crownets ) certaine {mall cups | 
or chalices,of a reddiſh colour,out of which come the flowers like vnto Archangell in ſhape, but of | 
a moſt excellent and ſtately mixed colour zrhe outſide purple declining to blewneſle, and fomrimes | 
ofa violet colour. The lower gapeth like the mouth ofa beaſt, and hath as it were a white topng, | 
the lower and vpper iawes arc white likewiſe , ſpotted with many bloudie ſpots: which being pal, | 
the ſeedes appecte very long, of a thining blacke colour , ſet in order in the ſmall huskes, as the | 


— : "< —* 


Chamepytis Spuria, The roote is blacke and harde,with many capillaments or hearie ſtrings faſtned | 


- thereto. |} | | % The place. ll | 
Theſe kinds of Chamepytis (except therwolait) grow verie plentifully in Kent , eſpecially about | 
Graues ende, Cobham, Southfleerte, Horton, Dartforde , and Surton, andnor in anic otherſhute | 
in England thateuerI could knde. - [3 -Þ 
That kinde of Chameprtys which beareth the white flower,T haue nor as yet ſeene. 
' 1 | }  Thetome. 

_ 'Theyflawerin June andoftenin Auguſt, | 
| | } % Thenones, | | Wes: i 
Ground Pine is called in Greek zau=:275 :in Larine /brga, Arugs & Abiga: in ſhops Iua Artherics, | 
& I#4 moſchat1 :in Italian {us- in Spaniſh Chamtepiteos: in high Burch Bergiſs mtchnicht: is love 
Durcch Qelt Cypyes: in Fiench Jue moſebate :10 Engliſh herbe Tuic, Forger menor, groundePine, 


— 


and fielde Cypreſle.. ' 4 The nature. 
Theſe herbes ate hor inthe ſecond degree and dric inthe third. | 
| WH: | | *% Thevertmes. hap 
A Theleaues of Chamepytizrunned vp inalc,ot infuledin wine,or ſodden with hony, and drunkeby 
- theſpace ofcightor ten daies,cureth the zaundies,the Iſchiatica, the ſtoppings of the liver, the dif- 
Fe es of making water, the ſtoppings of the ſpleene, and cauſerhwomen to haue their natural 
icknes. ; ' Te, ILS 
B Chamepytis ſtamped greene withhonie cureth hb on marrag, 1r and rebellious vicers,anddif 
ſolueth the hardnes of womens breſts or paps, and profitably helpeth againſt poiſon, or bicingol 
any venemous beail, | 7 | | HR 


C ThedecoQiondrunke, difſolueth congealed blood, and drunke with vineger driuveth foorrhthe 
dead childe., _ ; 50.4 ; y [|] 
D - Irclenſeth the jntrals : irhelpeth the infirmitics of the liver and kidneies : it cureth rhe yelo# 
jaundies being drunke in wine : itbringeth dqwne the deſired ficknes,and prouoketh vrine; being 
boiled in Meade or honied water and drunke, it helpeth the Sciaticain forrie daies. The peoples 


« 


RT) 


ſ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ! any 
Heraclea in Pontus do vſeir againſt Wolfes bane in ſteedofa counterpoiſon. 

The powder hereof taken in pils with a fig, mollifierh the belly z icwaſteth away the hardnes of E 
the paps; ir healeth wounds itcureth putrified vicers being applied with honie : and theſe things 
the firſt ground Pine doth performe, ſo doth the other two z but not fo effetually, as witneſſerh 
Dioſcorides. | | 


Cluſfus of whom mention was made;hath nt ſaid anything of the Lertues of Chamapytis Avw- F 


ia; but verily I thinke ir berrer by many degrees for the purpoſes aforefaid:my coniecture I take 
from rhe caſte, ſmell, and comely proportion of this herbe, which is more pleaſing andfamiliar to 
chenacure ofman,than thoſe which we haue plenrifully in our owne countrie growing, © 


Pg 
- 


* . - Of Nauelwoort,or Penniwoort of the wall. |» Chap.144.. 


1 Y mbilicus Veneri. os + Pbibiu Vinericmine. 
WE mavoort. | | ___  SmallNaucwoort. 


CEN Ft _—_ 


FT" He great Navelwoort hath round and thicke leaues, ſomewhat bluntly indeed about | 
the edges, and ſomewhat hollow in*the midſt on the vpper part, hauing aſhorr tender | 
ſtem faſtened to the midſt of the leafe.,, on the lower fide vnderneath the ſtalke, whercon | 


_ nl Foe TG" handfull high and more, beſet with many ſinall lowers | 


4 


Mouerworne incarnate colour, The roote is round like an oliue of awhite colour, 
Theſecondkinde of Wall Pennywoort ot Nauelwoort, hath broad thicke leaues; ſomewhat | 


deeply indented about the edges, & are not ſo round as the leaues of the former, but ſomwhar long | 
like tongs pred vpon the ground in maner ofa tuft, ſer about the render ſtalke, like to Sengreene 
uilecke 3 amon which riſerh vpa tender ſtalke whereon do grow the like leaues, The flowers 
onthe rop Gnbing of fiue ſmall leaues of a white colour. The ropt is ſmall and threddie, 

| |. WT | ' 3 Cotjledew 


_QHouſleck 


LY 


x" Ee owe 


A 


34 | THE SECOND [BOOKE OF THE 


3 Cotyledon palairis. [$7 4 
Water Pcanywoorr. a4] *% The deſcription. 


i 3 Thereis akinde of Nauelwoort, that prov. 
. ethinwateric places, which is called of the hut. 
. bandman Sheepesbanc, bicauſe it killeth ſhe. 
that do cate thereof : itis nor much ynlike the | 
precedent, but the round edges of the leanes are 
not ſo cuen as the other; and this creepethly 


the ground,and the other vpon ſtone wals, 


|  * Theplace. a= 
"#2 Thefirſtkindeof Pennywoort groweth plen. 
rifully in Northampton vpon cuery ſtone wall 

' about the rowne, at Briſtowe, Bathe, Wel;. | 
| andmoſt placesof the weſt countrie v onRone 
| wals. Itgroweth vpon Weſtminſter abbay, over 

| the doore that leadeth from Chaucer his tombe 

to the oldepalace. | 


Fo 
i 
: 


The ſecond groweth' vpon the Alpes neere- 
Piedmont, andBauier, and vpon the mountaines 
of Germany : Itounde the ſame growing yon 
Bieſton caſtell in Cheſhire. | 

| *% Thetime. | 
" Theyaregreeneand flouriſh eſpeciallyinwin- 
ter :they flowre in the beginning of fommet, 
| * Thenanes. | 

Nauelwoort is called in Grecke »-wiv:in 
Latine Ymbilicus Veneris, and CAcetabulum : of 
divers Herba Coxendicum : Incobus Manlins 1a- 
meth it Scatwmceli,and Scatelhon : in Durch Ng 
uelcruyt : in Italian Cuperrojute : in French Eſa 
| | els: in Spanilh Capadella: of fore HortmiPene- 

| | ' +- ! ri#,orVenus garden, and Terre vmbilicu,orthe 
Navell of theearth: in Engliſh Pennywoort, Wall Pennywoort, Ladies nauell,and Hipwootr. 
Water Pennywoort is called in Latine Coty/edon paluftris : m Engliſh Sheepes killing Penny 
grafſe, Penny tot, &in the north countric VYhiterot: for thereis alſo Red rot, which is Roſa ſoliy 
| 41n Northfolke it is called Flowkwoorr, | | I 
p | + The temperature. Be 
7 Nadaddel isof a moiſt ſubſtance and ſomewhat colde, and of a certaine obſcure binding qu- 
litie: it cooleth, repelleth, or driuerh backe, ſcowreth and conſumerh, or waſteth away, as 6u#s 


reſtificth, Il þ 
| Ha | | & Thewvertaes. 

A Theiuiceof Wall Pennywoortis afingular remedie againſt all inflammations and hot tumors, 
as Eryſipelas,Saint Anthonies fire,and ſach hke: and is good for kibed heeles, being barhedrhere- 
with, and one ot more of the leaues laid ypon the heele. | BUOY 

B  Theleanes androetescaten do breake the ſtone. , prouocke vrine, and prevaile much againſt is 
dropſie, | Dn oat [*.. 

C The ignoxant 4 bkeqe gy do vie the Water Pennywoor: in ſteade of this of thewall, which 
they cannot do without great error, and much danger to the patient: for husbandmenknow well 
that it isnoiſomE vntoſheepe, andother cartellthar feede thereon, and for the moſt part ungen 


Ef. death vato them,much more to men , by a ſtronger reaſon. _ 


's | 
'# 


. ! 

S a" . 

i br : : X n 
ro & we”, . 

4” . 

* #:3 : 54s - " 
34 v3 
< : p ; . 
=. f e 
[21 : . 
$7 t 
Ly it 6b " 
Fe x 
F . 
: : +4 of 4 


HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS. 2n$ 


Of Sea Pennywoort, (hap.1 4 


1. Androſace Mathiols. | A <Androſace annua ſpurs. 
Sea Nauell woort. [625 2999. -  Dneſommers Nauell woot, 


* The deſcription. 


bf He Sea Nauelwoort hath many round thicke leaues like vnto little faucers, ſet vpon ſmall 
and tender ſtalkes,bright,ſhining andſmooth,of two inches long,for the moſt part grow- 
.** ing vponthe furrewed backs of the ſhell fiſh called Chameconchagevery ſmall ſtem bearing 
yon the end or point, one little buckler and no more, reſembling a nauell; the ſtalke and leate 
ſet togither in the middle of the ſame. Whereupon the Hetbariſts of Montpelier haue called 
it Ymbilicus Marinu,or SeaNauell. The leaues and ſtalkes ofthis plant, whileſtthey are yet in the 
water, arc of a pale aſhe eolour, bur being raken foorth, they preſently waxe white, as Sea Moſle 
Called Coralhna,or the ſhell of a Cockle. Itis thought to be barren of ſeede, andis intaſtefaltiſh 
andbitrer, It were a maruell to conſider (as have done) how far, eventhe beſt writers haue becne 
deceiuedin the deſcriptioniof this plant, Bur we muſt remember, thatno man living knowerh all 
things and CAiquindo bonus dormitat Homer : it is a good horſe that neuer ſtumbleth. 
2 ſecond Androſace hath little ſmooth'leaues, (pred vpon the ground like vnto the leaues of 
{mall Chickweede, or Henee bit, whereof doubrleſieir is a kindet among which riſcth vp a flen- 
derſtem; having atcheropcertaine little chathe flowers of a purpliſh colour. The ſeede is contei- 
ned in{inaltſcaley huskes, of areddiſh colour,and a bitter taſte. The wholeplant periſheth when 
x hathperfe&edhis ſeede,/and muſt be fowen againe the next yeere, which plant was giuento A/4- 


thiolus by Cortuſis, who' (:ashe affirmeth ) receiued it from Syria z bur I thinke he-faide fo to make. 


Mathiolus more joifull : but ſurely I ſucmiſehe pickedir our of one olde wall or other, where irdoth 

groweeuenas the linall Chickweede'/; or Nailewoortbf the wall do,! 7 0 on nt 

14,0 23 £39162 11-696 304 i 3 4} if Thepþlace. ©: tt 91m) (13:7 Fi TT» 
CLnlroſaces will not growe any where butin water: great ſtore there is of it about Frontignan 

by Monpelliers in Lan guedoc , where cuery fiſher man Hh knowe it, 

The ſeconde groweth vpon olde ſtone and mudde wals : notwithſtanding I haue (the more to 


o 


A 44 


grace Mathjols great iewel) planttd irin my garde; * © 


| *% Thetime. | 
The baſtarde _Androſace owreth inlaly,andtheſcede is ripe in Auguſt, 
7 he names. _. 153tdo $157: oe ro Hunted 


Lat, T1 x x £50 
Anaro/aces 1s of lome called Fmnbilicas mar inus,or ia Naucll, 
went | * The 


OY WE UF. FRED =" IEC a SS." SETS IR _ 


|; 


=_ - THE SECOND: BOOKE( OFTHE 


| * The temperature. 
The ſea Nauell is ; of a diuxcricke qualitie , and more drie then Galewchoughti itto be —_ | 
| hotthenothers haje deemedit: there can no moiſture be foundinir, * ” | 
* 7hewertucs. / 
A Sea Nauell x woort proucketh vrine, and digeſterh the filthinefſe and ſlicaitielle gathiered _ the 
tointes, 
Two drams ofit, as D/oftoriaes faith, ikke in wine, bringeth downe great ſtore of vrine qu; of 
their bodies that hauc - i IP raakerh a good plaiſter ro ceaſe the paine of thegou. 


WW Revo, or QL roote. Chap. 145. 


* The defeription. 


> Olſewoort hath manie ſmall, thicke, andfar 
ſtems, growing from a thicke and 
roote, the vpper endof it for the moſtpar 
' ſtandethout of the ground, andis there of a) 
| pliſhcolour, bunched andknobbed like theroow 
; of Orpin, with many hairie ſtrings hanging there. 
| at, ofa pleaſant ſmell when it is broken, likethe 
| damaske Roſe, whereof it tooke his name, [The | 
| leauesareſer rounde about the ſtalkes, evenfrom 
| the bottometo the toppe, like thoſe of the hielde 
| Orpin, bur natrower and; more ſnipr about the \ 
| edges, The flowers growe at the top of a hi 
| yellowe colour, | 
* T Fhephce. I / 
My growerh very plentifully vpon ſundry nm 
| taines in the north part of any eſpecially 
| aplacecalled Ingleboro ls, neere wn 
| brooke ſides, and ot where that I canas yet. 
. finde out, from whence 1 has ndglong ig | 
| | garden, 4 3 | 
| * Thetime. 
| Irflowrethandflouiſherhin Luly,and theſe 
/asripein Auguſt, | 
| &* The names. 1 
_ ; Some haue thought it hath taken the nz 
= => | Fhodiaof the Iland in the Mediterranean 
| |  |IedRhodes:butdoubtleſſe it rooke his ann | 
. dis radix, of the coorgwhich fnelleth likea Roſe: : in Engliſh Roſe roote,and Roſe woorr. J 
| % The wertwes. 
A There is little extantin writing of the faculties of Roſewoort : but this I haue founde, ha 
if theroore be ſtamped with oile ho 2 pare gineemplece of the head, iteaſcth whe , 
of the head. | 


i" * 
Pl LI 


{ 


of Sg Op 14.6. 
* The kindes. 
The later Herbarift haue obſerued cenainindeof Sampicr,as ſhall be declared. | 
I Cries 


HISTORIE 
1 Crithnum marina. | 
Rocke Sampier, | 
NN? YH FT Wea 
AY, Ws 
RBEE--/ NS 
= i WV 


o 
mw 


3 Crithmun Chryſanthenos. 
Golden Sampier. 


OF PLANTS. 'S 
. 2 Crithmum ſbino/um. 


 Thorny Sampier. 


- 


DP RW 


EAPO. CD EEE 

4 UNIT) - £ as : 

of Phe, 223 
bt | ww. #6 


*X 2 & 
Ka \ >= d- 
I 1 — Yoo ae 
SS L——> 7 
- Ln Fi 
") A\ 

. A - 


N » - 
,—— L- - & ; 
- : , 
_ | — a 
ASD) 
2 > 
o —_ - - 


I \\\ 


no ae 


* The deſeription. 5 
I Ocke Sampier hath many fat and thicke 
R leaues, ſomewharlike thoſe of the lefler 
Purſlane, of a fpicie taſte with a certaine 


| falcnefſe; among which riſeth vp a ſtalke, divided 
Into many ſmall ſpraies or ſprigs; on the top wher- 
of _— fpokie tufres of white lowers, like 


ther 


cs of Feiell or Dill 3 after which commeth 


| the ſcedelike the ſeede of Fenell,but greater, The 


roote is thick and knobbie,being of tmel! deligtt- 
full and pleaſant, ' | 

2 Theſecond TR called Paſftinaca marina, 
or Sea Parſnep, hath long fat. leaues, very much 
iagged or cut cuen ro the middle rib, ſharpe or 
prickley pointed , which are ſer vpon Jarge far 
tointed ſtalkes ; on 'the rop whereof do growe 


.  ruftes of yellowiſh flowers, The ſeede is wrap- 


por in thornie huskes . The roore is thicke and 
ong, not_vnlike to the Parſne> , very goodand 
wholeſome to be eaten, ; 
3 Golden Sampier bringeth foorth many ſtalks 
from one roote, compaſled about with a multi- 


| ' tude of long farleaues, ſet togither by equall di- 


ſtances z at the toppe whereof come yellowe 
flowers. The fecde is like thoſe of the Rocke 
Sampier. I 1 


* The 


P. 
\ 


| i \ 

4:8 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 

Rocke Sampier groweth on the rockycliffes at Douer,VVinchelſey,by Rie,about Southam 
the yle of VWigkt.,and moſt rockes about the welt and north welt parts of England, 

The ſecondgroweth neere the ſea Toy theſands, and Bayche betweene Vhitſtable andthe 
yle of Thaner,by Sandwich,and by the Sea necre Weſtcheſter, | 

The third groweth inthe miric Marſh inthe yle of Shepey, as you go from the Kings fertieto 
Slerland houſe. ! K- | | 


pton, 


OR | + Thetime. 'f 
Rocke Sampier flouriſheth in May and Iunegand muſt be gathered to be kept in pickell inthebe. 
ginning of Auguſt, | { F- | | | [| 
|  *+ Thenames. | TRE 
Rocke Sampier is called in Grecke z;i%r; inLatine alſo Crithmwn, and of divers Bat: inſome 
ſhops Creta maring : of Petrus Creſcentiies,Cretamum, and Rincum marine: inhigh Dutch Feer- 
fencheil , which is in Latine Fer:culusmarinum, or Sea Fenel]: inTralian Fenocchio marina, Herbs 
di San Pietro, and hereupon divers name it Sampetrs : in Spaniſh Perexil de la mer, Hinotomaring, 
, Fenolmarin : in Engliſh Sampicr, and Rocke Sampicr, and of ſome Creſtmarine; andrheſcbethe 
- | namesofthe Sampter generally caten in ſallads. by 


$ z 


Py i 


The other twobe allo Crzth»:a,or Sampiers, but moſt of the later writers would drawethemro 
' ſome other plant? for one calleth the ſecond Paitinaca marine, or Sea Parſnep,andrhe third fx. 
- atticus: but we hadrather entertaine them, as 244/throlws doth, among the kindes of Crithmun, or 
| | th The temperature. 
Sampier doth dric,warme,and ſcowre,as Galen aith, 
 *% Th wertues. | | 6 
A Theleaues, ſcedes, and roortes, as Dieſcorides ſaith , boiled in wine and drunke , prouoke vine, 
and womens ficknes,and preuaile againſt the taundies. "© 
B Theleaues kepr in pickle,and catenin ſallads with oile and vineger,is a pleaſant ſauce for meate, 
wholſome for the ſtoppings of the liuer, milt, kidneies, and bladder: itprouoketh vrine gently; ic 
openeth the ſtoppings of the intrals,and ſtirreth vp an appetite to meare. | 
C leis theplea{antelt ſauce,moſt familiar, and beſt agrecing with mans bodie, both for digeſtion 
of meates,breaking of the ſtone,and voiding of grauellin the reines and bladder. | 


4 . 
( 


+ Glaſſe Saltnoort. Chap.14.7. 


&+ The kindes. | 
Here be very many kindes of Glaſſewoorrs, as itis cuident not onely in the bookes of the later 
_* Herbazilts,burin Aarces allozandin Serapio. : 


* 7 hedeſeription. 


1 Laſſewoorthath'many groſle, thicke and round ſtalkes a foote high, full of fat and thicke 
ſprigs, ſet with many knors or joints, withour any leaues at all, of a reddiſh greene colour. 

The whole plant relembleth a branch of Corall, Theroote is very ſmall and ſingle. _ 
There is anotherkinde of Saltwoort, which hath beene taken among the ancient herbariſts forz 
kinde of Sainpier. It hath alittle render ſtalke a cubithigh, ciuided into many ſmall branches, ſet 
full of little thicke leaues very narrow ſomewhat long and ſharpe pointed,yert not pricking ; among 
which commeth foorth ſmall ſcede, wrappedin a crooked huske, turned round like a crookedpet- 
winkle.The ſtalkes are of a reddiſh : olour, The wholeplantis of a falt and biting raſte. The roote's 

ſmall and threddie. ets $5 | | 

There is likewiſe another ſort of X/7,whereof 7Obelius maketh mention vnder the name Crib 
ww,vyhich is like vnto the laſt hefore remembred, bur altogither leſſer, W 
|  J-10--1 1 Saljgormid 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 429 
< a Theſe plants are to be ounde in ſalt marſhes al- 
moſt euery where, | 
They flower and flouriſh in the ſommer mo- 


nethes. | 
*% The names. 
Saltwoorrt is called of the Arabians Xal;, and 
Alkals.CAvwicen in his724.chapter deſeribeth them 
. - vnderthenameof Yſpex, which tiffereth from x//- 
_ mee: for Y ſee is that whichthe Grecians call &v@», 
and the Latines A7#ſcus,'or Moſle ; of ſome Em 


The axen or aſhes hereof is named of Matthew 
Silnaticus, Soils : of moſt Sa/ alk; : divers call it 
Alonen catinum, Others makethis kindeof difte- 
rence betrweene Sal Kali and '_Alwner catinum that 
Alumen catinumis the aſhesitlelſe. andthat the 
ſalt that is made of the aſhes,is Ss/ Hh. : 

Stones are beaten to powder, and mixed with 
aſhes, which being melted togither become the 
matter whereof glaſſes aremade, Which while it 
is made red hot in the fornace, and is melted, be- 
comming __ and fitto worke vpon, dothyecld 
as it were afat floting aloft; which, when it is cold, 
waxeth as hard as a ſtone, yetit is brittle , and 
quicklybroken. Thisis commonly called Axangia 
vitri : in Engliſh Sandeuer : in French San de 
voirre : in Italian Fior deChriFal,that is,the flower of Chriſtall. The herbe is alſo called of diuers 
Ku erticulatum,ort iginted Glafſewoort $ and in Engliſh Crab grafle.and Frog graſle. | 

| | | * T he temperature. | 
Glaſſewoort is hot and drie : the aſhes are both drier and hotter, and thateuen rothe fourth de- 
gree:the aſhes haue a cauſticke or burning qualitie. | 
_  * Thevertaes. 
Alirtle quantitie of the herbe inwardly taken I tk notonely mightily prouoke vrine, but in like A 
ri a foorrh the dead childe. It drawerhtodtth by fiege waterith humors, and purgerh away 
the dropſie. | | 
Apgrearquantitie taken,is miſchicuous and deadly. The ſmell and ſmoke alſo of this herbe being B 
burne,doth drive away ſerpents. 

The aſhes are likewiſe tempered with thoſe medicines, that ſerue to take away ſcabs andfilth of C 
the skin: it eaſily conſumeth proud and ſuperfluous fleſh that growethin poiſonſome vicers,as Auj- 
_ &nand Serapiodo report. | 

Wereade in the copies of Serapio, that Glaſſewoort is a tree ſo great, thata man may ſtande vn- D 
der the ſhadow thereof: bur itis very like, that this error proceedeth rather from the interpreter, 
than from the author himſelfe, | | 

The flowerof Chriſtall,or (as they commonly terme it,the fat of Glaſle)doth woondertully drie. E 
Ireaſily rakerh away ſcabs and mangineſſe, if the foule partes be waſbed and bathed with the warer 
wherein it is boiled. | neg | 


p 


PR 


Of Thorawe waxe. (bap.14.8. 
* Thedeſeription. | 
Horowe waxe or Thorowe leafe hath a round, (lender,and brittle ſtalke,dinided into ma- 
T nic ſmall braunches which paſſe or go thorow rhe leans, as though they had been drawn 
of thruſt chorowe, and(ro make it more plaine) cuery braunch doth grow a "x 
h | catc, 


430 | THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
leafe,making them like hollowe cups or ſaweers. The ſcede groweth in ſpokie tufts or rundel, like 
Dill, _ and blackiſh. The flowers are of a faint yellowecolour, The rooteisfingle, white, and 
threddie, | | pp | | 
2 Codded thorowe waxe reckonedby Dodonem among the Braflickes or Colewoorts, and mg- 
king it a kinde thereof, and calling it Brafic4 June prrfoliats: though inmine opinion withohr 
reabn ſich it hathneither ſhape, affinitic,nor likencfle with any of the Colewoorts, bur altogither 
moſt vnlike, reſembling very well the common Thorowe waxe; whereunto I rather referrer, |; 
hath ſmall.cender,and brittle ſtalks rwo foote high, bearing leaues , which wrap and incloſe then. 
ſcluesround abour,although they do not run thorowe as the other do, yerthey grow in ſuch maner, 
that vpon the ſudden viewe thereof, they ſeeme to paſſe thorowe as the r: vponthe ſmall 
braunches do growe little whitc flowers :which being paſt, there ſucceede flender and long cods 
like thoſe of Turneps or Nauewes, whoſe leaues and cods do ſomewhat reſemble the ſame, from | 
whence it hath the name Nepifoke, that is, Thorowe waxe with leaues like vato the Naucwe, The | 
roote is long and fingle,and dieth when jt hath brought foorth his ſeede. $8.17 k | 
There is a wilde kinde heercof growing in Kent, in manyplaces among thecorne, like vnto the 
 formerinech p17 iy buralrogither leſler: the which no doubtbrought into the garden woulde 
I Perfoliata vulgaris. *G 2 Perfoliats ſiliquoſa, 


Common Thocowe waxe, | Codded Thorowe waxe, | 


; 
; 


They flower in Maic and Iune,and therſcede is ripein Auguſt. 


| *%* The names. | Bigg 
Ir hath beenecalled from the beginning Perfoliare, bicauſethe ſtalke doth paſſe thorowe the 
ficati lame: we callic in Engliſh Thorowe waxe, or Thorone 


4 The 


+ HISTORTE/ OF PLANTS. i 43% 


Ce ERP Y oy The temperature, 
Thorowe waxe is of a drie complexion, P | 


The decoction of Thorowe waxe made of water or wine,healerhworinds. The iuice is excellent A 


Thegreene leaues ſtamped.,boiled with waxe,ile,roſirt and curpentine, maketh ancxcellenern- B 
oucntorfalue ro incarnate,or bring vp fleſh in decpewounds. Bn Jp w_ 


{ax wounds made cither into an oile or vnguent, 


1 Cerinthe maior. | 2 Cerinthe minor. 
Great Honie woorr. | | Small Honie woorr. 


dz 25221 
x MY 
LIT \\ 


- 


= WA =—A 4- 
NURS), i y #7 "=m)/ 
£ 
- 


\ = 
d ; o 4 / 
ko — 


Id 


k 
- - 
- , , 

" 


| *% The po0f Se 
I Erinthe or Honie woort , riſeth foorth of the grounde after the ſowing of his ſeede, with 
two ſmall leaves like thoſe of Baſill;berweene the which leaues commeth foortha thicke, 
© far, ſmooth, tender, and brittle ſtalke full of juice, thatdiuiderhirſelfe into many other 
braunches : which alſo are diuided in ſundric other armes or braunches likewiſe, crambling or lea- 
ning toward the grounde, bcing notable without propsto ſuſtaine it ſelfe , byreaſon of the grear 
waipht of leaues , braunches,, and much-uice, the whole plant isfurcharged with : vpon which 
branches are placed many thicke,rough leaues, ſer with veryſharpe'prickles like the rough skin 
ofa Thomebacke,of a blewiſh greene colour, ſported very norablie with white ſtrakes & ſpors,like 
thoſe Jeaues of the true Pulmonaria or Cowllips of Terufalem, and in ſhape like'thoſe of the codded 
owe waxe,which leaues do clippe or imbrace the ſtalks round about : from the boſome wher- 
olcome foorth ſmall cluſters of yellowe flowers, with a hoope or bande of bright purple roynde 
abqut the middle of the yellowe flower, The floweris hollowe, faſhionedlike alittle boxe, of the 
taſteofhonie when it is ſucked, in the hollowneſle wherof,arc many ſmall chiues or threds ; which 
beingpaſt, there fucceedeth round blacke ſeed,comteined in ſoft skinnie huskes, The root periſheth 
athe firſt approch of winter. SHER | | | 


2 Hliny 


433 ' THE. SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
2 Plinyſetteth foorthanother Cerintheor Honiewoort , which Dodonew in his laſt Edition cal. 
leth Maruberba:ichath ſmall, long, andflender braunches, recling this way and that Way; 2 bor 
able to ſuſtaine it ſelfe, verie brittle, beſer withleaues not much vnlike the precedent, bu le, 
neither fo rough nor ſpotted,of a blewiſh greene colour, The flowers be ſmall, hollow,andyelloy, 
The ſecede is finall, rounde, and as blacke as icat: the which diethas the former. There is notaſte, 
citherof honie or waxe in the flowers or Itaues, as the name doth ſeeme to import, neither the... 
mer,bur onely in the flowers which are iq > yg Ts aro 
| . ** The place. 

"Theſe plants do not growe wilde in En Ad 99 I haue themin my ar the ſeedes whereof 
I receauedofthe right honorable the Lord Zowch, my honorable good friend. 
| | ' | *£Thetime. s || 

They flower from Maic to Auguſt, and periſhe at the firſt approch of winter , and muſt bee 
ſowenagaihe the next ſpring, [| | 5 
* Thetemperature andvertues. - | 
Plinje and © Awicen ſeeme to agree , thac theſcherbes are of acolde complexion , notwithſtan. 
ding there is not any experiment of their yertues woorth the writing, Lox: 


Of Saint hobns Woort. Chap.150. 


1 Hypericum. +. | 2 Hypericum Syrianum. © 
Samet Iohns woort, || Rewe Saint Iohns woort, 
/ WEE WY Ne WH ; 
5/2 ENS CNW 
_ \Y L795 


P (A g WA _ 


$ : 
- s 


| | %* Thedeſecription. EEY 
I Aint Iohns woort hath browniſh ſtalkes, belerwith many ſmall andnarrowe leaues, which 
N if you behold berwixt your eics and the light, doe appeere as it were bored or thrult tho- 
row in an infinite number of places with pins points. The braunches diuide themſclues itt 
to ſuncrie ſmall twigs; atthe cop whereof do growe many yellowe flowets, which with the leaues 


bruſed do yeelde a reddiſh iuiceof the colour of bloode. The ſeede is conteined in little ſharp 


L 


'HISTORIE OP PLANTS.1HT ay 
:nted huskes blacke of colour, and ſmelling like rolin.The roote is long, yellow, and of a wooddy 


, « The ſecond kinde of S. Tohns woort named Sjr:acum, of thoſe that haue not ſeene the fruirfull 

andplentifull fields of England, wherein it groweth abundantly, hauing ſmall leauesalmoſt like to 

Rew,or Herbe grace, whercin Dodonens bath failed, intiruling the true &ndroſemey, with the name 

of gut flue Frts, whereas indeede itis nomore like Rew, than an appleto an oiſter. This plant is 
wither like the precedent,bur ſinaller,wherein conſiſterh the difference. 


olly S.lohns woorr. + The deſcription. 


3 Woolly S.Iohns woorthath many ſmall weake 
branches trailing ypon the ground, beſet with many 
little leaues, couercd ouer with a certaine ſoft kinde 
of downineſſe; among which commeth foorth weake 
and tender branches, charged with ſmallpale yellow 
flowers. The ſeedes androotes are like vato the true 
S.lohns woort, | 


Hyper icum tomentoſum L'Obely. 
, Wo 


% The place. 

They grow very plentifully in the paſtures in eue- 
ry countrie, | Ne 
% Thetime. - 

They flowerand flouriſh for the moſt part in Iuly 
and Auguſt... 
% Thenames. | 

S. Iohns woort is called in Greeke wwiewsr: in La- 
tine Hypericam : inſhops Perforata: of divers Fugs 

F) Demonws :in Dutch San Johans kraut tin lcalian 
B Hyperico : in Spaniſh Ceraconzillo: in French CAlille 
pertays:'in Engliſh S.lohns woort,or S.lohns grafle, 


| | *% The temperature. 6 
* $ lohnswoort,as Ga/exteacheth,is hot and dric,being of ſubſtance thinne, 
| *% The vertues. | 


 SIohns woort,with his flowers and ſeede boiled and drunken,proucketh vrine,and is right good A 
againſt the ſtone in the bladder,and ſtoppeth the laske. = 
Thejeaues ſtampedare good to be laide vpon burnings, ſcaldings,andall wounds ; and alfo for B 
rotten and filthie vicers. | | 1 
Theleaues, flowers, and ſeedes ſtamped, and put into a glaſſe yith vile oliue, and fetinthehot C 
ſunne for certaine weekes togither, and then ſtrained from thoſe Herbes, andthe like quantitic of 
new putin,and ſunned in like maner,doth make an oile of the colour of blood, which is'a moſtpre- 
vous remedy for deep wounds, & thoſe that are thorow the bodie, for ſinewes that areprickt; orany 
wound made with a venomed weapon. I amaccuſtomed to make acompound oile hereof,the ma- 
king of which yee ſhall receive at my hands, bicauſe that Iknowe in the world there is not a better, 
nonot naturall Balſam it ſelfe; for From yndertake tocureany ſuch wound, as abſolutelyineach 
eſpe, ifnor ſooner and better,as any man whartſocuer ſhall or may with nacurall Balſam. 

Take white wine two pintes, oile oliue fower pounds,vile of turpentine two pounds, the leaues, D 
flowers, and ſeedes of S Iohns woort,of cach two great handfuls gently bruſed;z pur themalltogi- 
therintoa great double glaſſe & ſetit in the ſunneeightor ten daies ; then boile chem in che ſame 
glalle per Babnewn Marie,that is,in a kertle of water, with ſome ſtrawe in the bottome, whereinthe 
glafſemuſt ſtand to boile 3 which done, ſtrainethe licour fromthe herbes, and doas youdidibefore, 
purung in the like quantitie of herbes,flowers,and ſeedes,but nor any more wine, And ſohaue you 
agrexlecrer for the purpoles aforeſaid. = | | 18, 


Dreſeeridesſaith,thar the ſeede drunke for the ſpace of fortiedaies togither, cureththe Sciatica, E 


andall aches thar happen in the hips. 3, poets | 
The lame author {auhb,that being drunke with wine,it taketh away tertian and quartan _—_ F 
| | Ee I 


434 THE SECOND! BOOKE OF THE 
7 Of $ Peters woort,or ſquare S .Fohns graſſe. Chap.151. 


SPerers woort 04 + o Thedeftripthm. © 
| | CW ENS ; 


Aint Peters woorr groweth to the he 
Y a cubir and a halfe, hzuing a ftraigh W 
right ſquare ſtalke, ſomewhar browne,ſe by 
couples at certaine diſtances with leauesmuc\ 
| like thoſe of S. Iohns woort, bur greater ; fam 
| the boſome of which leaues come foorthm;. 
ny ſmaller leaues , the which ate not boted 
oo as thoſe of S. Iohns woorrt are: yet form 


y 


wz 
Py 

L LANE 
<=” 
h__— 


A b- TERIRS 
% 


F 


(—< 
\ 
7 
= 


is 


NY 
WW 
y 


T. 


time there is to be ſeene ſome few more otlefle 
The flowers growat the top of the branches f 
yellow colour : the leaues and flowers when they 
arc bruſed, do yeeld foorth a bloodic juice, zz * 
doth S.lohns woort whereofthis is a kinde, The 
roote is tough and of a wooddie ſubſtance, 
* The place. EY 
S.Peters woort,or ſquare S.Iohns grafle,groy. 
eth plentifully in the North part of England, 
eſpecially in Landeſdale and 'Crauen, | ha 
found it in many places of Kent, efpcially in 4 
Cops by Maſter Saleyes houſe,necre Souther, 
| *% Thetime. | 
It floureth and ENS: when Saintloling 
woort doth. *% T he names. | 
Itis called in Greeke @-:+2»: rhe Latineshave 
noother name but this Grecke name A/cyn, It 
is called of ſome Androſemwn : Galex makethit 
both a kinde of Tutſan, and S:;[ohns woot; and 
faith itis named Afcyron and A ſcyroides: inEng 
liſh S. Peters woorr, ke ary or great $. lohnz 
aſſe : and of ſome Hardhay. Few Apothecaris 
| | | doknoweitfromS.lohns woorr. | 
; ' * The temper ature. 
This herbe is of temperature hot and dric. | 
| Thevertnes. | 
A Itisendued with the ſame vertues that S.Iohns woortis indued withall. The ſeede,faith Diſet 
rides, being drunke in fower ounces anda halfe of Meade, dothplentifully purge by ſiege, hols 
rickeexcrements. Galen dorh likewiſe affirme theſame. = 


b bh. Fs 
. pL n - I 5 
*. 
a | VS 


| Of Ti utſan, or Parke leaues.  Chap.152. 


&* The deſcr iption. as the 
He ſtalkes of Turſan be ſtrai Ki ihr <a; ny orcreſted,hard andwooddie,beingfor | 
© moſtpart two foote high. The leaues are three or fower times biggerthan thoſe of S.lohgs 
woort, which be atthe firſt greene; afterwardes, andin the end of ofa darkeredd 
lour. Out of which is prefled a iuice not like to blacke blood, butro Claretor Gafcoine wine: 
flowers are yellow, and greater than thoſe of S. Peters woort + after which riſeth vp a eel roun 
headorberrie, firſtgreene, afrerwardes ted, laſt of all blacke, wherein is conteined yellowiſh 


ſecede. Theroote is hard,woodic,and of long continuance, Chmens 


"I 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. - *W4 
Chmenon It al:ywn. | | | 
Turſan,or Parke leaues. - | % Theplace . 

Tutſan groweth in wooddes, and by hedges, 
eſpecially in Hampſtecd wood, where the Golden 
rod doth growe, in a wood by Railic in Eſſex, and 
2» imanyotherplaces, | = 

WV  » Thetime. 4 
It dowrethinIulyand Auguſt. The ſeede in the I 
meane time waxeth ripe. The leaues become red 
| in Aucumne ; at that time is very caſily preſſed 
 foorth his winie iuice, 
___ ** Thanames. 
Ic is called in Grecke «>92j52:w9: and the Latines 
| alſo _Androſemon; itis likewiſe called Dionyſ#as, as 
TY Galen witneſleth. They are far from the truth, that 
lY rakeittobe Chmenws, andit is needlefle to finde 
« | faulrwithcheirerror:itis alſocalled $;c:ljana, and 
| Herba Siciliana : in Engliſh Turſan , and Parke 


leaues. ' ; 
8 % The temperature. ? * : 
<= — A d The faculties are ſuch as S. Peters woort,which 
(EN -  dothſufficientlydeclareit tobe hot anddrie. 
4 440 % Thevertues. 


| The ſcedehereof beatento powder, and drunke A 
to the weight of two drams, doth purge cholericke 

| excrements,as Dzoſcorides writeth, and is afingular 
remedie for the Sciatica, prouided that the paticur 

_ Go drinke water fora day or two afterpurging, 

| The herbe cureth burnings, andapplied vpon B 
new woundes, it ſtancheth the blood , and healeth |, 

| them. | | | 
The leanes laide vpon broken ſhins and ſcabbed legs, healeth them, and many other hurtes and C + 

giiefes,whereof it tooke his name Tour ſaine,or Turlanc,of bealing all things. 


Of the great Centorie. Chap.153. F 


% The deſcription, 


 Hegreat Centorie bringeth foorth round ſmooth ſtalkes, three cubits high : the leaves are 
| long, dwuided as itwere in many parcels: like ro thoſe of the Walnut tree , ſomewhat ſnipt 
aboutthe edges like the teeth of a ſawe. The flowers growe at the top of the ſtalkes inicalie 
knaps like the great Knap weede,the middle thrums wherof are of alight blew,or skic colour; when 
the ſeede is ripe,the whole knap or head turneth toa downie ſubſtance.like the head of an Artichok; 
wherin is found a long ſmooth ſecede, bearded at one end like choſe of Baſtard Saffron, called Carta- 
mus,or the ſcede of C ardums benedrt7s. The roore is great, long, blackeon the outſide, and of a tan- 
guinecolour on the inſide, ſomewhar ſweere intaſte,and biting the toong. | | 
There is likewiſe another ſort hereof, hauing great and large leaues like thoſe of the water Dock, 
tſniptor toothed about theedges. The ſtalke is thorter than the other, bur the roore is 
moteolcous or fuller of iuice, otherwiſe like, | pk | 


Ee 2 Centauriun 


- 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Century inp 119 HW. q | 
Great Centorte.| / I's Þ| *% The place | 
| The great Centorie ioyeth in a fat and fir 
Joile,andin funnie banks full of grafle and herhes, 
It growerh yery plentifully , faith D tofeorides, iy 
Lycia, Peloponneſus, Arcadia, in Morea, and in 
 |Baldus-a mountaine in the territories of Yerop 
and likewiſe in my garden. 
; * Thetime. | 
It lowreth in ſommer, andthe rootes may he 
'gatheredin Autumne. 8 
; w The names, | | 
| Iriscalled in Greck onwews r! wh: of Theophraſu 
alſo Centwry: indivers ſhops fallly Kh Ponticun: 
'for Rha Porticws is Rha growing in the countries 
'of Pontus : aplant _— from great Centorie, 
[There is found among the baſtard names V nefers, 
\ Fel terre,and Polyhyd;on:but Theophraftus and Flay 
\do fet downe among the kindes of Panacesor All. 
heale,thisgreat Centoric , andalfo the lefſerwher. 
of we wil write in the next chap.following, Plizy re- 
citing the words of Theophr.doth in his 2 5.bookg. 
\chap.write,that they were found out by Chiron Cex- 
taurms and furnamed Centanris. Allo affirmingthe 
ſame thing inhis 6.chap where he more largelyex. 
pounding both the Centauries, repcateth to be 
found out by Chrrom:& therupon he addeth,thatei- 
'ther ofthemis named Chironium. Of ſome itisre- 
;ported, thartthe ſaid Chiron was cured therewithof 
a woundin his foote, that was made with an arow 


a, 


char fel vpon it, when he was perraineg of Herculesinto his houſe : wherupon it was called Chire 


»/u73; Or of the curing ofthe woundes © | 
* 7 he temperature. 


q: 


It is hot and driein the third degree, Galenlaith,by the taſte of the roote it ſheweth comraie 
qualirics, {o in the yſc it performeth contrarie effects. 
| *% Thewertues. - | 
The roote takenjn the quantitic of twodrams, is good for them thar are burſten, or ſpit bloud; 
againſt the crampe nd ſhrinking of ſinewes, the ſhorrnes of winde or difficultic of breathing, the 
cough and gripings of the belly. | |þ Ely - 
B There is notany part of the herbe, bur it rather worketh miracles then ordinarie cures in greene 
. wounds : for it ioineth _—_— the lips of fimple wopnds in the the fleſh, according tothe fitit us 
rention,that is,glewing the lips togither,not drawing to the place any matter at all. . 
C Theſethings and mo beſides ane es ry relleth of. The roore (faith he) is a reemedie for ruptures, 
- conullions and cramps, taken inthe weight of two drarms to be giuen with wine to thoſe tlatare 
_ withouta fcauer,and to thoſe that haue,with water. 20 oY 
'D_ Galenfaith, thatthe ivice of the leaues thereof, performeth rhoſe things that the roote dorh, 
| irhich is allo vicd in ſecede of Zycrama kinde of harde iuice of a ſharpe taſte. 


| Of jmall Centorie. Chap.154- 


tis ſoldiers, for the which purpoſe it is moſt excellent, 


- ” 
£YX 
R 


\ 


 % Thedeſeription, \. f 
I He lefler Centorie is a little herhe : it growerh vp with a cornered ſtalke,halfe a foot high, 
: with leaues in forme and bigneſle of Sine Iohns woorr : the flowers growe at the tOÞ 112 
| ** ſpokiebuſh or rundell, ofaredcolourtending to. purple, which in theday time, and ed 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 437 
the ſunne is vp doe open themſelues , and towardes euening do ſhut.yp againe : after them come 
forth ſmall ſeede veſlels,of the ſhape of wheate cornes, in which are contcined very little ſecdes, 
The roote is ſlender, hard.,and foone fading, *. 4 P: 1 
2. Theyellowe: Centorie hath leaues, ſtalkes, and ſeede likerheorher, andis in echreſpeR alike, 
favingchat the flowers heercof are of a perfeQ ycllowe colour, which ſerteth foorth the difference. 

I Centaur inm paruum. | 2 Centaurium paruwn luteum L'Obelij. 
Small Centoric. Yellowe Czntorie, 


*% Theplce. | 
The firſt is growing in lentie throughout England,in moſt paſtures and grafſie fieldes. 
The yellow doth ab ei chalkie jk of Greenehith in Kent,and ſuch like places, 
& *& The time, | | 
Theyare tobe redin their flowring time,that is, in Iuly and Auguſt; of ſome that gather 
them nr eng are gathered 96. 6 the two Fae wc ] i 
*% The names. | 
Pliny nameth the ſmall Centoric Libadion, and by reaſon of his great bitterneſſe Fe/terre. The 
ltalians in Herruria call it Biondefls : in Spaniſh Cextoris : in lowe Nurch Santozye : in Engliſh 
kſlerCentorie,or common Centorie: in-French Cenraive. | 
STS * Thetemperature. | | 
The ſmall Centorie is of abirter qualitie, and of temperature hot and dric in the ſecond degree: 
| the yellow Centorie is hot and drie in the third degree. : 
*% The vertues. — 
Being boiled in water and drunke, it openeth the ſtoppings of the liver, gall, and ſpleene, it A 
«th the yellowe iaundiſe, and likewiſe long and lingering agues: it killerh the woormes in the 
3to be briefe,ir clenfeth,ſcoureth, and maketh thinne humors that are thicke, and doth effec- 
y performe whatſocuer bitter things can. | | 
Duſecorides, and Galen after him, report, that thedeco&tion draweth downe by ſiege choler and B 
e humours,and helpech the ſciatica but though wehaue weed this often and luckely,yer could 


Ee 3 | #0. 


1 : £ I 
_ : , TY ; + p i Xe r Ye oben th | " Po 
— muy —__ k = m— 


433 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


wenot perceiuecuidently thatit purgeth bythe ſtoole any thing atall,and yet hath performed the 
ceffc&s aforeſaide. mm | 


C This Centorie being ſtamped and laide on whileſt it is freſh and greene, doth heale and cloſe w 

greene wounds,clenſeth old vicers,and perfectly cureth them. | 
D The iuice is good in medicines for the cies, mixed with hony it clenſeth away ſuch things as hin. 

derthe ſight, and being drunke it hath a peculiar vertue againſt the infirmities of the finewes, zz 

Dioſeor ides teacheth. 4 | Ra. | | 
E Italian Phiſicions dogiue the powder of the leaues of yellowe Centorie once in three daies, 

in the quantitic of adram,with anniſe andcarowaic ſeedes,in wine or other liquor,which Preuaileth 

againſt the dropſie and greene ſickneſle,of which plant Toannes Poſtimehath thus written; 

4 Fles mibi ſuane rubet, ſed ineſt quogu: [uCCUU Aar Mes, 
Qu iunat obſcſſum bile aperitque iecur. . 
, - Myfloweris ſeete in ſmell, bitter my iuice in taſte, 
Whichpurge choler and helps liuer that elſe would waſte. 


Of Calues ſnout or Snapdragon. (hap.155. 


1 CArtirrhinum pur purenwn. | + 2 Antirrhinumalbun. 
Purple Snapdragon. . | _ White Snapdragon. 


= - —__ = 
\ I -& , W 
—_ > 


" "XC 4 
A " . 

= = 

% = =_ w % _—_ 
- - 2, J E-> » 
$4 \ 4 

PF ” >» x J 
- -/ _ , p F 


XS 


—_— 
pj = 
——nſ 


— Av 


JE 
ee” Mz 
” — Lu] - - 
n_ = _ 4 
T, _ 
'('Þ- 
h 
—- 


—_ 


A. 


_—"—_ 


rather 4 
6 


2 Theſecondagr 
this plant bringet 


3 Antirrhimm 


A | HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 439 
2 Antirrhimbn (utewn. | 4 Antirrhins: w:; w_ 
Yellow Snaperagon. | Small Snapdragon, 


4 
/ as. | 


MB " F- 
N EE VASE 


[ 
F = 
7 
1 Cr 
WF/ - \ 
C—_ 


: 
+ 
vo # 5 By 
WT Ss, 
1 », ', 
, P. - / 
7 


* Thedeſcription. I | 
3 Theyellow Snapdragori hath a long, thicke woodie roote, with cerraine ſtrings faſtned rherto : 
from which riſeth vp a brittle ſtalke of two cubits and a halfe high, diuided from the botrome to the 
top into divers braunches; wherupon do grow long green leaues like rhoſe of Pimpernell,bur grea- 
ter and longer, The flowers growe at the top ofthe maine braunches, ofa pleaſant yellowe colour, 
in ſhape like vntorhe NT Hon | ES | . 
4 The ſmall or wilde Snapdragon differeth not from the others,but in ſtature. The leaues are leſſer 
andnarrower, ſhe flowers purple,bur alcogither ſmaller. 
| %* Theplace. | 
Thethree firſt do growe in moſt gardens ; butthe yellowe kinde growethnot common,except in 
.thegardens of curious Herbariſts, of 
| * The time. | 
Thatwhich hath continued the whole winter doth flower in Maie, and the reſt of fommer after. 
wards: and that which is planted {ater and in the end of fommer;flowrethin the ſpring of the ſane 
yecre; they do hardly endurethe iniurie of out colde winter, 
*% The names. | {4:2 | a7 Þ 
Snapdragon is called in Greek «-r/j105: in Latine alſo Antirrhinamof Apuleins Cant ceyebrum, Here 
br Smuana Yenuſt 1 minor ,Opalis erata,& Orontium : it is thought to be Leo her bagwhich Colamellein 
his 19.booke doth reckon among the flowers : yer Geſneruz hath thought thar this Leo is Colwmbzne, 
which forthe ſamecauſe he hath called Leonto#omium: but this name ſeemerh to vsto agree bert- 
tr with Calues ſnout,then with Columbine: for the gaping flower of Calues ſnout 1s morelikere 
lyons ſnap then the flower of Columbine: it is called in Dutch Dzant tin Spaniſh” Cabeza' de ter- 
he :mEnglith Calucs ſnout, Snapdragon , and Lyons ſnap :in French Tefte de chien; atid Teſte 
Vets, | | | | DIS 
Ee 4. 4+ The 


_— 


449 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE - 


* The  remperature, 
They are hot and dric and ofſubrill parts, | 
* Thewvertaes. 
A Theſcedeof Sna apdragon,as Galen ſaith,is good for nothing in the vſe of phiſicke; and the hethe | 
_ it ſelfe is of like facultie with Zabonizon, or Starwoort, but not ſo cffeftuall. 
B Theyr Nath Dioſcorides, that the herbe being hanged about one,preſeruethaman frombe. 
ing bewi oxds vey thar it maketh a man grartious in the ſighr of people. | 
C cApuleims writeth, that the diſtilled water or the decoction of the herbe and roote made in wa. 
ter, isa TR remedic for the watcring of cics procceding of a hot cauſe,if they be bathed there. 


with. 


UE Tode for Chap. 156. 


2 Linaria parparetodorats. 
Sweere payin Tyyotanc 


| . "9% % i 4 $; f 
Te 


\WSIN\| 


SSOP A 
DJ 


; * The deſeription. 5 
Jr tne trltbadhl kindaof Antyrrhinwn , hath ſmall , lender, blackiſh ſtakes; from mich | 
do growe many leaues like flaxe, The flowers be yellow, with a ſpurre hanging at the ſame | 
like vnto a Larkes ſpurre,hauin —_ frogs mouth, cuen ſuck as is to beſeene | 
in the common. z the plant {9 axuch reſemblech Efaleminar, tharthe ons | 
hardlylnonefin orher,bur by this olde verſe: 
> +1». Eſalzlatteſcit ſine laite Lingria creſcit. | 
Some-there be that haue confounded Scoparie, ot Belueder Italorwms, dt chinDteedegharts ti | 
they arc deceived greatly, as/in many otherthings ; forthe leaues of | Belueder are longer then Line | 
744,a0d more in number,not bitter,nor of that effe& which Limeris ſeructh vnto in whichbe 
moleſted with the jaundiſe, and brought therby very neere vntothe dropfie. | | 
2 Theſeuenth kinde of Snaperagon, bengthel ſecond kinde of Tode faxe ach leaves ike | 
pelis 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. 441 


aalb maker, but not ſo broade, and ſomewhat iagged about the edges. The ſtalke is ſinall and ten- 
der,ofa cube bigheſer wit many purple flowers like vnto the former in ſhape. The root is long, 


with manyt S ="g7E therear : the whole planris ofa reaſonable ſwcere ſauour, 
3 Linaria pur puree alters, ;* Lindvis Palentie. 
Variable 


c flaxe. Tode flaxe of Valentia. 


/ /* 
Za? i La 


* The 4 ripton FA 


3 Thecightkinde of Antyrrhinum or Snapdragon . being likewiſe Kideof Tode flaxe F: "\ 
{mall and narrowe leaues like vnto the firſt kinde of Linaria: is a cubic high, beſet with 
Bowers of a purple colour,in faſhionlike Linarie, but chAirwanteth! he railcorſpurre at rind 


ofthe flower which the other hath. The roore is ſmall ah thteddie. /// 


| 4 LinariaV dlentins hath "earn like Hypericon, or ra rlike "W1/a, owing ypona ſtalke or 
wiggie braunch,of a footehigh,and calletby C luſgres s,t0 7 {4 S nde, by himſciſe 
In egro Yalentino, aciticin Iralicz where it beareth yellawe flo ers abour ropiof the ſtalke like 
hk common Lzneria,but the mouth of the flower is downisg, leofa purple colour, 
x Itflowrethat Valentiain March,and groweth in the me as yetbcen ſeen 
Ke ph eo 0a arts. FR WF 2s 
is # alba hath great, thicke, and lon rootes,with chredsorftr atthe lame ; 
from which riſe yp many braunches Tn lianek So towat . flowers,not 
much vnlike the ſmall -T 6-16 hy of aw our, andthein rp mouth ſommwhat 
more wide and, leaues like the common Tode flaxe, ©! _ \ 
6 1a ons rr of Snaperagon,or T Aaxe,chat Hah any ſmal & weak bran- 
ches.rrailing de,beſct with many lirtle ; like axe. The flowers grow at the top 
df the falke” ew _ c common kinde, but of a pu ur la blewneſle, The roote 


Yo and threddie, 


-. m_— # o 

ng Ofzris 

4 *.. s 
- aw” . 

-t — ” 
-_ , n w T 
: _ ; % 

s 


u— 


442 THE SECOND|BOOKE OF THE 
5 Ojprts alba. \_- 6 Ofyris pur paroceraler. | 


VVhite iodeflaxe. 244 ; Purple TodeRaxc, 


7 Linofyrts N uperorum. 
Buſhic Todeflaxe. 


\ 


HISTORIE| OF PLANTS. OY 


Foraſmuchas this planris ſtalked andleafed like common Zinaris, the newwriters haue called 
it Linoſyris: it hath ſtalkes very ſtiffe and wooddie, beſet with leaues like the common Linarja, with - 
flowers at the rop of the ſtalks ota taint mers Len colow,in forme or ſhape ſowwhar like vnto 
Conyza major, The whole plant groweth to the height of two cubits &isin taſte ſharpe &clammie, 
or glutinous,8 ſomwhar birter. The root is compact of many ſtrings, intangled one within another, 
Gurllandimus calleth this plant Hy/ſopus wmbellifera Dioſeoridis , that is, Dicſcorides his. Hylope, 
which bearethatuft in allpoints like Lroſyris, whereof it is akinde, nordiffering from irin ſhew | 
and leaues. The ſtalkes are a cubite high,diuided aboue intomany ſmall branches.the rops whereof 
are garniſhed with tuftes of ſmall lowers, gliſtering full of many golden haires or thrums , with 
ſeede as ſmall as duſt, | | [2 
$ Golden Tode flaxc hath divers ſmall vpright branches very little & render, garniſhed fromthe 


: bottome to the top with ſmall long thinne leaues bke rhoſe of wilde flaxe: onthe roppe of the 


ſtalkes doe grow tufts of flowers of a gold yellow colour, The roote is tough and ſingle. 


9 Scoparis ſine Oſyris Gr ecorwn, | 19 Pafering linaria. 
Broome Tode flaxe, | Spatrowes Tode flaxe, 


(- Y 


/ 


_- * Thedcſerintion. 
: Seoparia, or after Dodoneas Ofris, which the Iraliaris call Belvidere, hath very many ſhoores or 
pigs riſing from one ſmall ſtalke,making the whole plant to reſemble a broome or beeſome,wher- 
of it tooke the name Scoparta. Theleaues be ſmallandnarrowe. almoſt like to the leaues of flaxe. 


The floivers be as it were a buſh of herbic coloured threds, growing among the leaues,which keepe 


 Lreeneall the winter, | 


a0 This plantalſo for reſemblance ſake is referred vnto the Linaries, bicauſe his leaues be like 
Ss, Arthe top of the ſmall branched ſtalks,do growe little yellowiſh flowers, pale of colour, 
omewhar like the tops of Chryſocome,and the ſtalkes of Limonmm. hn Mouton of Tournay takerh 
ito be Chryſocome alters : md] bicauſe therehath beeneno concordance among writers, it ſvail be 
cient to have ſer foorth his deſcription with his name Paſrina. | ; 
. *& T0 


414 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


% The place. | | 
The kindes of Tode flaxegrowe wilde inmany places as ypon ſtone wals,gravelly grounds ba... 
ren medowes,and along by hedges. © of | 28 
| | % Thetime. 
They flowerfrom Iune to the end of Auguſt, | | 
| | * T henames. 


Tode flaxe is called of the herbariſtes of our time, Linari«,or Flaxweede, and Prinatis: of forge 
_ Ohrs : inhigh Durch Lynkraut, and Onſer fraumen flaſch: in Lowe Dutch Unit Utag: in 
Engliſh Wilde flaxe, Tode flaxe,and Flaxeweede :in Iralian Be/wiatcre, or faire in ſfight,whichmay © 
very well agree with the firſt deſcribed, asbeing in ſhew a molt glorious and goodly flower, bur 
at rb noſe moſt lothſomly ſtinking. Kew 7 ma called Scoperis, is named alſo Herbg fladioformm, bj. 
caule it is afic BRED make broomes of, wherewith ſchollers and ſtudents may ſweepe their owne | 
ſtudies and cloſcts. The particular names axe expreſſed both in Latine and Engliſh in their ſeyera] 
titles, whereby they may be diſtinguiſhed,  ' | ifang 
| | % The temperature. AS Ex \ PS; 
The kindes of Tode flaxe are of the ſamertemperature with wilde Snapdragons, whereof theyare 


; 


kindes [i #þ | 
| | *% Thevertnes. : Hee wh 

A ThedecoQion of Tode flaxe taketh away the yellownefſe and deformitic of the $kin, being 

waſhed and bathed therewith. [8 | 38 PER 

B Theſame'drunken openerh the ſtoppings of the liuer and ſplecne, andis fingular good for the 

- taundife which is of long continuance, | > ph te [et 7-1 
C -The famedecoQtion dothalſo proucke yrine, inthoſe thatpiſledrop after drop, vnſtoppeth the 
kidneies and bladder. 4 | | 


Of Garden Flaxe. Chap.157. 


Garden Flaxe, | % The deſcription. 


Laxeriſeth vp with ſlender and round ſtalkes; = 
The leaues thereof be long, narrow, & ſharpe 
: pointed: onthe toppts of the ſprigs are fare 
| bleweflowers, afterwhich ſpring vp lirtle rounds. 
| knops or buttons,in which is conreined the ſecede, 
| in forme ſomewhartlong, ſmooth,glb or {lipperic, 
| of a darkecolour. Therootes be and thred&: 
die, &* The place. i | | 
Ir profpereth beſt inafat andfruirfull ſoile, in 
| moiſt and not drie places; for itrequireth as Col 


' mw llfaitha veryfargrounde, and ſomwhatmoilt, 
Some, faith Paladizs, doſowe it thicke ina leane 
de, and by that meanes theflaxe growetlt 
ne: my faith thatitis tobeſowen in gravellic 
| Places,eſpeciallyin one forrowe: Nec magufefts 
| ware alind: and that it burneth the ground and 
 makethitwoorſer, which thingalſo 77reil reſtiti 
 ethinhisGeorgickes : j | | 
Þ V rit ling compu ſeges qurit Auen : 
V rwnt letheo perfuſa papanera ſomns. 
Flaxe and Otes ſowne conſume 
the moiſture of a fertile eld: 
The fame worketh Poppic,whoſe 
| iuiceadeadlyleepedorhyeecld. 


HISTORIE |OF (PLANTS. 445 
| *% The time. | -| | 
Flaxe is ſowen in the ſpring, itgowreth.in Iunc and Luly. Aﬀeer itiscutte downe (as Plyic in his 
19. booke fit chapter ſaith ) the ſtalks are put into the water fubicCt co the heate of the ſunne,and 
(me waight {aide on them tobe ſtceped therein , the loolenes of the tinde is aftgenewhenit isWwell 
fteeped: then is it taken vp and dricdin the ſuhne , and after vitd asmoſthwfwwes cancel! better 
then my {elte, ; | 
Lo EE a * % Thenames. | ; 
Tris called both in Grecke and Latine >ir,) Linwm: in high Dutch Flachf32 inlralian and Sva- 
viſh 2480: in French Dain :inlowe Dutch Ulas; in Engliſh Flaxc and Lyne. | 
. *% Thetemperature and vertues. | | 
Genin his firſt booke of the faculties of nourithments faith, that diners vic the ſeede heerevf A 
arched as a ſuſtenance with Gerwm,no otherwite then made ſalt. | ; 4 52 
They alſo vie it mixed with honic ; ſome likewiſe prit it among bread, but iris hurtfull to the ſto- B 
macke,and is hard of wer celdeth tothe bodie bur Ifttle nouriſhment : but touching the 
oualitiewhich maketh che belly ſoluble,neither wil I praiſe or difpraiſcit;yet that hath ir ſome force 
* prouoke vrine,is more apparant when itis parched : but then iralſo ſtaieth the belly more. | 
The ſame author in his bookes of the faculties of ſimple medicines ſaith, that Lineſcede being C 
eaten is windie although itbe parched, ſo full is it of ſuperfluous moiſture: andir is allo after a ſore 
hotin che firſt degree, and in ameane berweene moiſt anddrie. But how windie the ſeedeis , and 
howfull offupertiuous moiſture it is in euery part,might very wel haue been perceiued a few yceres - | 
fince at Midedleborough in Zeland,where for want of graine andother corne, molt of the Citizens 
were faine to cate breade and cakes made heereof with honie and vile, who were in ſhort time af- 
_ ter ſwolnein thebellic about the ſhort ribs, faces, andother parts of their bodies infſuch forr, 
that a great numaber were brought to their graues thereby: for theſe ſympromes or accidents came 
nootherwiſe then by the 2 ba ages moiſture ofthe ſeede,which cauſerh windineſle, = 
Lineſced, as D#oſcorides hath written, hath the ſame properties rhatFenugreeke hath: it wafteth D 
awaic and mollifieth allinflammations or hot ſwellings, as well inwarde as outward, if it be boiled 
with honie,oile,and a little faire water, and made vp with clarified honie; it taketh away blemiſhes 
of the face and the ſunne burning, called in Greeke Ephelers,being rawe & vnboiled; and ailo foie 
ſpots, if it be mixed with ſalt peter& figs : itcauſerh rugged and ill fauoured nailes to fall off, mixed -— 
with honic and water Creſles. | | | | | 
It draweth foorth'of the cheſt corrupted flegme and other filthie humours.,if a compoſition with E 
honie be made thereof to licke on,and eaſeth rhe cough, , 
Being taken largely with pepperand honie made vp into a cake,ir ſtirreth vp Juſt, | F 
The oile which 1s prefled our of the ſeede,is profitable for many purpoſes in phiſicke and chirur- G 
extie;zandis vſed of painters,pifture makers, and other artificers, | | | 
It ſofneth all hard ſwellings;it ſtretcheth foorth the ſinewes that are ſhrunke and drawne togi- H 
ther, mitigaterhpaine,being applied in mancr of an ointment. | EP) 
. Some allo giue itto drinke to ſuch as are troubled with paine inthe fide & collicke;buritmuſt be I 
freſh and newly drawne : for if it be olde andrranke, itcauſeth aptneſle to vomite , and withall ic 
overmuch heateth, | | i; Sad | 
Linefeed boiled in waterwith alittle oile, Sa quantitic of Anniſe ſeede impowdered and implai- K 
tered vpon anging, or any ſwelling in the throate, helperh the ſame. | 
Itis with good ſucceſle ved plaiſterwile, boiled in vineger , vponthe diſeaſes called Colzece, and L. 
Dyſſenteriagwhich are fluxes and paincs of the bellie, _ EB 4 
the ſcedes ſtamped with the rootes of wilde Cucumbers,drawerth foorth ſplinters,thornes,bro- M < 
kenbones,or any other thing fixed in any partof the bodie. | 
thedecodtionis an excellent bath for womento fit ouer for the inflammation of the ſecret parts, N 


bicaule it ſoftneth the hardneſle thereof,and ealethpaine and aking. | | 

lheſecd of Line & Fe nugreek made into powder,boiled with Mallowes, Violet leaues,Smallage, O 
& Chickweed,vnuill the herbs be ſoft;then {taped in a ſtone morter with a litle hogs greaſe tothe 
torme of a cataplaſme or pultus:appeaſeth all maner of paine,ſoftnerth al colde tumors or (wellings, 
mollifieth & bringethto | ua 4 all apoſtemes;defendeth wounded members from ſwellings & 
rankling, and when they be alrcagic ranked, it taketh the ſame away being applied verie warme 4 
evening and inorning, FLEA ; | | 


: | 
of 1; 
ws 
- 


445 THE SECOND | BOOKE OF THE 


Of Wilde Flaxe. Chap. 158. 


I Linum frlue Hire floribus albis. | | 2 Linumſplueftretenuifolinn. 
Wilde whire flaxe. | |: | Thin ated =" 1 ang 


El * The deſeription. 


x This Wilde kinde of Line orflaxe hath leaues like Aſparagus, or ratherlike Fennell, grov 
ing vpon round bright and ſhining ſprigs,a foote long, and flowers like the manured faxe, 
bur of a white colour. The roote is rough and ſmall, with ſome fibres annexcd thereunto, 

v 2 Thenarrow andthinne leafed kinde of Line is very like tothe common flaxe, bur in all pojntes 
leſſer. The flowers conſiſt of fiue leaues,which do ſoone fade and fall away hauing many ſtalkspro- 
; ceeding from one Foote, of a cubitchigh, belct with ſmall leaues, yea lefler thanthole of Lip:1i4 


Os. | . [| 
PT There is a kinde of wilde flaxe which hath many hairie branches, riſing vp from a very ſinall 
roote,which doth continue for many popes without ſowing, increaſing by rootes into many other 
plants,with ſtalkes amounting to the height of one cubire,beſer with many rough and hairie broade 
leaues: at the toppe ofthe ſtalkes do growe many faire blew flowers, compact of fiue leaues,much 
greater and fairer than common Line or flaxe; which being paſt, there ſucceede ſmall (harpepoit- 


red heads full of ſeedes,like Lineſcede,but of ablacke ſhining colour. g | 
4 Canelinum(ot lomecalled Linus ſylueftre per puſilhom, % ray be called in Engliſh very Lowedt 
Dwarfe wild flaxe; for this word Chame ioined to any fimpledoth fignifie,that itis a low or dwarſe 
kindethereof) being ſcatce an handfull high, hath pale yellow flowers : bur as itis in all things like 
vnto flaxc; ſo the flowers, leauesand ſtalkes,and allother partes thereof,ate fower times lefſerthan 
Linum, | [oY | | 

| ; Lites 


+ "HISTORIE/OF PLANTS RE 2 
Cy Pies FIR | | 3 Chonelinem peruſe 
3 eaſed Wilde axe — " dabaz; adlgiagny 1 Daenvs BF. 


£*® >£ 3 1 #1 F 


i Fo ” Hþ The place, 
ey growe generally in grauellie grounds 

The firſt growerh in well manured places as in gardens,and ſuch like ſoiles + 

The ſecond groweth by the fea fide. Thechird and fourrh growe vpon rocks and cliffes neere 
tothe ſea ſide. 

Ihaucſecne themgrowe vponthe ſca bankes by Lee inEſſex, and in many ors of the yle of 
Shepey. They growe alſpberweene Quinborow and Sherland bod | 


*+ The time. | TEE f 
Thepfaerfrom May the middeſtof Aga | , oF | 
*% The names, : | 


Theirnames arcſufficiently expreſſed in their ſcuerall titles, | 5 5c 
*% The nature and vertues. | 4 
Thefacukies of theſe kindes of Wilde flaxe are referred vnto che manned flaxe; bird 
iowenie cither re oper ajrk 


. Of blacke Sal woort. Gepalp 


ED rime this plant was vſed for Ace mm *.Purſlaintandother herbes wok theſe 
es, and receiued amongthe Legwnins. In mine opinion it was called Glasx, byreaſonof 
W097 2 2DrES- arc of a gray or olde dried colour,called in Latine G/aweivs hr, 
Purdy nes leafe: of others itis called Ga/ax or Glax : of others Engalatton, quaſi Lack 
TLeifica: bicauſe it is good to increaſe milke in chebreſtvof'romin, ifir be much vſed, Ruins 
07mg haue ferdowne Galegs, Soeapidiſs, Polygala, and many other plants for the true which 
| WHICH - 


243 THE SECOND" BOOKE: "OF 'THE 
which hath bred oo 4b yt myo ha Di- 
oſcorides hath'ma all branches, ſome creepin 
N the ou he dfoths ſtanding wpright, hes 
and ſmall,beſer with many little fat leaues like Triba- 
Inc terre#ri,ot Herniaria, growing | the ſtalkes 
by couples; betweene whom grow ſmall purpleiflo- 
w-rs; which being paſt, there ſucceed certaine little 
bullers, or ſecede veſſels. The rooteis very ſmall and 
threddy,8&taking hold of the vpper face of the carth, 
as it doth runne abroade, by which meancs it doth ' 
mightily increaſe. EY | | 


+ 3 Ms 
The true Gl:ux or Milkwoort groweth very plenti- 
Fully in ſalt places and marſhes neere the ſea ,, from 
whence I haue brought ir into my garden, where ir 
proſpereth as wellas in his native foile. Ifound ic 
eſpecially berweene Vhhitſtable and the yle of Tha- 
netin Kent, and by Graueſend inthe ſame countie, 
by Tilbery Blockhouſe in Eſſex, and in the yle of 
Geperapilt from Kings ferry to Sherland houſe. 
| + Thetime. | 
It lowreth in May,and the feede is ripe in Tune, 
*% The names. 


The names have becne ſufficiently ſpoken of in the deſcription. Irſhall ſuffice to call itin Eng. 
liſh Sea Milkwoorr. "+ 1 | 
|  %* The natare. | 

| Paulus Acginetalaith,itis hotand moiſt of temperature. 
h * Thevertnes. | 
A This Milkwoorttaken with milke, drinke or pottage,ingendreth ſtore of milke,and thereforeitis 
good to be viced by nurſes that want the ſame. | | 


Sz 


OY 


Of eM. ilke woort. (hap.160. 


T Here be diuers ſortes of Milke woorts ; Ks in the colour of their flowers, wherin conſiſteth 
| - % The deſcription. EM | #7"; Why 
I Here haue beene _—_—— necrely re 8X 2a Polygala, and yetnot the ſame in deede, 
oh. which doth verifie the Latine ſaying, 4 «um nile eff idem. This neere reſemblancedoth 
* ratherhinder thoſe that haue ae Pane much time inthe knowledge of ſimple thanin- 
creaſe their $6 Mug 8 And this alſo hath:beene an occaſion that many have imagined aſundric 
Polygala vnto themſelues,and fo ofotherplants, Of which number, this (whereof 1 ſpeake) is9ne, 
obraining this name of thebeſt writers and herbariſts ofour time, deſcribingit thus. It hath many 
thicke ſpreading branches, creeping on the ground,bearing leaues like them of Herniaria,ſtandi 
in rowes like the. Sea Milkwoort ; among which dogrowe ſmall whorles, or Crownetsof white 


L ” 


flowers: theroote being exceeding finall and threddie. 


2  Theſecondkinde of Polyga/z is a finall herbe with flenderpliant ſtems, of a wooddie ſubſtances 
an handfull long,creeping by the ground: the leaues be ſmall and narrow like vnto Lintels,or lictl 
Hyſlope. The flowers prone atthe top, ofa blew colour, faſhioned like alittle bird, with wit 
taile,and bodieeaſic tobe diſcerned by them that do obſervethe ſame: which being 

ccede ſmall pouches,like thoſe of Burſa pait4r1s,bur leſſer. The roote is fmalland | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 449 
als repens. þ- Leala fl leo. 
f lpigMllkenoor, | hays <7 ohinng 


1 


P T., " 


Po ale abit floribas. 
Wine Mie moor 


WOOTLt, 


rec, one en wo rr og 
OL 


ND ag 


dos - | ON D:BOOKE. OR THE 
£q0 lc dtakes ke th 
2 This thirdhinde of £oh | woort, 1 Icaues an 
#'] and differerh fromir Wt "the this kinde hath ſmaller branches, and $M 
' thicke thruſt rogither , and the flowers are like the other'z bur that they be cf a tedor = 
colour, 
4 The fourth kindeis like the hops ofi in everyreſpe&tbur par hath white flowers; ohe 
_ wiſcitis very like, | 


* 


5 Polygalae purpuree. p--] 6 nr « | 


Punks wort, (| Darke col 


5 Purple Milke woort differeth from the plex in « colour f thi 

mobranches than the precedent, and the flowers are of a 

ſterh the difference. | 
'6 Theſixt Milke woortis like vnto cheteſt; in cach reſpe&, caving that the Cd ucofaom: 
worne il fauored colourgyhich maketh it to ps from all the other of his kinde, | 

\,. %Thepkee. 
Theſe plantsor r Milke wOorts gory A in cuery wood and tertill paſture, when! 

haue trauelled. 


*% The time. 7 { 
They fwncfom Mayo Aug. | Y 4-51 


| 4 Thenomer,. { 
Milke iwoortis called C\ambarmati ” :ſo called bicauſe it doth ſpeciallylouriſhi in the Croſs 
Gang weekegor Rogation weeke3of which flowers,the maidens which vic inthe countries to 
the proceſſion,do make themſclues garlands,andnoſegaies:in Engliſh we a it Gol flower, 
Gang flower, Rogation flowerzand Milke woorr, of their vertues in Aux 2 chehreſs0 
nurſes, | Hieronmus Tregue callerh ir hy 2% and likewiſc Dzſcorides. (\ 47 þ 


% Theverraes. 


Of Knot praſſe Chap.161, 


% The kindes. 


Here be diuers herbes of ſundric formes and ſhapes comprehended vnder this name Polygo- 
1 ke ara Bur ofthe common or beſt knowen Knot grafle, we intend to intreate in 
this chapter : whereof there be two ſorts,the greater andthe lefler. | 


W4 N Al | 
Vl —_ \ W | 
VE N {EL 


I : H mal —_ ſip the greveill wth long flenderweake 
ecommon male c on ”und Henc 
: nap gies | org | ie coke tits aene;” tthe James growe pon oh 


_ weake branches like thoſe of ſmall S. Iphns woorr, bur rand narrower. The flowers 
ze maruellous lirtle,and growe out oftheknors, of an herbic colour; in'their places come vp trian- 
gedſeede. The roote is long,flender,and full of firings,” — 5 


cullyconſiſterh the difference. © 


2 Theſecond differeth notfromthe former 4 but onelythar it is altc | | 


Theſe Knor graſſes dogrowe in barren and vom places almoſt cuery where, 
Fr:  ' Thetime, | | 


They arcin flower andfecdeAll the ſommer long, | 


* - HISTORIE' OF PLANTS, * at 
On DA canta ety a 


rf. % Thy 


1 
: 8 
F = 
' 
| 


452 THE SECOND, BOOKE OF THE 
ww Thenenes. | 
Knorgraſle is called in Greeke =>-12 ib, that is tofay,Polygomum mar, or male Knot graſſ 
Latin Seminalis, Sanguizaria : of Columel! Sang mints : z in ſhops Cemurmed:a, and Go 
Apuleias Proſerpinaca : in high Datch Mo alt 2 in lowe Dutch Glerkens gras, and ot 
knop: 2 in Iralian Polygomo : in Spaniſh Corr/ole : 1n French Renoxee : in Wallen Mer lang 
in Engliſh Knot graſſe,and Swines grafſe: in the North,Birdes toong, 
| "* Thetemperatire. | 
- Knorgraſle,as Ga/en chick} is ofa ping qualitie, yet is it colde inthe ſecond "”Y rel 
ia the beginning of the third. : 
graifet Re en SH AER oaRR et 
A Theinice of Knot is good againſt the ſpitting piling and all 
iſſues or fluxes of bloodas Braſanolusreporterh,and arr etrogi faith heharhcured many an 
iuice thereof,thar haue vomited blood, given in a little ſti ticke wine, Ir greatly prevailerh againſ 
the Gonorrhea,that is,the running of the reines, and the weaknes of wy backe comming by mezne 
thereof,being ſhred and madein a tanſie with egs andeaten. 
B. Thedecoctionofit cureth the diſcaſe aforcſaid,in as ample maner as the i juice: or Linen in pore. 
der in areare egge,helpeth the backe very much. 
C Thchetbeboiledin wine and honie, cureth the vicersand inflammations of the ſecrer pane 
man or woman,adding thereto alirtle allume,and the parts waſhed therewith. 
D Dieſceridesfaith thatit prouoketh vrine, and helpe ſuch as do piſle drop after drop, when te 
vrineis hotandſharpe. 
E Iris given vnto ſwine with good ſacketle; when they are licke, and will not cate their menre 
whereupon wp YG LannEX 025. Jedocall p Swines graſle,and Swinesskir, 


Of, fapdry ſortes of Knot graſſes. (hap.162. 


1 Polygonum montamon. | 2 'Anthylluvalemtina Cl 
| tre T 28 Ao. " 


-— HIST.ORIE O08 /PEANTS:'' "ag 
| 4% The deſcription. ls 


Hripanica,is 2 ſtrange and woorthie plant to behold, handle, and conſider, although it be 

but fall. It is not abouc rwo inches jong,haling {mall branches, thicke, rough, hard, 
and full of iointss out of which the leaues came foorth hke'{mall reerh lefler than the leaves of 
Herniar 14,0! Thymun tenuifolium. At the topiof theſtalkes ſtand moſt delicate flowers f| ramed by 
nature, 25 it wetc, with fine parchmentleaues, ſtanding like {mall buttons, in their ſingular white- 
nesand ſnowie colour reſembling the perfe@whirefilke , fo many in number at the top, and fo 
thicke, that they ouerſhadow the reſt of the plant beneath, The roore is flender, and of a wooddic 
fbſtance,longer than the branches,or the whole plant:The {cede is couered as itwere with chafte, 
andis as ſmall as duſt,or che motes inthe ſunne, | | |< - 12723 LEENES 
2  Aathyttiof Valcntia,being likewiſe a kinde of Knor gralehath ſmall leaues like Glaux exigur, 
ſetorderly by couples at the ioints : among which come flowers,and orher ſinal leaueslikethe hut, 
buraltogirher er. The rooteis fall and long and of a wooddie ſubſtanced 121 


x T He ſnowie white and leaſt kinde of Palygonwmn, or Knot gralle, called of C/u/izs Paronychis 


—— as —- 


; Poly own Selinoides, five Knanel. 
Parilcy Pierr, Salas, 


3 Thereisakinde of Knotgrafle, which hath'ma- 
ny long andflenderbranches, or rather fwallrwigs, 
ſpredand ſtretched vpon the ground like Sex pillum: 
from among which leaues, -docluſter in rundelslike 
tuftes, hauing ſpaces betweene each tufr'; ont of 
which proceederh a ſinall duſtic flower. The whole 
_ is full of juice like 4200p, or ſmall Sengteene, 
raſte;atid hor, aid fomerhar aſtfingert, 

_ + Among the Knot grafles may well be futed this 
ſmallplant bat lately wrirter'of;and not fo cointrion: 
ly knowne as growing/t1Englande; being abour'an 
handfull high , and putteth our from a fibrous roote 
ſundrie flendec ſtalkes: full of lictle braunches and 
ioints)NMbout which growe confuledly many narrow 
leaues,for the moſt part of an vnequall quantirie; yer 
heere and there two longer thet'ths , and much 
alike in greatnes: at the out! Dafts ct the braun- 

"hes _ ſtalkes (where it hath thickeſt rufts)appeete 

OD nin A 112915) out of the middeſt of the leaues little lowerv,of an 

betbycolour, The whole plant is all oner whitiſh or hoarie. If my memorie faile me not, Paxedoth 


meanethis herbewhere he ſpeakerh of Sexifrega ang icant , in his Adverſaria peg.103. andalforc- 
porteth that he formde'this ys bythe way fiteas he rode from London to Briſtow, on alittle hill 
notfar from Chipnam his pi&ture doth very well reſemble the kinde of Knot grafle, calledamon 

| theGermaines RKnaielt; and calling it Saxsfags anghicine, cauſerh me rothinke that ſome in the 


weſt parts where he firſt founde it do call it Saxitrage,as we docall ſundric other hi ec hal 
theyſerue for the ſtone; My friende maſter Sfeuen Bredwell, pratitia in Phyfickin boſe parts, 
heard of a ſimple man, who did much good witha medicine (that he x 


2ainſtthe ſtone, which heminiſtred vnto all ſorrs of Thi d reque 
manta ſhes hinrtheHerb: called Parſley Piert,who fr ypromiſed i him, andthene 
broughrhim athandfaull of the herbe, androl&e him the compoſitionof hismedicine wichal;whic 
Jouſhall findeſet downe in the vertues,arid prooucd byſundrie of good account, to be alingy 
remedie fos the fame. TUE TOLDLS 3" CEC 4 | &” 
7Ifs * The place. 


1 


- 


The Gi aendnor Knot iſſe groweth'in euecry graucly or barren grounde : the ſeconde 


groivethneerethe ſea banks: the rhirde and faurth are ſtrangers in Englande; the fifr doth growe 

In my garden :the fixr groweth inbatten ſandic fieldes where Batley hath been ſowen : the ſcuenth 

groweth by the ſea fide ypon rockes and cliffes: and the laſt doth growe in the places where _ 
. | 


Theroote is ſomewhar'long andwooddie,bitter in- 


RA Te ata Ce 
? {HA * * : 


454 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


hath tethc ſowen.as by Barneelmes where. my friende aforeſaid founde the ſame : ir doth grows in 
Kent.infundric places, from whence I brougty ſore formy garden , where ir proj perech vell; + an 
by Chipnam atorclaide, As Pengreporteth. | | 
'*T he time. 
Theſe flower for the moſt part from Maie to September. 
& The names. 
That which hath beene Tide of their ſeuerall names in cheir deſcriptions ſhall ſutfce, 
* The nature. 
They are colde in the ſeconde degree,and ric inthe thirde,aftringent and making thicke. 
* The wertnes. | 
A Theiuice of Knorgraſſe is good againſt the eG of bloude, the piſhng of bloud | and al Pip 
i{Tues and fluxe of bloud: it preuaile agzinſt eGonorthza, andthe wealneſſe of the backe, be. 
'ing made inatanſic with egges, 

B , Thedecoftionof Knorgrafle cureth the diſeaſe aforclaide, in as awple manner as the iuice, and 
bbing boiled in honic and wine, itcureth the vicers & inflamwations of the priuic or ſecrer parts of 
man Or woman. 

'C Druſcorides faith that Knor graſle prouckerh vrine, and helpeth ſuch as piſle drop by drop, w hs 
the vrine is hot and 

| D _ Heereaccordingto my promiſe I have thought good to inſert this medicine made with Knayel, 
whichherbe is called (as Lfaide before)ParileyPiert; bur if Lmighe withour offence , ir ſhoulde be 
. Called Peirs Pungens : for that barbarous worde Parſley Piert,was giuen by ſome limple man ,who 
had not well learncd the true terme. The compoſition which followerh muſt be voO m warme 
white wine halfe a dran,yea two {cruples or more,according ro the conſtitution of the badic w hich 
Is tO IECCIWE tt, | 

E . Thelcaues ofPanlley Piere, Mouſeare,ofechcene ounce when the herbes be dried, Baie bates, 

Turmericke, Cloues,the ſcedes ofthe great Burre, rhe ſcedes inthe berries of heppes or Briertree, 
Fenugreeke,ofeche one ounce,the ſtone in the 0xe gall, the waight of 24.Barley cornes, or halſea 
dram, made togither into a molt fine and ſubrill powder , taken anddrunke in manner aforcltid, 
hath beene —_— Uo Sngulac for the difealeaforclaide. 


19 Repture woort.. Os 163. 


X*+ The wer oy ba , | 
Here is alſo a kinde of Knot grafle common- 
ly called in Latin Herziaria: in Engliſh Rup- 
| ture woott,or Rupeure graſle. Itis abaſcand 
| me creeping herbe, having many ſmall ſlender 


, ; : braunches trailin the gromtle / pies yer very 
£ | * ' tough and full of py, /u 19 omewhar - 


[1 whereupon do growe very ſmall leaues —— 

Þ fer. ; —_ which come foorth little yellowiſh 

| flowers which turne into very.ſmall ſecede, & great 

| quantitie thereof, conſidering the {malneſic of che 

| ant, growing thicke cluſtering rogitber by cer- 

- raine ſpaces. The whole planc is of of eoyelloniſh 

 greenecolour .The roore is very ſlender and fingle. 

b : There is another kinde of r aloradennegeaied Mil 

'h \grane,or all ſced,thar groweth vprighsa handful 

&E” | bigh5withmanie ſinalland render braunches, ſet 

F-  withleaueslike the former; but fewinfiumber, 'ha- 

| *  uingasitwererwo ſmall leaues aridnomore. The 

whole plan ED as it wecere har ſerprith edanoy ſony like the ſeedevof Panicke-but 
much leſſer, | 


* rh 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 255 
; . * The place. | þ-* 

Icioyerh in barren and ſandie grounds,andis likewiſe foundein dankiſh places that lic wide open 
cothe ſunne,it doth growe and ptoſper in my garden exceedingly. | 4g 


7 * Thetme. ION | 
It fowreth and flouriſherh in Maie,June,Julic,and Auguſt, bug 
| * The Hames. | 
Ir is called ofthe latter Herbariſtes Heywiayia , and Herniola: taken from the effe&incuring the / ; 
dilcaſe Hernia : of diuers Herba Turea, and Empetron : in French Boutenet : in Engliſh Rupture = 


woott,and Burſtwoort, - | 


% The temperature. | | ! 
Rupture woort doth notably drie,and through cloſeth vp togither and faſtneth, | 
' t*%* Thewertues. I | | 
Iris reported, that being drunke iris ſingular good for ruptures, and that very many that haue a . 
beeneburſten,were reſtored ro health by the ve of this hetbe : alſo the powder heereof raken with 
wine , doth make a manto piſle that hath his water ſtopt, and that ir waſterh awaie the ſtones in 
the kidneies,and expelleth them, 4 = F7 


-Of wilde Time. Chap.164. 


- 


I Serpi vnleare. 
Wilde Time. 


ch *% The deſcription. | | 
I TY Oth Dieſcorides and Plinje make two kindes of Serpillum, thatis, of creepingor wilde Time, 
whereof the firſt is our common creeping Time,which is ſo well knowen,that it needeth.no 
| deſcription ;yer this ye ſhall vnderſtand.,thar it beareth flowers of apurple colour,as cuerie 
bodie knoweth.Of which kindel foundanorher forr,with flowers as white as ſnowe.and haue plan- 
ted it in my garden, where it becommeth an hetbe of great beauric. ” | 
2 This wilde Time that bringeth foorth white flowers, differeth not from the other, bur onely in 
the colour of the flowers. | | | | 
There is another kinde of Serp;lhums , which growerh in gardens, in finell and ſauour reſem: 
bling Marierom, It hath leaues lie Organic, or wilde Mazierome, but ſomewhat whiter, putting $ 
toorthmany ſmall ſtalkes,ſer full of leaues like Rue, bur longer, narrower, and harder. The flowers 


arcof a biting taſte, and pleaſant ſmell. The whole plant growerh veright, whereas the other cree- 
peth along vponthe earth,catching hold where it groweth, and ſpreadi 


igg iciclte far abroad. 


Ff 4. 3 Serpillan 


456 THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 


Ser pillum mains fore purpareo Clusj þ L'Obely, 4 Serpillammainu flore albe. 
; Graarpurple witde tines | BEE Great white wi 


4 - 
x i A , - 
. ” # \\y\ # - 4 
p A - — 
m W —_ | . » -—# #7 # 
"> _ C - 
f « - 
C—_ A ha a - 
> —— 
, - = = 
- * 
, 
£- " j " pd ,- S 
- % ” X 


5 Serpillyn foljs amaraci. 


Time Maricrom. 


HISTORIE OF -PLANTS. 457 
* The deſerittion. | EE 
3 This wilde Time creepeth noras the others do, but ſtandeth vprighe, and bringerk forth 
lictle ſlender branches full of leaues like thoſe of Rue z yer narrower, longer, and harder. The flow- 
ers be of a purple colour, and of a twinging biting taſte : ir groweth ypon rocks, andis hotrer than 
the others | FS 
, , _—_ other great one with white flowers differeth nor from the precedent, hauing many knaps 
or heads,of a milke white colour,which ſerteth foorth the difference. | 
5 Thiswilde Time creepeth _ the ground, ſet with many leaues by couples like thoſe of Mar- 
:erom,bur leſſer,of the ſame ſmell : rhe flowers are ofa reddiſh colour. The zoote is very threddic, 
5s Wilde Time of Candie is like vnto the other wilde Times, ſauing that his leaugs are narrower = 
and longer, The ſmell is more aromaticall than any of the others, whereinis the di = 
There isakinde of wilde Time growing vpon the mountaines of Italie called Serpillum Citr atm, 
thatis,hauing the ſmell ofa Pome Citron,ora Limon,which giueth it the difference from the other 
wilde Times. | | | & 


* The pace. mm | 
The firſt groweth ypon barren hils,and vntoiled ſoiles,the ſecond groweth in gardens. The white 
kinde I found at Sourhficere in Kent,ina +0 9? belonging to one Maſter William Swan. | 
| ' % The time. | | 
They flower from May to the end of ſommer. 


* The names. | | Es 
Wilde Times calledin Latine Serpillum,s ſerpendo,of creeping: in high and lowe Dutch Quen- 
del,and wiſhen Thymug,and alſo Onſer Pzouven bedſtroo: in Spaniſh Serpot: inlralian Serpilh: 
in French Pr{bler : in Engliſh wilde Time, Puliall Mountaine,Pella mountaine, running Time,cree- 
ping Time,Mother of Time,and our Ladies Bedſtrawe. Yet there is anotherherbe hauing the ſame c 
name,called alſo Geliwm: it is doubtles Serpillum werterwm : of ſome Apothecaries named Pualegium 
montanum; notwithſtanding ir anſwererh not ſo well tothe wilde Times , as to Dioſcorides his 
Saxifranga : for if it be diligently compared with the deſcription of Time and Szxifanga,it ſhallbe 
found ro be lirtle like the wilde Times, bat very much like to Saf, beingnone of the kindes 
of the olde phifitions wilde Time, but Sax474ngs D ioſcoridic: for ſaith he, gs is anherbe 
like Time,growing on rocks where our common wilde Time is oftentimes foun | 
Aclianuws inhis ninth booke of his ſundrie hiſtories, ſeemeth to number wilde Time among the 
flowers. Dionyſaws Iunior faith he,comming into the citic Locris in Italie,poſſeſſed moſt of the hou- 
ſes of thecitie, and did ſtrewe them with roſes, wilde Time, andother fuch kindes of lowers. Yet 
Virgdinthe ſecond Eglog of his Bucolicks, doth moſt manifeſtly reſtifie, that wilde 1ime is an 
herbe,and not a ie plant,in theſe wordes, | | 


The#ylis & rapids feſt meſioribus efta 


SL. bas contundit olentes, 
Theſtylis,tocaſe men wearied with parching heate; 
Garlick,wild Time and holſome herbes prouides to cate, 


Our of which place it may be gathered thatcommon wilde Time is the true and right Seyp; : or 
wilde Time which the G hdr APY Marcellus an olde ancient author Rai Fragen | 


men,ſaith it is called Gi/arww,as Plinim Yaler ian faith itis called ofthe ſame Lawrio. 


*7 Ns, 1 | 
Wilde Time is of temperature hot and dric in the third degree: iris of thinne and ſubrill partes, 
cutting,and much biting, | | 


| * The vertues, | 
Itbringeth downe the deſired ſicknes, prouoketh vrine, appliedin bathes and fomenrations it A 
procueeth fivegce being boiled in wine, ithelperh the ague, it caſerth the ſtrangurie, it ſtaicth the 
p TO ly" __ os inahrbpte, þ clperh the Lyrhargie,frenſic,and madnes, and ſtai- 
Wilde Time boiled in wine and drunke,is good againſt the wambling and gripings of thebellic, B 
ruptures .conuulfions,and inflammations of the liuer, | | 
Ithelpethagainſt the bicings of any vengmous beaſt , either taken in drinke, orourwardly ap- C - 


plied, | 
AEtina 


— 


458 THE SECOND|BOOKE OF THE 
D cAEtimwiiteth, that Seypillm infuſed wellin vineger, andthen ſodden and mingled with roſe 
waters arightfingularremedie to cure themthat haue had along phrenic or lythargie, ; 
'E Galen preſcribeth one dramof the ivice tobe giuen in vineger againſt the vomiting of bloyd, 
and helperh ſuch as are greeucd with the ſpleene. =» = | 


— 


* | Of gardenTume. Chap.i65. 
mt 5x + The kindes. | 
e be two ſorts of garden Time among the old writers,the latter Herbariſts hauefound more, 


2 Thymum latifolium. | 
Greator w_ leafed Time, 


[Foo 22. 
% I,» 4 Py 
X34 1 


PA 
s 
\3% 
4 i» * A 
Pod a 
” bb RESTS 
WY 


NY 
—Y 
q 0 
LAOS 
”, IS I "K.2/- 
» _ ; we 5 
F/ v* a. 
i -, 
F= : 


i» 


4 
>» RIS 
= 
SF <S 
* Þy 


PU) 9). 
Vb- 


< - \. 
\ <<, fare 
\ Cn. 
IF 

P —_ 

« + 


F/ 
>. - at < % < 
«, - \S % 
"— . > \%.. 
- 
# 4 - 
”_ =_—= 
= 
—_ who we I. 
/» 
I% 


NN _—_ C1 


. 
Lo 
ad 
x 
«+ % , 
: 
" ts - 
> _ 
— 
iWyT< 
FAM. 
> 
-, 
: 
,\ 


| FE <1 *% Thedeſeription. Bs is | 
7 T! He firſt kinde of Time is ſo well knowen, that it needeth no deſcription, bicauſe there isnot 
any which are ignorant what Thymum durius is, | meane our common Garden Time. 


2 Theſecondekinde of Time with broadeleaues , hath many wooddie braunches riſing from 2 


threddic roote , beſet with leaues like Afyrtus, The flowers are ſetin rundels abour the. ſtalke like 


Horehounde. The whole plant is like the common Time intaſte and ſmell. 


3 Timeof Candie is in all reſpeQs like vntocommon Time, bur differeth in that , that this kinde 
hath certaine knoppietufts like vnto the ſmall eares of Pha/aris, and not much vnlike the ſpikes or 


knopsof Srevades,butmuch lefler,beſer with flender flowers of apurple colour. The whole plant is 
of a more pontick and gratious ſmell then any of the Times,and of another kinde of taſte,asit were | 
ſauoring like ſpice. The roote is brittle,and of a woodie ſubſtance. F3S: 
4 Doubtleſſe that kinde of Time whereon Epithymum doth e, (and is called for that 
cauſe Epithymon, and vicd inſhoppes,) is nothing elſe then Dodder that groweth yppon Time; | 
and isall one with ours, though AMarh;olws makes a controuerſie & difference therof; for Pematri- | 
- uellingouerthe hils in Narbone ncere the ſea, hathſeenenot onely the garden Time, bur the w_ 


HIST ORE. OF. attaohtsnt! 49 


Time likewiſe, lodenand garniſhed with this that by his fight and mine owne know. | 
ledge, Iam aſſured Nb rh that beareth Zpithymaws, bur is common 
Time : for I have often founde the ſame in Englande ; noconely vpon our Time bur pon Sauotie, 
and otherherbes alſo: : notwithſtanding, thus much I-maycomecture, thac rhe am of thoſe. 
countries doth yeelde the ſame foorthin greater abundance then outs. by reaſon of the | intempe- 
rance ofcolde, Rr", ON $17. 1-5 pros 


*The 
Theſe kindes of Timegroweplentifully in Endandes cuery where, Facepe thatwith broad leaues, 
and Time of Candie,whichI haue in | my garden, f 


* The time _ 
They flouriſh from Maic vnto | - 
W þ The names. | © | 
The firſt may becalled arde Time, or common VO Meckide brad otcafes Thhaee 


hed Tino aridi ourEngliſhwomencall] opirdas demorey geared 
Wee TEE 


# 


þ Thin - ſ ] _ | 1972 
RL. 6D nas <N Crodirdtlh 

_ "+ The®t 
a0 doywoi honie and drunken , isx 


WALES Oximell, 


a THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Oxunel!l,and a little ſalr, purgeth by ſtoole rough and clammie,flegme, ſharpe cholericke humours, 
and all corruption ot blood. F1 

D Thefſamerakenin like ſort,is goodag ainſt the Ihiaica , the paine in the fide and breſt, againſt 
the winde inthe {ide and bellic/, andis- s profcable alſo for ſuchas are fearcfull ,melancholie and 
troubled in mince... . | 

E lIrtis goodtobe ginenvnto thoſe that haue he falling fickneſſe toſmellynto, | | 

- Epiebymas, after Ga/en,is of more effeQualloperation in Phiſicke then Time,being bot & yin 
the third degree, more mightily clenſing, heating, drying, and opening thenCuſexta;hauin grigh: 
good cffe& to eradicatemelancholic,or any other humour in the 7 try other diſeaſe prongby 
occaſion of the ſpleene. 

G Irthelpeth the long continued paines of the head, and beſides his ſingular cffeQs abour ſplenei. 

call matters3ithelpeththelepry, or any diſcaſc of welancholie , or hypochondriaes ; z all Quartzine 
agues,andſuch like griefes proceeding from the ſpleene, 

H de ron 2 4 2 Hen ng with bonicd water pulleth downe byſicge flegme, called, P 
tucts, an 

1] ' Ofhisnative propertic irrelecueth them which be melancholike , or houen VP, ſwollen in the 
face and other parts, if you pound Epithymwnand rake the fine powder thereofin the quantitie of | 
fower ſcruples in the liquor whichthe Capadolarks call Paſſipn,or with Oximelland falr, which _ 
keel away all flatuous humours and —_} 


ſ 


; ' | | þ 


Y Sauorie. | - | Cipa 


*The kindes. 


T Herebe two kind of Sauorie, the one that endurethwinter& is of lon continuance: the 

other anannuallor yeerly plant,char periſherh at the time when it hathperfeQed his ſeede,and 
mult be ſowen againethe next yeere,which we call Sommer Sauorie,or Savorie of aycere. There 
is likewiſe another,which is a ſtranger in England, called of z; Obetim Thymbra S. Me erg it 
to be the right Sarureie, or Sauoricz whether that of 7: Obeline , or that we have in our Englih 
dens be the true Winter Sauorie,is yer diſpurable :for we thinke that of S.lulians rocke,ro aka 
a wilde kinde, than otherwiſe. - | 


we 


| * Thedqfrition 


1 lineal Sauorie is aplant reſembling Hyſlope hurl mer, ls ITO : 
| \ \ geth foorth very many branches, compaſled on euerie fide with narrowe and ſharpe 


pointed lcaucs, longer than thoſe of Tune 3 among which growe the floyers, from 
the bottom tothe rop,out of ſmall huskes, of £0. our white, tending to a ny __ Ae roote is 
hard and wooddic,as is the reſt of the plant. . | 
_— Sommer Sauorie growerh vp with a {lend brittle ſtalke afoote hi 
' ches: the leaues are narrow. lefſer than thoſe af Hyſope. ike the leaues 
ner ſet ypon the branches. The flowers ſtand. bardro the branches, of a light purple parton 
whitenes.The roote is {mall full of trings,a dperiſbeth when i it hath perfected his pap : 
3 Thisſmall kinde of Sauorie, which 704 {b; athſer foorth vnderthetitle Thymbra $ alia, bi 
eauſe. itgroweth-plentifully \pan;che rough cliffcs, of the Tyrrhenian ſeajn ales called Saint 
Iulansrocke, itharh render rwiggie branches an han full lhigh, of: a wooddie ſubſtanc $6 hl 
leauesfrom the bottom to the top, very ike = ruſt rogithex like yorg hgſe of Time, 

- they be ſmaller and narrower, bringing foonth arthe rop of the ſprigs. hae ſpikic ruft, 
purpliſh flowers. The whole _ whitiſh, 8 to.4, bleake colour, and ofa hot Shan 
2h well ſmelling. TL WY OO us LP 

; 'x Sat 


I Satareia hortenfis, 
Winter Sauorie, 


ROI Fn 
CODE oe 


| miSTORIE! OF' PLAN 


rrarere and vertues. © 
pres the third A ,it WA thirine, curteth;ir A 


0 W.; 
I + LS 7: 1 RG 


tv Theplace. 
They are ſowen in gardens, and being foorth 
their flowers the firſt yeere of their ſowing, 
% The time. | 
They flower in Iuly and Auguſt, 
*% The names, 
Sauorie is called in Greck 4-2, neither hath ir 
anyother true name in Latine than Thymbr,The 
interpreters wouldhaue it called Sazwreja, wherin 


they are repugnant to Columells 2 Litihe writer, 


who doth ſhew a manifeſt difference betweene 
Thymbra and Satuyeia, inhis teruh book where he 
writeth, that Sauorie hath the taſte of Time, and 
of Thymbra,or Winter Sauoric. , 
Et Satureia T. referens Thymbr 4 em, 
Sanoric js be who _ : 
So winter Sauorie from it is differenr. 


[0 Notwithſtanding the contradiction of Columells, 


or , out Winter Sauoric may be that 
, Thmnbracalled alſo Cenila: in high DucchKunel 
whichname, as it ſeemeth, is drawen in 


7 and fegwte: in OP s Sarrictte; in SEght 


» "T 4#3 | 


cleateth 


' 
: ; L - o 
3 . - v - CESS "ey - ay 14, < *. . 
L z Law p 
, 4 \ : * * 
4 N "0 Et * pe ad Ate 4 Habs p 
# £7*..4 4 2 
_ *z 
- 
= - 


as. th; at ht od 


| 


463 THE SECOND | BOOKE OF THE 
clenſeth the paſſages,co be briefe,it.is altogither of like vertue with Time, 


B Sommer Sauoric is not full ſo hot as Winter Sauotic, and therefore ſaith Diofeorides,more fitto | 
be vſcdin medicine : it maketh thin, and doth maruellouſly c againſt winde : therefore iris ; 
with good ſuccefle boiled and caten with beanes, peaſon,and other windie pulſes, yeaifir be appli, | 
edrothe belly in a fomentarion, it foorthwith helperh themother proceeding of winde, | 


Dodder. Chap.166. 


| * The deſcription. 
FA Yſeuts,or Dodder, is aſtrange herbe, al. 
(; togirher withour leaues or roote, like yn. | 
= ro threds verymuchſnatled or wr 
- rogither, confuſedly winding it ſelfe Rublars fa | 
and hedges, and ſundrie kindes of herbes, The | 
. threds are ſomewhat red: ypon which grow heere | 
and there little rounde heads or knops, bringing | 
| forth arrhe firſtſlender white lowers, afterevy 
a ſmall ſeed, | 
| | % The place. 
This hetbe groweth vpon ſundrie kindes of 
herbes,as vpon Time, Winter Sauoric, German. 
der, and ſuch like, taking his name from the herhe - 
| whercuponitdoth growe "Fu that ypon Time is 
| called Epithymwn , vpon Line or flaxe Epili 
 : and ſo W _ me Dodonewms ſetteth "anaraps 
large: yet ha gotten one among the reſt, 
: which _ very plenrifully in | drab | 
ſhire vpon nertles:neitheris it the leaſt among ma- 
- nie, cither in beautic or operation,but comparable 
- to the beſt Epirhymn : following therefore theex- | 
:  ampleof Dioſeorides,Thaue thought good tocallir 
| Epiurtica,and ſo of thereſt according tothe hetbe 
| | | whereon they do growe. | 
Wi -- CZ a LE * + brfur ans $9 
FEI Sao ge ' ateſt is called in where Caf- 
 LLZ _ ' I Saeed aranh boa flaxe or 
Lyne, Podagra Lini;the better learned doname itCaſſuths, or Caſſythe: and Gefnerms MroHagir: the 
Arabians Xeſſath, and Chaſuth : in Dutch Sthozfte, and U2zanghe ; in high Ducch Filkraut: in 
French Goute 4 Lin,and Tiene de Lin:in Englil | Dadder. | 
That lefler and {lenderer which wrappeth itſelfe ypon Time and Sauorie,is called of Dieſcorides 
er, the apothecaries keepe the name Epithymwrr: others, among whom is Auer iue,name that 
Epix which groweth vpon Time onely, and that which groweth on Sauoric Epithymbron, = 
andthar alſo which hangeth vpon Srebe,or Scabious, they terme Epiffeben,giuing a peculiar name 
to cuery kinde. | | |. : 2 
*% The nature. 
The nature of this herbe changeth and alcererh,, according to thenature and qualitie of the 
herbes wherupon it groweth: ſorharbyſcarching of the natureof the planr you may caſilic finde 
out the temperament of the laces growing vpon the fame. But more Poticne'y : its of rempera- | 
_ ture ſomewhatmore drie then hot , anche ſeconde degree : it alſoclenſeth with a cerraine 
aſtritive or binding qualitic, andeſpecially that which is founde growing vpon the bramble: for 
it alſo receiueth a certaine nature from his parents on which it growerh; for when groweth yp 
the hotter herbes,as Time and Sauoric,ir becommeth hotter and drier, and of thinner Pare : that 
which commeth of Brame prouoketh vrine more forcibly., and maketh the belliemore oluble :and 
that is moiſter which groweth vpon flaxe : that which is founde yon the bramble hath ioincd with 


© SW ——— 


HISTORIE.4OF PLANTS. ; —_ 
i 25 we have (aide, a binding qualitie, which/alſo by reaſon of this facultic ioynedby gocdright 
wi other infirmitics of the liuer and milt: for ſeeing rhar it hath botha purging and binding fa- 
cyſtic vnited toit, itis moſtſingular good for the entrals: for Ga/en in his 13. booke of the methode 


- 


of curing,doth ar large declare that fuch medicines are fitteſt of all for the liver andmilee, 


| * The Verines. ; SPS | | 
This kinde of Dodder remooueth the ſtoppings of the liuer and of the milrorſpleene, it disbur- A 

 deneththe veines of flegmarike, cholericke , corrupt and ſuperfluous humours: prouokerh vrine 
tly,and in a meane op—_ the kidneies, cureth the yellowe taundcile which are ioined with the 
Tk of the liuer and gall: it is a remedic againſt lingring agues,corrupt and long tettians,quar- 
tains alſo, and properly agues in infants and yoong children , as Meſes faith in Serapio: who alſo 
reacherh,cthar the nature of Dodder js to purge choler by the ſtoole, and thar nyore etfeftually if ic 
hane Wormewoode ioinedwith itz but too much vſing ofit,is hurrfullto the omacke: yer Avices 
writeth thatit doth nor hurt ir, bur {trengtheneth a weake or feeble ſtomackez which opinion alſo 


\ 


wedo berter allowe of. | | 
Epithymum, of the Dodder which groweth vpon Time, is hotter anddrier then the Dodder that B 
growerh vpon flaxc,chatis to ſaie, euen inthethirde degree, as Galen faith. Ithelperh all the infir- 
mities of the milte: it is a remedie againſt obſtruQions and hard wennie fwellings : it raketh awaic 
oldchead aches,the falling ſickneſſe, madnefle that commerh of melancholie, and eſpecially thar 
which proccedeth from theſpleene and parts thereabour : it is good far thoſethat have che French 
diſeaſe, and ſuch as be troubled with contagiots vicers,theleprof e,and the ſcabbiecuill, ED 
Ttpurgeth downwards blacke and melancholicke humours, as Atine, CATuariue,and Meſurs C 
write 3and alſo flegme as Dioſcoridesnoteth : that likewiſe purgeth by ſtoole which growerh vpon 
Sanorie and Scabious,but more weakely,as Atuariws ſaith. - 2 
Cuſeats,or Dodder thar groweth vpon flaxc;boiled in water or wineanddrunk,openeth the ſtop- 
pings ofthe liuer, the bladder, the gall,the milr,the kidncies and veines, and purgeth both by fiege 
and vrine cholericke humours. | gs Pas! | 
It is goodagainſt the ague which hath continued a long time,and againſt the iaundiſe, Imeane E 
that Dodder eſpecially that groweth vpon brambles. | | 


Epiurtica tr Dodder growing vponnertles, is a moſt ſingular and effeualmedicinero prouoke F. 


vrine,and tolooſe the obſtruftions of the body,and is prooued oftentimes inthe weſt parts to haue 
good ſuccelle againſt many maladies. | = Eongh: " 


of Hyſſepe. Chap.167. 


| *+ The kinder. | 
T Here be diuersſorres of Hyſſope, ſome greater, oxhers leſſer, ſome with white flowers, others 
of apurpliſh blewcolour,as ſhall be declaredin this preſent chapter. | 


, *The deſcription. Are | 
iT ao sthat gaue ſoman nilesfor theknewledge of fin es, Harh lefe Hyſſope altogj- 
x hkhonedefanipeionces bei a Tn 6 ey 1 9077 whoſe ex- 


amplcT follow not onely in this plant, bur in many others which be common, toauoide , 


Ky es tothe reader. | | | . | 
2 Theſecondkindeof Hyſſope is like the former, whichis our common Hyſlove, anddiffereth 
inthat,thaethis Hyſlope hath his ſinall andlender branches deckedwirh faire red flowers. -- | 
| | | Þ 1 Hyſſopn 


CE SEO 
as hs CEE 


- —— nes. arr 4s 
tals AMP we dlwÞwuw@w wm au@aErcrw<©cowcCYfXkZouAcK=nKwc,  . DOA ae s”” a W.% 4 db. LA 


As: Ie Sc 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


- 


Arabs. wa | 0s 2 Hyſſopme Arabure fore rubye, 
with blew flowers, $4 Hyſlopewith reddit flowers. 


4 


i 


” w* The 4eſeription. 


Hyſlope,and differerh in the flowers onely,which are as white as ſnowe. IP Þ 

4 Thiskindeof Hyſlope of all the reſtis of the greateſt beautie; it hath a wooddie roote, tough, 
and full of ſtrings; from which riſe vp ſmall, rough, andſlender flexible ſtalkes, whereupon dogrow 
infinite numbers of ſmall Fenell-like leaues,much reſembling thoſe of the ſinalleſt graſle;of a plea- 
ſant ſweet ſmell,and aromaticke taſte, like vnto thereſt of the Hyſlopes, but much ſiveerer : atthe 
top of the'ſtalkes dogrowe amongſt the leayes ſmall hollow flowers, of a blewith colour tending 
to purple. The ſeedes as yerI could neuer obſerue. - | it] | 


3 Thethirdkinde of Hyſſope hath leaues, ſtalkes, branches, ſecede, and roote, like the common 


We hauc in Englandin our gardens another kind,whoſe pifture it ſhall be needleſle ro expreſſe, 

conſidering thatin few words it may be delivered. Jris like vnto the former,but the leaues are ſome 

_ __ >: gy I greene,as the other;andfome greene and white,mixed and ſpotted,very good 
ro OICe, 3h | G 

L Of which kinde we haue inour 6 ores rote gt + fort, whoſe leaues are woonderfull 

curled,rough, and hairie, growing thicke thruſt rogither,makingas ir were a tutt of leaues;in 

and ſmell, and in all other things like vato thecommon Hyſſope. ao 


. 
a 


I haue likewiſein my garden another fort of Hyſlope, growing to the forme of a ſmall wooddie 
ſhrub,hauing very faire broadJcaucs like varo thoſe of 2} wawleris, or Money woort, bur thicket, 
fuller of iuice,and of 4darker greenecolour; in taſte and [mell like the conanon Hyſſope.” 7 


3 Hyſſpws 


'/HISTORIE \OF PLANTS. | 465 
Pool FyFopus albis floyi be; "I FR 
To White flowred Hyflope. | | 
; ©3510 
SF hoo Caicl'® 
WW {ly VO | | 
wo WE M . fr a6 R-4 | 4 
Gy CN p "EVAN ONS CE Sl f 
Go 
IF 
TY = | 
£4 en _ | 
TX - SIS | A # 
% The place, | 
All theſe kindes of Hyſſope do growe in my garden,and in ſome others alſo. 
BE % The time, 
They flower from June, tothe end of Auguſt. | 
% The names, | 


Hyſſopeis calledin Latine Hyſſopm: the which name is likewiſe retained among the Germans, 
Brabanders, French men,lItalians,and Spaniards. Therefore that ſhall ſuffice, which hath beene ſet 
downe in their ſeucrallcitles. | , 

* Thetemperature andwertues. &E 29 

Adeco@tion of Hyſſope made with figs,and pgargled in the mouth and throte,ripeneth and brea- A 
| kechtherumors and impoſtumes of the mouth and throte, and ealcth the difficultic of fvallowing, 
comming by cold rheumes. | : s | 

The ſame made with figs, water, honie, and rue, and drunken, helpeth the inflammation of the B 
lungs,the olde cough,and ſhorrnes of breath,and the obſtruftions or ſtoppings of the breaſt, | 

The ſirupe or iuice of Hyſſope taken with the ſirupe of vineger, purgeth by ſtoole rough and C 
clammie —_— and driueth foorth woormes, ifit be.caten with tigs. | | 


; The diſtilled water drunke,is good for thoſe diſcalcs before named,bur not with that ſpeedezand D 


'T 


+ #4 * 


Of Hedge Hype. " (hap.168. 


*% The aeſerirtion. oe aha 4 ae tht 

7 Edge HyſTope is a loweplant or herbe about a ſpan long, yerylike vnto the common 
1 byſlope, with many ſquare ſtalkes or{lender branches, betct with leaues fomwhat larger 

than Hyſſope,but very like, The flowers growe —vR4 the leaues vpon ſhort _— 4 

z | g I w tC 


466 THE SECOND BOOKE'OF' THE 
white colour declining to blewnes. Alltheherbe is of a moſt bitter taſte, like the ſmall Centori | 
The rooteis litleand threddie,dilating it ſelfe far abroad; by which meanes it mylripliech greatly 
and occupieth much ground where it groweth, | | | F | 
2 Broadlkafed Hedge Hyſſope hath many ſmall and render branches, fower ſquare,and ſormwhar 
hollow or furrowed, beſet with leaues by couples one oppoſite againſt another, like vnco the fox. 
mer, but ſomewhat ſhorter and much broader: among which grow the flowers of a purple colom . 
ſpotted on the inſide with white, and of a brighter purple than the reſt of the flower, faſhioned like 

the (malleſt AHntirrbinam, or leaſt Snapdragon ; which bong part there ſucceed little ſeed veſſels, 
faſhioned like thenutof a croſſebowe , which conteine ſmall yellowiſh ſecde, extreme birter of 
raſte, The wholeplantis likewiſe birter,as the common or well knowen Grattola, The roote is com. 
pact of a great  ofwhitiſh ſtrings,intangled one within another, which mightily increaſech 
and ſpreadeth abpbad, | | Ia | | 


\) 
WY Au 
d; Fo fb F\ 


= 
WADA VN Ay 
_ / Js ; p) 


v 
” 


4 


| ol _ * Thepiuee. 
The firſt groweth inlowe and moiſt places naturally, which I haue planted in my garden. The 

ſecondgrowerh likewiſe in moiſt places. I found it growing vpon the bog or marriſh groundat the | 
further end of Hampſteed heath, and vponthe ſame heath towards London, necre vnto the | 
of the ſprings that were digged for water to be conueied ro London 1590. atrempted by that care 
tull citizen ja John Hart Knight, Lord Maiorof the Citic of London: ar which time my elfe wa$0 
his Lord(hips company,and viewing for my pleaſurethe ſame goodly ſprings,l found the {aid plan 
not heretofore remembred. vc } +» | 


| The ficſt lowreth in May, the ſecond in Auguſt, 


+Th 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 457 
4/0 'The names. 

Hedge Hyſiope is called in Latine Gratzola, and Gratia Det.,or hd Grace of God; WOES 
ding there 15 inde of Geranium, or Storkes bill, called by the {amename. Of Cords Limme ſam, 
and Centawris of Anguiliara and Dieſcorraes , and allo Papaner ſpurt , or Spating Poppic : bur 
chereis another herbe comprehended vnderiheſamename, winch we call Behena/bam + in Ditch 
itiscalled Godts gratie ; in Iralian Szaxcz cxymabo, bicaule that horſes when they have caren ther. 
of dawaxe leancand languith thereupon : and in Engliſh Gratia Dei, and Hedge Hyſlope. The 
{cede hereotis called Gibenerh which name the Arabians do tercine vnto this day. 

% The temperatur Ce 

Hedge Hiſſope is hotand drie of temperature. 

* The Vertues. 

Who fo taketh but one ſcruple of Gyatzolabruited , ſhall perceiue Loidendy his effeQtuall "8.5 A 
tion & vertue, in purging mightily, and that in great Sundance: watriſh, grofle, & {limic humors. 
 Conradue Genres experimenced this,-and _—_ it ro be true, and fo haue my ſeltc andnany 
others. 

Gratiola boiled, and the decotiondrunke or eaten with any kinde of meate, in manner of a fal-B 
lade,openerh the belly,and cauſeth notable looſencs,and ro {cowre irpely,and by that meanes Pur- 
geth grofle flegmes, andcholerike humors. | 

Gratiola, or Hedge Ryflope boiled in wine and giuento drinke , } helperh fevers of what ſorr # 
ſoeuer, and is moſt excellent i in dropfics, and ſuch like dilcaſes proceeding of colde and watctic 
cauſes, 

Theextraction giuen with the powder of chramom and alittle of thei iuice of Calamint, preai D 
leth againſt certian and quotidian feuers, ſet downe tor moſt certaine by the learned Doachimm Ce- 
WET AT F006 | 


Of Lander ſte. Chip 16g. 


2 Lanendule flore albs. 
YE app" Nadler ſpike, | 


= = Y q 
— ' 7 
; IW | 
£1 Ky N14 
W ' 
— RW Ee) 


k 


/ 


A 


— 


 ſicknes,&thar vie 


468 | THE SECOND BOOKE OF: THE 
| | *% T. he deſeription. | | 
I Auander ſpike hath many ſtiffe branches of a wooddie ſubſtance, growing vp in mannergf 
aſhrub,ſet with many long hoaric leaues, by couples for the molt part;of aſtrong linell,yer | 
pleaſant ynough to tuch as louc ſtrong ſakors. The flowers growe ar the top of-the bran. 

ches {pike {aſhion,of a blew colour. The roote 1s hard and wooddic. | 
2 Thceiccond differeth nor from the precedent, bur inthe colour of the flowers : for this plan 


bringeth milke white flowers;and the other blew gwherein eſpecially conſiſterh the difference: | 


3 Lauandula hortenſis minima. i $4 | 

| The Smalleſt Lauander. : * Thede ſcription, 

#155 & ts # : 3 Wetaucinour Englith gardens a fmal kinge 
G $ | : of Lauander, which is alcogither leſſer thanany | 
of the other of his kinde, wherein confiſteththe 
difference, + Theplace. | 
| InSpaine,and Languedocke in France,moſtof 
: the mountaines and deſert ficldes, ate as it were | 
couered ouer with Lavander. In theſetoldcoun. 

tries they are planted in garcens, | 
* Thetime. | 

They flower and flourith in Iune and Iuly, 

*% The names. | 
WP, + — Lavander ſpike is called in Latine ZLianduls, | 
6/74 and Sprce : in Spaniſh Spigo, and Languda. The 
” - firſtisrhe male, andthe ſeconde the female, Iris © 
thought of ſome to be that ſweete herbe Cafe, 

. Whercof Y;rg# maketh mention in the ſeconde 
- Eclogof his Bucolicks, ba. | 
Tum Caſia atque alys intexens ſuauibu herbis, 
Moll lutepla pingit wacinia Calths. [ 


The maide faire hir gar!3d decks with flowers gay 
Thar yeeld a fragrantſmelas freth as ſomer may; 
Mlinging ſweete Lauander and yellow Marigold 
Wh purple violer,moſt pleaſant ro behold, | 


And likewiſe inthe fourth ofhis Georgicks where 
he intreateth of chooſing of ſeates and places for | 
; | Bees,and for the ordering thereof, | | 
Hee circum Caſie virides e olentia late ” Wo 
Serpilla,c grauter ſprrantu copia Thy. br, 
Abour the ſeates of Bees tnany brauc herbes are planted 
That with pleaſant aires fil! the places of them haunted, 
As Lavander,wilde Time and Thymber,moſt ſwceteinſenr 

Breathing foorth ſtrong ſmels,rheir apperires oft toconrent, | bg... 
Yertherc is another Ceſiz, called in ſhops Cimmonum, and Canclls, as alſo Caſia nigra, which is 
named Caſia fiffuls ; & another a ſmall ſhrubbie plant extant among the ſhrubs or hedge buſhes cal- | 
lcd Caſts poctiea.” 1 | «3 7 hetemperatare. 974 F 2 of 
Lauander is hot and dric, andthatin the third degree, andis of a thin ſubſtance, conſiſting of 
many airieand ſpiritual partes. Therefore it is good ro be giuen any way againſtthe diſcaſcsot the 
head, and eſpecially thoſe which hauc their oxiginallor beginning not of abundance of humors, 
but chicfty of a qualitre onely. * Thewvertues. ' © RES bag 
Th- diſtilled water of Lauander ſinelr vnto, or the temples and forchead bathed therewith, 152 
refreſhing to hay thar haue the Caralepſic , a light Migratn, and to them that haue the ws | 
roſwoune much. Burt when there is abundance of humors;xefpecially mixed with 
bloodjitisnot then tobe viedfafely,neirher isthe compotitianto be taken, which is made ot diſtil- | 
led wine * in which (ach kinde-of herbes; flowers, or feedes , and certaine ſpices arc m__ - | 


! 


- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 469 
ficeped, rhough moſt men do raſbly and at aQuenture giue them without making any difference 
atall, For by viing ſuch horthings thar fill and ſtuffe thehead, both the diſeaſe is made greater,and 
the ficke man alſo broughrinto danger, eſpecially when lerting of blood, or purging have nor gone 
before, This much by way of admonirion,|bicauſe every where divers raſh and onerbold' Ap 
thecaries, andorher fooliſh women, do by and by giue ſuch compoſitions, andothers of the like 

| linde,notonelyto thoſe that have the Apoplexic ; but alſo to thoſe that cannorfleepe, &hanue alſo 
an aguez towhom they can giuenothing worſe, ſecing thoſe things do'very muctherr, and ofteh- 
crimes bring dearh ir ſelfe. | y 


”- 


The flowers of Lauander picked from the khaps }l meane the blew part, and notthe biithe phindd P 


with Cinamom,nutmegs, and cloues,made into powder, and giuen todrinke in the diſtilled water 
thereof, doth helpethe panting and paſſion of the hart, prevaileth againſt giddineſle , ruming, vr 
ſwimming of the braine.and members ſubie& tothe palſic. | | 


Conſerue made of the flowers with ſugar, proficeth much againſt the diſcaſes aforeſaid, if the C 


antitic of a beane be taken thereof in the motning faſting, 


Ic profireth them much that haue the palſie, if rhey be waſhed with the diſtilled water of the D 


flowers , orannointed with the ojle made of the lowers and oile oliue , inſuch'manneras oile df 


roſes is, which ſball be expreſſed in the treatiſe of Roſes, E 
Of French Lauander,or $ tickadoue. Chap.170. 


i Stachas fine ſpica hortulana, | \s Sterchas multifide. 


Sticadoue and Sticados. lagged Sticados, 


G 


k 

w4S, 
ag 95 
gar 


4" 4M 
W 13> 
W 


* - jf #* , af _ 
7 - 
- # 7 - 
we,” - Wo.» -* - 
= . — : 
No . k . 
* # "4 f 7 as Y 
Py Cos -& - a = 
. "> = - E ward 
4s» et —_ 
gift . x a 
, gn__ . Hf uf 
FAS» >, * — 
? 
[ =V 
*.. 
"» i = 
- - " 
6 _ 
i/»%;. — _ 
- - 6. 


ks. 
Ll 
4 ' 
” < - wer + 7 
== 
: 
&” 


% 


* The deſeription. 


itiſh colour.Jeſſer then thoſe 'of Lauander; it hath in 
& or thruſt rogither;out of the which grow foorch 


d E each Lauander hath a body like Lauander,ſhort,and of a woodie ſubſtance, but lenderet,- 


ofa pleaſancfiell The ſeede is ſmall and Blackiſh:thetoore is harde aod 
B+ 3 3 This 


- s | Av - 


: 
x 
x 


mg 


475 - THE SECOND BOOKE-OF THE 
2 Thisiagged Sticadoue hath many ſmall ſtife ſfalkes of a woody ſubſtance ; whereupon do grow 
jagged leaucs in ſhape like vnto the leaues of Dill, butofan hoarie colour : on the top of the oy | 
do growe {pike flowers ofa blewiſh colour; andlike vnto the common Lauander ſpike. The roore | 
is likewiſe woodic, | , p | 


3 Stechas folio ſerrate. - 
Toorhed Sticadoue, | % The deſcription. | | 
| 3 Thereisalſoa cerraine kinde heereof, diff... 
ring in ſmalneſle of the leaues onely, which ae | 
- roundeabout the edges nicked or toothed like 4 | 
ſawe,reſembling thoſe of Lauander cotton, The | 
roote is likewiſe woodie. 5 Bed | 
* The place. | | 
Theſe herbs do grow wilde in Spaine, inLan. 
guedockin Fraunce , andthe Ilandscalled Ste. | 
; Chades ouer againſt Maſlilia: we haue them in 
'. - our gardens, and kept with great diligence, 
| * fromtheiniuricofourcoldeclymate. | 
*% The time. | 
. They are ſowen of ſeedein the end of Aprill, 
' andcoueredin the winter from the colde, orelſe | 
ſet in pots or tubs with carth , and caried into 
houſes. + The nones. | | 
The aporhecaries do cal the flower Stecader: | 
' Dieſcorides<as:Galen 1a;,by the diphthonguin 
 _ thefirſtfillable: in Latin Srechas: in high Dich | 
| Stichas krauts in Spaniſh Tomar:, and Car- 
#*eo : in Engliſh French Lauander , Steckado, | 
_ Stickadoue,Caſſidonie, and ſome ſimple people 


. uwitating the ſame name doe call it, Caſt me | 
downe, | 


* The temperature. | 
+ | French Lauander ſaith Gelenis of temper: 

- ture compoundedof alittle colde carthie ſubſtapnce, by reaſon whereof it bindeth: it is of forceto 
take away obſtruCtions, to exterwate or make thinne, to ſcoureandclenſe, and to ſtrengyhen not 
onely all the entrailes,but the whole bodiealfo. 

| | *% Thevertnes. & 5530 ” 

A Wy ny teacherh that the decoQion thereot doth helpe the diſcaſes of the cheſt, andis with | 

good {ucceſle mixed with counterpoiſons, © | | 

B The laterphiſitions affirme, that Srechs, and eſpecially the flowers of it, are moſt effectuall | 
againſt paines of the head, and all diſeaſes thereof proceeding of colde cauſes, and therefore they 
be mixed in all compoſitions almoſt which are made a headach of long continuance, the 

apoplexic, the _ ficknefle,and ſuch likediſeaſes. = 

C Thedecotion of the huskes and flowers drunke, openeth the ſtoppings of the liver, the lungs, | 

_ themilt, the mother, thebladder, and in one wordeall other inwarde parts, clenſing and driung | 
foorth all cuilland corrupt humours,and procureth vrine, 


lt. 


Of Fleawoort, (hap. 


et. | 4.1... 1, & The deſcription... :..;. | TIT 8 -\, 
1 TY Shwr,or - common Fleawooxt, hath many round and render branches, ſerfull of long 

| P33: narrow eaues ſomewhat hairje The top of the ſtalkes aregarniſhed with ſundrie rovnd = 

_. chaffic knops, beſet with ſmall yellay flawers3whichbeing ripe, "containg.many lictkeſbs | 

ning ſcedes,in proportion,colour,and bignes Iike vnzo fleas, a ade af” OR 


2 Tis 
. .. : 


1 
{1 
: 


' 
: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. Ion 
> Theſecond kinde of Pſ51:umr, or Fleawoort, hath long and toygh branches, of a wooddie ſub- 
{tance like the precedent, bur longer & hatder,with leaves reſembling the former, bur much longer 
& narrower. The chafhie tutr which conraineth' the ſeed is like the other,bur more like the care of 
Pphalarts, which is the carc of Alpiſti,the Canaxie ſeede which is meate for birdes, that comefrom 
the lands of Canaric, The roote hercof laſteth all the winter , and likewite keepeth his gtecne 
leaues,hereof it tooke his name. | 12. | 


1 Pſyllizon ſiue pulicaris herb:. : | | 2 Pylinum ſemper virens LObels. 


Fleawoort, | Neuer dying Fleawoorr, 
. p 4 , W | 


: - x'» j 
L \ JC o 
% V #; 4 * [4 4 
' . _ T h uy 
-<aff, [ c 4 f © f f f $ 
g 4 : ". fo 
\ / ” SSR . / Ty . FP ; 
» GO FN > ; LS 


5 . * The place. | Wn E 
Theſe plants are not growing in our ficldes of England, as they do in France and Spaine, yet 
haue them growing in my garden. | [SE | = 
% Thetime. 
They flowerin Iune and Iuly, EE | 
% The names. | | 1 
| Fleawoortiscalled in Greeke {aver: in Latiye Pulicaria, and Herba Pulicaris :in ſhops P/ylhum : 
m Engliſh Fleawoort, not bicauſc it killeth fleas, bur bicauſe the ſeeds are like fleas : and of ſome 
aw bur vnproperly, in Spaniſh Zargatona: in French Lherbe aws pulces; in Dutch Duyls | 

ye-crupt. | Hee | 

© u% The temperature. 


Galen and Serapiorecord,that the ſeede of p/lliwn, which is chiefly vſed in medicine, is capjo in 
the ſecond hae temperate in moiſture fer drineſle. ? { | 
| *% The vertues. | EI 

The ſeede of Fleawoort boiled in water, or infuſed, and the decoRtion or infuſion drunke , pur- A 

oo downwardes aduſt and cholericke humors, cooleth the heate of che inward partes,hot feuers, 
ing agues and ſuch like diſeaſes proceeding of heate,and quencheth drought and thirſt, 

Theſeede ſtamped, and boiled in waterta the forme of a plaiſter, and ___ raketh away all B 

lwellings of the ioints,cſpecially if you boile the ſame with vineger and oile roſes, andapplieit as 


reſaid, 
Gg 4 The 


wt 


472 THE SECOND] BOOKE OF THE 
© Theſame applied in maner aforc{uid,vntoany veyping one, called S.Anthovies frc,or ain 

and violent flaming impoſtum&afſivageth the fame and bringerh it to ripenes. 
1) Somcholdthar the herbe ſtrowed im the chamber where many fleas bewill driuethem away; for 

which cauſe it rooke the name Fleawoort : but Ithinke it is rather bicauſe the feede doth relenible. 


' not 


a flea ſo much, that it is. hard to diſcerne the one fromthe other, = | 
[-4 3 The danger. | 
Too much Fleawoort ſeede taken inwardly is very hurtful ro mans nature; fo thatI wiſh vounoe®®., 
ro follow the minde of Galen and Droſcorides in this point, being a medicine rather bringinga ma. 


ladic,than taking away the griefe : remembring the olde prouerbe, Aman may buie gold too deere: 


x 


and the honic is too deere that 15 lickt from thornes. 
Of Clone Gilloflowers. (hap 172. 


jo” | * Thekinades. | 
| Here are at this day 'vnder the name of Caryophylins, comprehended diuers and ſungrie 
| ſorts of plants, of ſuch variable colours, and alſo feucrall ſhapes, thar a great and large 
volume would not ſuffice to write of cueryone ar large in particular; confideringhow 
| # infigite they are , and how cuery yeere, euery climate and countric bringeth foorthney 
ſortes, ſuch as haue not beene heretofore written of ; ſome whercofare called Carnations, others 
| CloueGilloflowers,ſome Sops in wine, fome Pagiants or Pagioncolour, Horſefleſh,blunker, pur. 
ple, white, double and ſingle Gilloflowers, as alſo a Gilloflower with yellow flowers. The whicha 
worſhipfull marchant of London Maſter Njcholzs Lete,procured from Poland, and gaue metherof 
for my garden, which before that time was never ſcene nor heardof in theſe countries, Likewiſe 
there be ſundrie Þrts of Pinks,comprehended vndet the ſame title,which ſhall be deſcribedin aſe- 
verall chapter, There be vnder the name of Gilloflawers alfo thoſe flowers, which we do call Sweer 
Iohns;and Sweere Williams. And fuſt of the great Carnation and Cloue Gilloflower, 


' 2 Caryophyllusmaximu multiplex. © 2 Caryophylumultiplex. 
- The great double Carnation, LI--2Þ-:4 The le Clous Gilloflower, 


[ 4 "ae - 
D _ - 


Sl A. 
Mo es Z A D  — 
* The 


1. A art" x 


 HISTORIE, OF PLANTS. 473 

*% The deſcription. | | | 
He great Carnaton Gilloflower hath a thicke wooddie roote, from which riſeth vp many 
ſtrong ioinred ſtalks, ſet with long greene leaues by couples: onthe top of the ſtalkesdo 
growe very faire flowers of an excellent ſiveere fmell, and pleaſant Carnation colour, 


whereof 1tooke his name. . 


. | | | 
. > TheCloueGilloflowerdifferethnor fromthe Carnation,but in oma as well of the flowers 


a5 leaues. The flower is werveri well knowen, as alſo the Pinks and other Gilloflowers,wherfore 
a ({tand long vpon the deſcription, | | 
will got S'P / Ng The place, | | | 
Theſe Gilloflowers, eſpecially the Carnations,are kept in pors fromthe extremitie of our colde 
winters, The Cloue Gilloflower endureth better the cold,and therefore is planted in gardens, | 
1 % | The time. | | 
They flouriſh and flower moſt part of the former. | 
| % T he names. | | | 
The Cloue Gilloflower is called of the later Herbariſts Cer yophyilews fles, of the ſmell of Cloues, 
wherewith it is poſſeſled : in Iralian Garofo/s: in Spaniſh Clawe/: in French Oelletz: in low Dutch 
$inoffelbloemen: in Latine of moſt Occ/ius D amaſeenus, Ocellus Barbarieas, and Barbariea : in 
Engliſh Carnations,and Cloue Gilloflowers.Offome it is called Yetonicaand Herba Twnica, The 
which Bernardus Gor donius hath ſer downe for Dioſcorides his Polemonie. | 
That woorthic Herbariſt and learned phyſition of late memorie,Maſter Door Turner, makerth 
Car yophyliews to be Cantabrica, which Plinte in his 23.booke 8.chapter, writeth to haue been found 
out in Spaine about Auga##zs time,and that by thoſe of Biſcay, | 


- 


Johqpmes Ruclizus thought, that the Gilloflower was vnknowen to the olde writers, whoſe dee 


ment is very good, eſpecially bicauſe this lower is nor like to that of Yetonica, orCantabrica. tis 
maruell, ſaith he,that ſuch a famous flower, ſq pleaſant and ſweete, ſhould he hid, and not be made 
knowen by the olde writers, which may be thoughtnort inferior tothe Roſe in beautie, ſmell and 
varietic. | | 
* The temperature. ; £ | 
The Gilloflower, withthe leaues and rootes for the moſt part are temperare in heat and drineſſe. 
* The vertnes. ; | =] 
The Conferue made of the flowers of the Cloue Gilloflower and ſugar,is exceeding cordiall,and A 
woonderfully aboue meaſure doth comfort the hart,being caren nowand then, | 
Ir preuaileth againſt hot peſtilenriall feuers, expelleththe poiſon and furie of the diſeaſe, and B 
greatly comforteth the ſicke,as hath of late been found our by a learned gentlemanof Lee in 
called Maſter Rich, _ | | | 


» 


3 


Of Pinks,or wilde Gilloflowers. Chap.173z, © 
"op | + The deſcription. | 
I He double purple Pinke hath many.graſſic leaues, ſer ypon ſmall iointed ſtalks by couples, 
one oppoſite againſt another; whereupon do growe pleaſant double purple flowers, of a 
Hoe moſt fragrant ſineli, not inferiour to the Cloue Gilloflower. The roote is ſmall and 
wW IC, ; |  £-* B- | p 
2 Thefinglered Pinke hath likewiſe many ſmall graflie leaues,lefſer then the former, The flowers * | 
groweat the top ofthe ſmall ſtalkes ſingle,and of a ſiveete brightred colour, | 
3 Thewhite tagged Pinke hath a tough woodie roote : from which riſe immediately many gra(- 
lie leaues, ſet vpon aſmwall ſtalke full of ioints or knees, at enery ioint two , one againſt another, 
even tothe top; whereupon do growe faire double purple flowers of a fweere andfpicie ſmell, con- 
liſting of fiue leaues, ſometimes more, cut or deepely iaggedon the edges, reſembling afeather ; 
whereupon T gaue it the name Plwnariws,or feathered Pinke. The ſeede is ſoft, blackiſh, and like vn- 
roOnion ſecede, _ Po | | 
4 This purple coloured Pinke is very like theprecedent, in ſtalkes,rootes, and leaues. The flowers 
groweatrhe top of the braunches leſſer then the laſt deſcribed, and not ſodeepely iagged ; ofa pur- 
Plecolour tending toblewnefle,wherein conſiſteth the differerice,' 0 _ | | 
1 Caryophyliu 


+14 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
I Caryophyllus fylnefyis multiple x. | ' 2 Caryophyllus fyluetris (ample ſuane rubens 
rms] 215k Va | Sioplered wh 0s ris ſonple x oſuane rubeng, 


DR 194,9 
> MW 


. 
"ly 


v4 
_ 
&\ 


3 Caryophyles plumar 1s aibus. | | | 4 Caryophylln- paOMaY fs Pur par £26. 
White iagged Pinkes. BY 0 Parpleingced Pinkes, 


—=— 7 


| 5 Thiswilde iggedPink hath leaves, ſtalks. an 


HISTORIE OF- PLANTS. 7 475 
There be divers forts of Pinkes more,whereof to write particularly wereto ſmall purpoſe, conſt- 


dering they areall 
for thoſe that ve 
wilder forts in this fa 


i 


* The deſcription. | G 
if flowers like vnto the white iagged Pinke of the 

garden, but alrogither leſſer, wherein they eſpecially differ. [7 l | 
6 Thepurple mountaine or wilde Pinke hath many ſmall graffic leaues;among which riſe vp ſlen- 
derſtalkes, ſer with the like leaves, but er: on the top whereof do groweſmall purple flowers, 

much leſſer then any of the others before deſcribed, 4 #1 
7 | Themountaine Pinke of Clu/awsdeſcriprion,hathmany leanes growing ina tuft like to thoſe 


of Thrift,and of a bitter taſte : among which'riſcvp ſmall render foote ſtalkes,rather then ſtalkes or _ 


ſtems themlclues, of the hcightof two inches ; whereupon do growe ſuch leaues as thoſe that 


were next the one, buc leſſer, ſerby couples one oppoſite to another :at the top of each ſmall | 


footeſtalke doth ſtande. one red flower without mel}, conſiſting of five lirtle leaues, ſet in a rough 
hairie hucke,or hoſe, five cornered, of a grechiſtcolour tending to purple. The roote is tough and 
ROY abroade many ſhootes whereby it greatly increaleth.. 7 PS 

8 Thisleafcles Pinke,as the Greeke worde(doth {ecrre to import; hath many ſmall ruſhic or bentie 
leaues, riſing mmediate'y from a\tough ruſby roote 3 among-which rite vp ſtalkes like wnto 
ruthey ot a ſpan high,vithout any iointat all, byr ſmooth and plaine: on the top whereof growerh 
aſmallflower ofa lewiſh or skie colour, conſiſting of fower little-Jeanes ſomewhat lagged inthe 
edges,not vnlike thoſe of wilde flaxe. The = !c plantis very bitterandof a hor caſte, "'® | 
WA I | | | | 7 Caryophyling 


- 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


7 Compliment Cl, | | | 8 Connhillucoreemſur Apbyliatis 
6 cameron | | -- tne hier, Polenthes 


9 Ceryophy 
Wh 


> | | $9 The whice Mountaine Pinke hath a great, 

F [ 5 |  thicke,and wooddieroote, from the which imme. 
*v | | diatelyriſe yp verymany ſmall and narrow leaugs, | 

NY. = fines &:leflerchan grail. nor ittheto the fra 

9 4 ; - ruſh: among which riſe vp little render ſtalkes, 
' lointed or kneed by certaine diſtances, ſet with | 


| | the like leaues, euen tothe top by couples, one | 
: oppolite againſt another : © Gp wtaereſlls = 
- growepretic ſweete ſmelling flowers, —_— 
| _ raj whitc leaues. Thelcedeis and 
' blackiſh, 


'  Thereis a Wilde creeping Pinke,which gron- 
. eth in our palbires wang x Vie London, and 

| _ otherplaces, buteſpecially in the grear fieldnext | 

| © to Detford; bythepath ſideas you go fromRed- 

© rifferoGreenewich, which hath many ſmallten- | 

| der'leaues, ſhorter than any of the other wilde | 

| Pinkes fer vpon little render ſtalks, which lie fat | 

| | vpontheground,taking holde of the fame inſun- | 
| | drieplaces, whereby it greatly encreaſeth; whet- 
| | vpondothgrowe little reddiſh lowers. The r00te | 
| ' is fmall,cough and long laſting. [| 


|| 126/ This Virginlke Pinke 3 like yoo the rf 


5 EE EC | ! ofthegarden Pinkes in ſtalkesJeaues,and rootes. 
The {ayers areoof a bluſh colour, whereof it tooke his name, which ſhewerh the difference from: 


the o . | 
Fuſe x0 Capephyls 


10 Caryophyllus Vir gine as. 


PW 


<< 
[Na 
< 

1 


\ 
4 


SS PMA Ch AP 
WA <IIH 
tf 4 Yap , 


- ” 
, 
- 
- 
+ " 
# » " 2M. | \} 2 
},t - 
*r al WISH 4 £ 
: Py —_ 
* 
: P J 
* © 


p 


HIST ORTIE 


QF -PLANTS. 


11 This wilde Sea ike hath divers Cnall 


(Rn DD INE LS ed. a ee eg 


$ 
] 
| 
| 
| 
. 
| 
£ 
£ 
' 
: 
; 
? 


ah + 


—_ 
tender weake braunc | 
ground whereupe 

our ſmalleſt ardef 


colour, ren | 


hes, trailing vppon rhe 

are Haley likechofe * 

inke, but of anolde hoaty 
to whitenefle; as are molt of 

the Sca plants. The flowers ear therop 

of the ſtalks in ſhapelike thoſe of Stirchwoort, 

and of a reddiſh colour. The ſeedes, neither 

the ſcede veſſels, I have not as yer oblerued, 

Theroote is 1 and ſingle; | 

12 Thereis another of theſe Vilde Pinkes, 

whichis found growing in plowed fieldes ; yer 

in ſuch as'are neere vntothe ſea : it hath ve 

many leaues fpred vpon the de, of an 

ouerworn hoary colour, like thoſe of the Can 

ue 027 $3. ich riſe yptender ſtalkes oh 

y 


cighrof rwo foote, ſet with the like leaues | 


couples at certaine diſtances. The flowers 


growe at the top many togither, in maner of 
the Sweete William, of a red colour tending 
ro purple. The roote is ſmall, rough, and long 


| 


478 THE, SE.CON D-\ BOOKE OF;THE 


% Theplite. 
Theſe kindes of Pinkes do growe for tkemolt part in 


porcens 5 andlikewiſe many other lortes, | | 
which were ouctiong rg write of particularly. Thoſe that be wildedograw ypou Meuntamnesſhoni F 
rockes,andceſart p!aces. Therell are ſp xccifiedin their deſcriptions. | | 


* The tome. 
They flower with the Cloue Gilloflower.and often after, 


.* T7, be names... . 
ThePinke is called of planes and Twrner,Cantibrica,and tie: of Fachſius and D Pe. 
tonic alter a, andVetonics altilis : of L'Obelius and Fuchfiue, Su 


be : in French Gyrofflees, Ocilere, 
and YVrofettes herbues: ___ ſings and Garont : in Spaniſh Claws: in Engliſh 98-3 uv 4h Smal 
Honelkies. -£4..4 ; 


* Thetemperature. 
The tCMPErature ofihe Pinkes i is referred vnto the Cloue Gilloflowers, 


* The vertwes. 
A Theſcarenor ledin phiſicke , buteſtcemed for their vie in garlands andno 


ſegaies. Theyare | 
good to be purinto vineger,to giue it a pleaſant raſte,and Re _ ndnoſpics. Th us 
taith,that the zootes are commended againſt the infection of the 


prague gue; and thatthe iuice therof | 
is profitable to waſte away the ſtone, and to drive i it foorth: and likewiſe to cure them that haue 
the falling {ickneſle. . | 


Of, Sweete lobns,and Fo weete IWilliams . Chap. b L. 
1 _Armeria atbe. | 2 Armeriarubrs. 
White lohns. hed | 


< Wen lchantattirouptiomncefe Nee at Ne Gllohoncia(whicndtt this ink) 
halfe a cubire high : whereupon do, growe long leaues broader than thaſe of the Gills- 
foneral a Ree Gs wer gyery like vac 
Pirlids, of a perfect "IN colour... 


# 


+> 
. Aa 
- 
- 
: . 
*. 
bf , 
Y to 
w 8 
« — 
of ; 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS:'? 439 
, Theſccond diffcreth nor from the other, butin thar, thatthis plant hath redde flowers, and the 
TN hel our London gardens akinde hereof, bearing moſtfineand pleaſant white flowers, 
ſporred very confuſedly with reddiſh ſpots, which ſerreth foorth the beautie thereof, and hath 
beene taken of ſome to berthe plane calledof the later writers Superba Auſtriaca, or the price of 


anftrich. | | q 
We have likewiſe one of the ſame kinde bringing foorth moſt double flowers,and yer verywhire 
3 CArmeria rubralatifolis. 


' Broadleafed Sweere Williams, 


"= % The deſcription, | | 
3 Thegreat Sweete William hath round ord ſtalkes, thicke and fat, ſomiwhar reddiſh about 
the Joweriointes,acubite high,long,broad,and ribbed leaues as thoſe of the Planraine, of a greene 
grafſic colour, The flowers at the top of the ſtalkes are very like to the ſmall Pinkes, many ioined 
togither in onetuft or , cm vmbell,of a deepe red Att; Feta is thickeand wooddie. - - 
A bo ___ Fant "_ AO groweth yp to the height of Þ 6 cubires, well reſem- 
ng tne tormerbur leffer,and the leaues narrower. The flowers are ofa bright red c herei 
elpeciallyconſiſterh the difference. 1 vins uy | | a 
* The place. | 2 bilaf| : 
het arc kept and maintained in gardens, more for to pleaſe theeie, than eicher thenolgdl” 
. Fo * T | time. | | J | 
They flouriſh and bring foorth their flowers in Aprill and May, ſomewhat before 
mm after beare their | 42rR the whole yt - _ 
Haes. 


The fect Iohn,8& alſo the ſect William both comprehended vnder one title, that is roaie 

. . i | - | jo 
OENG ſome Superba , and C er yophyllue (ylneFris : of ſome Herbariſts Yettonica pony ri" 
fri, of fome Herbs tunica: but it doth no more agree hecrewith then the cloue Gilloflower doth 


a 
i 


+ 433 THE SECOND) BOOKE +OF;THE 
% Theplcce. 

Theſe kindes of Pinkes do growe for —_ pp in gardens Fo PRS304 many. other | 
which Wrong to write of particular! ole that be wilde dograw ypon Mountaines Fu 
rockes,and cefart P/ acces. T The reſl are FER in their deſcriptions. 2h 0 

& The spme. 
They flower with the Clove Gilloflower,and often after, | 
. 1.% The names. O 

ThePinke is called of plinie and Turner,Capt 1 brica,and Stadtice: of Enchſizs and FS TrRh Pe 
ronica alter a, andYetonica altilis : of L'Obelizs and Fuchfius, Su _ in French Gyrofflees, Ocilere, 
and/olcttes herbues: ienliny wetbrich and Garons-: in Spaniſh Clagts: in Rs Pinkes,and Sm] 
Honelkies. 

Ys T Is —m—_— 
The remperature af the Pinkes is referred vnto the Cloue Gilloflowers. 
% Th: vertues.. 

A Theſcarenotwedi in phiſicke, buteſtcemed for their vic in garlands andnoſegaies. Than 
200d to be purinto vineger,to.giue it a pleaſant taſte,and RR Comes Ruellixa writeth. Fuchs 
jaith,that the zootes are commended againſt the infetion of theplaguez and that the iuice therof 
is profitable to waſte away the ſtone, and to m6 it foorth: mn fr likewiſe to curethem that haue 
the falling ſickneſle, / 


Of Sweete lohns,and Sweet Wi lliams . Chap. _ 


1 CArmeria alba. | Fn | 2 AHymeriarubra. 
White lohns. nf 1 aa P27 


Ws 


WeeteIohns romdvinctae's nee Gillolowers(whereof thi indy 
halfe a cubite high :W \ex tra do growe long long leaues broader than thaſe of of the Gillo- 
pid, 06, RAS c Ns REI 45 the talkesgerylikew®? 
Pins, of a perfet il IN te 

6 F<d 


HISTORIE| OF/ PLANTS: //” 479 
2 The ſeconddiffereth noe from the other, burin that, tharthisplanrhath.redde flowers, and the 
white. 


in our London gardens akinde hereof, bearing moſtfine and pleaſant white flowers, 
ſ up caſbcly wich reddiſh pore, which ſeneth foorh the beaurie thereof, and harh 
re" of ſome to bethe plane called | the later writers Swperbs Auſftriaca, or the pride of 
Abi hand one of the ſame kinde bringing ing foorth moſt double flowers and yer verywhire 
of colour. "a IT *: | FLO C1, 3 | 
; CArmeria rubralatifolis. | | 4 Cdrmer is ſuane ruben; - br | 
: Broad leafed fy Williams, | - Narrowleafed Sweate Williams, | 


v 


| oe % The deſcription, Ag Rn | 
3 Thegreat Sweete William hath round iointed ſtalkes, thicke and fat, fomiwhar reddiſh abour 
the Joweriointes,acubite high,long,broad,and ribbed leaues as thoſe of the Planraine, of a greene 
grafſie colour, The flowers at the top of the ſtalkes are very like to the ſmall Pinkes, manyioined 
togither in one tuft or ſpokie vmbell,of a deepe red on Thomas is thickeand wooddie. - - 
4 . Thenarrow leafed Sweete William groweth vp to the height of twocubires, very well reſem-. 
bling the former,bur leffer,and the leaues narrowet.The flowers are ofa bright a hatin 
elpeciallyconliſterh the difference. | TEEOTTTS turrets 
* The place. | 


Theſgplants arc kept and maintained in gardens, more for to pleaſe the eie, than eicher thenc 
orbelly, _ % The time. | 

Toy flouriſh and bring foorth their flowery in Aprill and May, ſomewhat before the Gillc 
ers,and after beare their flowers the whole ſommer. ; 


| 


*% Thenames. 
The feet Tohn,& alſo the fivect William are both comprehended vnder onetitle, that is tg 
Armeria,of lome Superba , and Caryophyllms plueFris: of ſome Herbariſts Yettonica agreſti 
veſtr6, of ome Herbs tunica: but it doth no more agree hecrewith then the cloue Gillo 


with 


480 THE SECOND 'BOOKE'/ OF THE 
with Yertonicaalters,orPolemariam: in French Armoires, heereupon Ruellizenameth ic. Lgimges 
flores: in Dutch Kepkens, as though you ſhoulde fait g bundell or cluſter, forin their vulgar roong 
bundels of flowers ornoſcgaics they call Repkengzdoubtleſſe they are wilde kinds of Gilloflowers 


in Engliſh che firſt ceworare called fweete Loh zandrherws laſt fveere Williams, Tolmeiners. F 
London Taftes, ; ve) III 2u0etr Jooſt uy: 2 bt | - Þ £1: oo 


gardens,the boſomes of the beaurifull,garlands and crownes for pleaſure. 


lowers,or wilde Williams. Chap.i7s. "Ys 


2 Armoraria pratezſis faming. | 
The female Crowe flower. 


mu | | 8 44 1% *% Thed: eription, © 
bj  Efides | kindes of Pinkes before de cribed, there is a certaine other kinde, eitherof the 
Gill rs qrelſc of the ſweet Williams,altogither and cvery where wild, which of ſome 

= thath beertinſerted amongſt the wilde Cartpions,of others taken to be the rrue Flog Carts: 
notwithſtanding I am not of any of their mindes,bur do holde irfor neither: bur rather a degene- 
rate kinde of wilde Gilloflower. The Cukowe flower I haue comprehended vndertheritle of Sijaw 

_ b-4w%, Engliſhed L2dies ſmocks, which platthath beene generally raken for Flos Cuenlz. Tt hath 
ſtalkes of a ſpanor a foote high, whereupon theleaues do ſtand by couples outof cuery joint; they 
arc ſinal & biuntly poinrec! very rongh & hairy I The flowers are p cedon the rops ofthe ſtalks,m4- 
ny in one tufc, finely and curiouſly ſnipr in r ecdges,leſſer thenthoſe of Gilloflowers, very well [6- 
ſembling the fiveete William(whereofno dovubr tris a kinde)of alight red,or ſcarlet colour. 

2 This female Crowe flower differeth nor from the male, fauing thar this plantis lefſer, and the 
flowers more finelyiagged like the fethered Pinke whereof itis akinde, PEI] "el 
Ofthele Crowe flowers we haucin our gardens one that doth not differ from thefermer y 4 


"HISTORIE|OF PLANTS. 481 
felde-ſaving tharthe plant of the garden hath very fairered double flowers, andthoſe ofthe fickde 
liogle. | | | hoabine; 
Theſe groweall aboutin medowes and p 


. They begin to flower in Maie,andende in June. | = 

The Crow floweris calledin Latine Armor aria ſylueftris,8 Armoracis,of lome Flos Caculi bur not 
properly 3itis alſo called Twnix : of ſome Armeris, Armerius flos primus of Dodoneus; and likewiſe 
Caryophylius minor ſylueftris folys latioribas: in Durch Craembloemkens,tharis rofaic Cormict flo- 
res: in French Cuydrelles : in Engliſh Crowe flowers, wilde Williams, marſh Gilloflowers, and 
Cockowe Gilloflowers, | | | a aft dl3hr] 


* The temperature and Verftues. | * 
Theſe arenot vſed cither in medicine or innounthment:bur they ſerue for garlands and crowns, 
and to decke vp gardens, . | ; 44 


| = | 
Of Catch Flie,or bird-Limewoort. Chap.176. | 
V2 Eg 


\\ ,Y 
N 
\ 
Dy 
W 
\ , 
\ WH 
NM 
\ 
WW 


I His plant, called Viſcaria or Lime woort,js likewiſe of the ſtock and kindred of thewilde 
Gilloflowers :notwithſtanding Cluſavs hath ioined it with the wilde Campions, n_— * 

Jefſeie; 2 kinde thereof ,butnot 425 au wy tae m—_ ſweete Williams, whereof doy | 
y t15 akinde, It hath many leaues riſing jmmediately from theroote like thoſe of the Crowe 
ER as wilde fweete William : among which riſe vp many reddiſh ſtalkes jointed or kneed at cer- 
tne ſpaces ,fex with leaues by couples one againſt another: = = roppe whereof come foorth, 
| x "= 


432 THE SECOND'BOOKE OF THE bo 
pretic little red Bowers, which being paſt there commerh in place ſmall blackiſh ſeede. The roote 
is ſmall and threddie, The whole plant, as welleaues & ftalkes,as alſo the flowers,are couercgoug 
witha moſt thicke and clammie marter like ymoBirde lime , which if you take in your handes , the 
{linynefle is ſuch, that your fingers will ſticke and cleaye togither, as it your hand touched birce.. 
lime: &furthermore, if flies do light vpon theplant,as they do vpon other herbs, they wil beſg in- 
_ rangled with the limynefle, that they cannor flic awayz infomuch that in ſome hor day or other, you 
ſhall ſee manie flies caught by that meanes : whereupon I haue called it Catch flic,or Lime woor.,. | 
2 This plant hath many broad leaues like the great Sweer William, burſhorter(wherof iris like. 
wiſe a kinde)ſet vponaſtiffe and brittle ſtalk; from the boſome of which leaues ſpring forth ſmaller 
branches than the aforefaide,clothed with the like leaues,but muchlefler. The lowers grow arthe 
ofthe ſtalkes many togither tuft faſhion, of a bright red colour. The whole plant is alfopoflec.. 
{cd with the like limyneſle,as the other is, but lefle in quantitie. 

Theſe plants do growe wilde in the ficldes in un ot Wen of England, among the corne: we | 
haue them in our London gardens rather for toyes of pleaſure, than any vertues they arc poſleſſed 
with,that hath as yet been knowen. * Thetime, | | 

They flower andflouriſh moſtpart ofthe ſommer. 

| * The names. | 

Catch flies hath beene taken for Behew, commonly fo called, forthe likeneſſe that it hathwith | 
Behen rubentis floris, or with Behen that hath the red flower, called of ſonieV aleriana rubre, orred 
Valerian; foritis ſomething like vnto it in jointed ſtalkes and leaues, but more like in colour: of | 
L Obelizcs Muſcipula and Viſcaria : of Dodonems Armerius flos tertixa : of Cluſins Lychnis ſyluetra, 

_ Sulene 7 heophrait;,and Behen rubrum Salamanticwn :in Engliſh Catch flic,and ary SEA Rs | 
* The nature and vertues. | 4:2 
The nature and vertues of theſe wilde Williams are referred to the wilde Pinkes and Gillo- 


\ Bowers, Y | ® : 
Of Thrift, or our Ladies cuſhion. Chap.177. 
x C marinueminim LObely, 2 Caryophylius Mediterranem. 
ifr,or Sca Gilloflowers. | Leuant Thiift,or Sea Gilloflower, 


r 
: 
: y g="8 
- _ " 
: o Ss f 
y of ns ae 
” 
4 , 
. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 483 
% The deſcription. | 

Hrift is alſoa kindeof Gilloflower , of Dedenew reckoned among graſſes, which bringeth 

forth] leaues in great tufres, thicke thruſt togirher, ſmaller, flenderer, and ſhorter, thari 

which riſc vp ſmall tender ſtalkes of a ſpan high, naked and without legues 

onthetop grwberef and lictle fowhsin a ſpokiceuſs of a white colour tending topurple. The 

is andthreddie. . 

"The "_ kindof Thrift,found vpon the chouritiines neere vitothe Leuant or Meditertanean 

ſea,differeth norfromthe precedentin —_— ſalkes, GENES A I In and 
the leaues arc broader, 


+ The 
The firſtis found.in moſt ſalt marſhes in "En ep alſoin gardens,forthe bordering vpofbeds 
and bankes,for the which it ſeruerh very pet wn other is a Ni in theſe A regiotis. | 
time. 
They flower from May till ſomwer be far ſpent. 
*%* The names. 
Thrift is called in Latine Gramen Poljanthemum,of the mulritude of the flowers: of ſome Gramen 
warinwn ; of L'Obelins Caryophyliue marinus ; in Engliſh Thrifr,Sea oraſle,and our Ladies Cuſhion, 
* The Femperature andwvertues. | 
Their vſe in phiſicke as yet is not knowen, 'neither doth any ſccke into the nature thereof, but 
cſteemerhem onely for their beaurie and pleaſure in gardens, | « 


Of, Sneeſe whore Chap. 178. 


, mrs 


| 


2 
"by 
7 
i£ 


N 
— tf 


A WR Ng by jen | 


7 GL 
| "EY 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


* The deſcription. 

He ſmall Sneeſe woort hath many rpunde andbrictle braunches, beſet withl 

 roweleaues,hackt abour dee a ſawe;artherop of the 

flowers like the wilde fielde Dailic .. The rootc is render and full of 
abroade in the carth, and inſhorrtime occupicth v 
biring ghhontny cndgwbib Pelle of be In 
licorie. The ſmell of this procurethſneczing,v mentoria tl 
is the herbe which Pa 0K Sneeſing, or Neeſewoort. 
2 DoubleflowredSneeſewoort,or Prarmice,is like vato es leaues Ralls, and rootes a 
that vnleſle: yonbehghi rhe loveryoucan yot diſqeranthe canſromthe othes had papegtg 
whiteand double like vnto double Fetherfew, This plant is pes, , andif itbe curdowne 
in the _ by his domog in will come wiſhing amoneth ſupplic or crop of fonenfas 
then the 


of 47 1: As $64 eripei 
cc rt 1 = | *T 
X | | _»  Thereis allo another kind heerof, of excee. 

ding greatbeaurie, hauing loog eaves fomwhar | 
et 6 thoſe ofche Olive trec :the ſtalkesare = 
of acubitchigh, on the top wherofdo grow very 
beautitul flowers of the bi ofa ſmall 
Marigold, conſiſting of or ſixteenc 
leaues, of a brightſhining red colour ns to 
purple; fer abour a ball of thrammie ſubſtance, 
ſuch as is inthe middle of the Daiſie, in _ 
of apale which flowers ſtandinſcalic 
'thoſe of Knapweede, or Marfellon, Thos 
ſtraight,andthruſterth co into the ground. 
| *T 


The firſt kinde of ow proweth wilde 
in drie andbarren py roky many places, andin 


the three great fieldes next adioining toavillige 
neere London ealled Kentiſh rowne, and jo fu- 
dry Ce ve 

| Thekf oweth in my gar 

. othersalſo. i * The tone. _ 
Ger flowerfrom Maytotheendeof So 


* Thenowes: + | | 
| Sneelfewoorris xalledaf ſome AG, 
 Pyrethrum fyluefire, andalſo Draco f5lacitris, of 
| —_ NN yon " 
| fromhi , bicauſe irprocurerh ſneeling; 
Tra Ch T anacetunvujciitins elites i in EngliſhPel- 
litorie \of Spaine ,” takit g thar name from bis | 
ſharp andbingrſts birt alogithrynlin proportion GEEEIN utc js 
*% T he natare. "o " Kot 
Theyare hot and drlinthethindedegree, | ANNA 156 | 
| 3 The vertwes. | 
A The juice mixedwith vi rand holden nt 7 tcl the toothach. 
B Theherbe chewed andholden inthe mouth, bringerhmightl rom th brain lm fi 
mnt es ttt and therefore Roy rime to time i barb becks. chi 


ww 4 
ry. we 


\--4 


- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS... _ 48; 


Of Hares eares. Chap.179. 


1 Bupleurwn anguſtifolzwn Monſpeiienſe. | 2 Bapheur uns Lit folien Monſpelienſe. 
[ Broadleafed Harescare. 


Narroweleated Hares care. 
| © —_ , 
ST - \ OP, 00s 


| 
V/ Rv 158 [ 
\ | bs I wet. * 
WA Wy (4 ITS / 
on / ( / £ 

l : \ 
þ 


= | % The deſcription. ' 0 18 
I Arrowe leafed Hares eares is called in Grecke Bindey?, and;is repured of rhe Latine wri- 


ters tobe Buplearwn Pling from which the name or figuredifagreerh norar hath the long, 

* narrow and grafſie edi of Lachrymalob,or Gladiolus, ftreaked or balkedas it were wi 
ſundrie ſtiffe ſtreakes or ribbes running along every leafe , as Pliny ſyeaketh of his Hepraplcurms : 
The ſtalkes are a cubire and a halfe long,full of knors or knees, very rough or ſtiffe, ſpreading them- 


| {clues into many braunches: at the tops whereof growe yellow _ inrounde tufts or heads like 


Dill. The roote is as Digg aSa finger,and blacke like Peucedanum, whereuntoitis like in taſte, ſinell 
and reſemblance of ſecde,which dorh the mote perſivade me that it is the true Buplewrwn , whereof 
I nowſpeake,and by rhe authoritie of X 7cander arid Pliny confirmed. | 

2 Theſeconde kinde called broade leafed Hares eares, in figure , tufts, and flowers, is the verie 
famewith the former kinde,ſaue that the leaues are broadet & ſtiffer,and more hollow inthe midſt: 
which hath-canſed me to callic Hares eares, hauing inthe middle ofthe leafe fome hollowneſle re. 
ſewblingtheſame. The roote is greater and of a woodiefſubſtance. | | 

© | SU E3moRo090 2106 be place: 


They orowe among oken woods in ſtonie and harde grounds in Narbone. I haue founde chem | 


growing naturally among the buſhes vpon Beiſtone caftell in Cheſhire, 
Bott 9 0. ' #'The time, © 
- Theyflower andbring foorth their ſeede in Tulic and Auguſt, | | 
| % The names, ; a; 
_ Hares eatciscalled in Latine Boplewrur tin Greeke $4295: the Aporhecaries of Montpelier in 
Framcedocall it Auriculaleoris, and therefore Itermeit in Engliſh Hares cates: Yalerins Cor dns 


hamerhir yophylon bur whence he had tharname,itis notknowen. | 


| Hh ; | | * The 


- 
=>. 


FY 


486. THE. SECOND  BOOKE OF. THE 


| | % T he temperature. 
They are temperatein heate and drinefſe, | | we 

| *% The vertues. | Et] 
Hipporrates hath commended it in melites, for ſallads and potherbes: butbythe authoritieof 
Gleucon,Nicander jt is cffeftuall in medicine, hauing the raſte and fauour of Hyper;com,ſeruing inthe 
placethereoffor woundes , andis taken by Tragas for Þanax Chironium , whodothrecken it ayer 
Herbas vulnerarias, Fob. w 


B Theleaues ſtamped with ſalt andwine, and applied, doth conſume and driue away the frelling | 


ofthe necke called the Kings cuill,andis vicd againſt the ſtone and grauell. 


Þ Of Gromey | Chopato- 
F Cr Gan, | Ban, ” 


IN 


It 81 OE GRO Yn Pf PC aro ors im: 
I He great Gromell hath long, ſlender ard hairic ſtalkes,befer with long,browne and hoatie 


: > 
! b, 


 leaues; among whichgrowe certaine bearded huskes, bearing at the firſt ſmall blew fow- | 
ers; which being paſt, there ſucceederh agray tonic ſeede ſomewhar ſhining, The roote 
is hard,and of a wooddie ſubſtance. ['Þ Yet | [ 


bl 


2 'Theſecondkindeof Gromell hath ſtraight, round, wooddie ſtalks, full of branches: the leaves 

long,ſmall,and ſharpe,of a darke greene colours, ſmaller than the leaftes of great Growell : among 

whichcome fodrth little whitc flowers z which _ palt,:there doth-followfich ſeede asthefol- 

| Theres another kinde of Gromell, which hath1caucs. and ſtakes like the finallkinde; theſecde 

is not ſo white, neither ſo ſmooth and plaine, bur ſomewhat ſhriveled or wrinkled.” The leauesare 

ſomewhat rougher, like vntoa wilde kindezof Buglofle, called Anchuſa, forwhichcauſeſr carrie 
. 0 4 I 


! 


£ 


j 


"y 


F- HISTORIE OF PLANTS. F.5 

that additament nag > ay at flowers are like vnto the former,thatis,of a white colourggrow: 
ing in tufts atthe top of! ſtalkes,like 0 SyOpewooart, | | 

There1s alſo a degenerate inde hereof called Anchuſs = mg cither a kinde of wilde 


lofle, or a kiride of wilde Gromell,or wy a kinde ofneither of both, bura plantparycipating of 
both kindes : it hath the ſeeds and ſtalkes of 41:/;um ſolit , or G | 
chaſa, which is Alkaner,andis alrogither of ared colour likethe ſame 


| | % Theplace. ; 70 Left. 
The two firſtkindes do growe in wntoled places, as by the high waies ſides, and barren places, 
inthe ſtreete at Sourhfleere in Kent, as you go from the church vato/an houſe belonging tos gen- 
tleman of worſhip,called Maſter !Vi/l;am $wan,and in fundrie other places. 


The two laſt kindes growe vpon the ſands and bach of the ſea, inthe yle of Thanet neere Recul. 


vers,among the kinds of wilde Buglofle there growing. 
| *% Thetime. be 


They flower from the ſommer Solſtice, or from about the twelfe day of Iune euen ynto Au- 


3 the leaucs and rootes of 4n- 


Vf 


rumne,andin the meane ſeaſon the ſeede is ripe. | 
|\% 7henomes. | | A] 
Gromell is called in Grecke a%=ngwy, of the hardnefſe of the ſeede: of diners Gorgoniums : of 
others Megonyehon, Leontion, or Dioſporen,or D ioſyron, as Plinie readeth it, and alſo Hereclers : of 
the Arabians Ailium :inſhops, and among the Italians Miium folis: in Spaniſh Myo del ſol » 
in French Gremil, and Herbe aux perles : in Engliſh Gromell: of ſome Peale plant, andof athers 


Lichwale. | 
 % Thetempergture. 
The ſeede of Gromell is hot and drie inthe ſecond degree, 


* The vertnes, | ot 
The ſeede of Gromell pound, and drunke in white wine, breaketh, difolueth, and driueth fgorth A 
the ſtone, and prouokerth vrine,and eſpecially breakerh the ſtone in the bladder. 


Of Chickweede. Chap 481, 


1 


| | % Thekindes. £} ; 

Here be divers ſorts of Chickweedes , 'among which one is greater and other leſſer and lower : 

and other ſome there be alſo which we may call baſtarde Chickweedes : and firſt of the: beſt 
knowne Chickweedes. | | | 


. 
$ 
4 


4 
: 


| * The deſcription, 


F=z=z7x] He great Chickweede riſeth; vp with ſtalkes a cubite high, and ſome time higher, a 
SY 1,27 great many from one roote,long and rounde, ſlender, fullofioints, with d couple of 
31 1eaues growing out of cuery khot or ioint aboue an inch broade, and longer then the 
= leaues of Pellitorie of the walllwhereunto they are very like in ſhape, bur ſmooth with- 
out haires ordowne, and of alighrgreene colour : the ſtalkes are ſomethingcleere, and as it were 
tcanſparent or thorow ſhining, and aboutthe joints they be oftentimes of a very light red colour, 
as be thoſe of Pellitory of the wal: the flowers be whitiſh on the top of the branches like the flowers 
of Sti tchwoort, bur = lefler: in whoſe places ſucceedelong knops, but not great, in which the 
ſeede is conteined, The roote conſiſterh of fine little ſtrings like haires. 1 

2 Theſeconde Chickweede for the moſt part lieth vpon the grounde: the ſtalkes are ſinall, flen- 
derlong, and rounde,and alſo jointed; from which ſlender braunches do ſpring leaues reſembling 
the precedent, but muchleſler, as is kkewiſe the whole herbe, whichinno reſpect atrainerh to! the 
| 0a ofthe ſame: the flawers arcinilike ſort little and white ; the knaps or ſeede heads arelike 


c former, The rooteis alſo full of little ſtrings, | | 
3 Thethirdis like the ſecond, but farre leſſer: the ſtalkes be moſt tender andfine: the leaues are 
very ſmall :the flowers yery little 3 the rootes maruellous ſlender. —_— | 
4 Alſo there is a fourth Linde which groweth by the ſea; this is _ theſeconde,but the ſtems 
are thicker, ſhorter,and fuller of ioints, The leaues in like ſort be thicker : theknaps or ſeede heades 


3 


benotlong and rounde but ſomewhat broade,in which are three or fower ſeedes contained. | 
SOT] 1 AA a 


- G 


®_ Ja >, dS 
6 v F - 


Þ ", 
"LA £6 


Y AN 
” x 7 
. G A N , « W < : 
. C3 / - ; - — 5 . 

7 SUP CA WR = 
I's YAY SKUAN DP 7 WE (A) LED = 
# \ ou 15 hea ous —_ A LAB, Pl P +. . AY Bo 

WF. =0 | 


= _—_ — _ 
#- —_—..: 


#, — 4 
D 4 2 2 
i == % 


11 
- Þ 
[60] 
© 
kl 
hf 
© 
SS 
= 
'© 
> 
Oo 
—_ 
' 


rt CMſmemaror. 
| Great Chickweede. 
ine Checkeweede, 


3 CAene minima. 
Fine 


PLANTS. 
6 refta. 
ight Chickweede. 


"SV W 
v E p * 
® Ky 1 x 
JQ/ . : 7 <> 


, 


\ 
NN 


UTA TAN y , 
4) 


STAR 
7 
Wt t 


MU Ber a” | , 
* The deſcription. | | 
5 The middle Chickweede hath long trailing braunches , diſperſed heere and there vpon the 
ound,whereupon are ſet by couples ſmall leaues like thoſe of Yu/uaria. The flowers are very lit- 
e,and white of colour; after which come rounde knops wherein is the ſeede. The roote is ſlender 
andthreddie, | T hn 4 
6 The vpright Chickweede hath a _ ſmall ſingle threddie roote,from which riſeth vpaſlender 
ſtem,diuiding it ſelfe into diuers braunches,euen from the bottome to the top z whereon do growe 
{mall leaues,thicke and fatin reſpec of the others , in ſhape like thoſe ofRue or Herbe grace. The 
flowers grow at the top of the branches conſiſting of fower ſmall leaues of awhite colour. | 
7 Alſme Pety aa. | 8 Alſie folys vetonice. 
Stone Chickweede. Speedwell Chickweede. | 


2.5 


£ 0 
, 
\ 


þ 


420 THE SECOND |BOOKE OF. THE 


& The deſcription. | | 
7 This ſtone Chickweedeis one of the common Chickweeds,hauing very threddie branches cg. 
ucring the grounde farre abroade where it groweth: the leaues be ſet togither by couples : the gg. 
wers be ſmall and verie white: the roote is tough and veryflender. | 
"8 Speedwell Chickweedehath a little tender ſtalke,from which comediuers ſmal armes or bran. 
ches asit were wings,ſet 96 49 by couples :whereon doe growe leaues fer likewiſe by couples 
like thoſe of Feronica, or herbe Fluellen,whercof it tgoke his name. The flowers growe along the 
braunches of a blewe colour,after which come little pouches wherin is the ſeed The rooteis ſmall, 
| and likewiſe threddie.. | | þ | : | 


9 CAMlſme fontans. F<. = 10 Alſme fluniatilis. 
Fountaine Chickweede. bi} 1 | River Chickweede. 


ay 
VA/TY 


\) 


To y 
We; 


TY 9 
"0 


JA 
} 


8 


Mp 
l 


gs) 090 


Y 
2 ZANP 


WDY — 
nd ft 


ET 


— 
i 


% 
—_ 
4 
= LL 
nn - | 
_ 
F 


*% The deſcription, | 


9 There is a kinde of Chickweede growing in the brinks and borders of wels, fountaines, and - 


ſhallowſprings,hauing many threddie rootes ; from which riſe vp diuers render ſtalkes,whercupon 
do growelong narrow leaues, not vnlike tothe yoong leaues of Marigoldes : from the boſomeof 
which, come toorth diuers ſmaller leaues, of a bright greene colour. The lowers growe on thetop 
of the ſtalkes,fma!l and white of colour. E:7 
10 Thereis likewiſe another Chickweede, ſmaller than the laſt deſcribed , hauing for his roote | 
a thicke haſſocke or tuft of threddie ſtrings; from which riſe vp very many tender ſtems, ſtretching 
or trailing a!ongſt the ground; whereon do growe long leaues, conſiſting of many ſmall leaues {et 
vpon a middlerib, like thoſe of Lentils, or the wilde Fetch. The flowers and ſeedes are like the pi&+ 
cedent,but much ſmaller. | = ny 
It There groweth in the mwarriſh or wateriſh grounds, another ſort of Chickweede alcogither 
vnlike the reſt of the ſtocke or kinred of Chickweedes. Ir hath a long roore, of the bi nes of 2 
wheate ſtrawe, with diuers ſtrings hanging thereat, very like the rootes of Couch grafle; from the 
whictriſcth vp diuers vpright {lender ſtalks, {er vpon by couples at certaine diſtances : 08 _—_ 


colour. 


11 Ame Fey 
wo Chinkorenth, 


notably. 


bathed therewith. 


rn, (ae, ew 
wflowers; \whic 1ban 
bent The r6bte is fiHAl ah 

ocdelt {troied,bur naturally commetrh Pp from 


(Of the baſtard (| bihweed, 


& Thekindes, | 
T, He baſtard Chickweedes do differ from the former, eſpecially bi nl th oe "Ge and bay. | 
lie; tens apron 9 5 ofche' rapes col _ 


go »* 
oy "i! Bw £51577 obnan The ſeriptibn. 
Elias Chas taht 


at er 


rom yeere - wo EOS ao 


HISTORIE OF: PLANTS. 291 
of the ſtalkes do ye ſmall white OT Toto of ——— bat lefler, and of a white 


fear , 
Chickweedes, ſome growe among buſhes a ad 
bricrs,olde wals,gutrers of houſes,and ſhadowic 
places. The place is ſet foorth in the {cuerall de 
{criptions of the other ſorts, 
* The time. 

The Chickweedes are greenc in winter, they 

flower and ſeede inthe ſpring, | 
*% The names. 

Chickweede or Chickenweede, is called | in 
Grecke «im: in Latine it rerainerh the ſac 
name Alſeze: of ſore of the ancients iris called 
H:ppia, the on andthe leſſer. Thereſt of the 
plants are diſtinguiſhed in their ſeuecrall ticles; 
with propernames which likewiſe ſerreth oy 
the place oftheir grawings. - | 

\% T he temperature. 

Chickweeds is colde and moiſt, and of a wa- 
teriſhſubſtance; and therefore it cooleth with- 
out aſtriction or binding, as Gz/ex ſaith, | 

"+ Thevertaes. 

The leaues of Chickweede boiled in water A 
very ſoft, adding therero ſome hogs greace, tlic 
powder of Fe _ and Lineſcede , and a ſew 
rootes of Marſh Mallowes , ſtamped to the 
forme of a Caraplaſma or pultus , taketh away 
the ſwellings of the legs; orany other part3brin- 
geth to ſuppiitation' or matter, hot apoſtemcs ; 


diſſolueth pings * will ior willingly wy to ſuappuration ; eaſerh members that are ſhrunke 
w ;comforterff wounds in finewic partes 3defendeth foule'maligne and virulent vicers from in- 
flammatior{ du:i ring t] the cure © in aword, ir comforterh, digeſterh, defendeth,and fuppuraterh very 


' The leaues boiledin Lvineger and ſalt.i Js good againſt mangyneſle of the hatids & &legs, if they be B 


Little birdes in Cages ( eſpecially Liners) are refreſhed with the leffer Chickw ved, when they ( C 
loath their meatez whereupon it was called of fone Paſſerina, 


Chats 


Lay 


tehider branches Ja ay pon: che hegrome, beferwirh 
Wate e&r_ Gem 


. 
w pl .,4 


1mander,. Am chem fem bak 
x wpeer Fells 


Orpo 


ED ground thi hard 


weede. 


2 Cluſwit 


492 ' THE SECOND [BOOKE, OF THE 

2 Clujmu,amanſingularin the knowledg of plants,hath ſer down this herbe for one of che Chich,,. 
weedes,which doth very wellreſemble the Storks bill, and might haue beenthere inſerted, Burthe 
matter being of ſmall moment let it paſſe; for doubtleſle ir participareth of both, that is, the heag 
or beake of Storks bill, andthe leaues of Chickweed,which arc long 8 bairy, like thoſe of Scorpion 
Mouſe care. The flowers are finaJl,and of an herbic colour ; after which come long horned cog ox 
{cede veſlels. like vato thoſe of the Storks bill. Theroorc is fall and ſingle, with ſtrings faſteneq 
thereto. _ | Ts | uM 


2 Alle cornigulata Churh. 


Rl 


. *%*Thedeſeription, 

3 Iuic Chickweedeor ſmall Henbir, hath thinne hairie leaves ſomewhar broade,withtwocuts ot 
qv in the ſides,afterthe maner of thoſe of grounde Iuie,whereof it tooke his name, reſembling 
ebacke ofa Beewhen ſhe flieth, The ſtalkezaremall, tender, hairie, and lying flat yponths 
grounde. The flowersareflender and of a blew colour, The rootois little and threddie. | 
4 Thegreat Henbit hath feeble ſtalkes leaning towarde the grounde , whereon do grow ttt. 
raine diſtances leaues like thoſe of the dead Netrell; from the boſome whereof come foorth {len- 


Gngle nd foe emer oPurplecin ſhape like hoſe of cho mall dead Neuell The rootei wag 


HISTORIE|'OF PLANTS. 49% 


Hederaces, | a Aiſme Hederula alters. 


PR - 1 > £ ; ZI > 
«v3.2 _ > fo 
= ". ou — C - 


% 
% is7 


Yao | 
2. as, T i > ' — g ——= - 
\ SC TNSg CNEL 
% *s > 


©... 
| X 370 


| OS * The place. amr | 
. Theſe Chickweedes are ſowenin gardens along potherbes,in darke ſhadowie places andin the 
hieldes after the corne is reaped. = <8 : | 
They flouriſh and are greene when the other Chickweedes are. 
| *% The names. | 


The firſt is called Mor is Galline, Hens bit, Al/me Hederula , and Hederaces : in high HunerbiſF: 
in French Mor /ge/pn and Morgeline :inlow Ditch Horndercbiet : in Engliſh Henne bitthe grea- 


ter andthe leſler, mo | | | | 
| | *% The temperature and vertwts, | | 
heſe are thoughtalſo tobe colde and moiſt, and like to the other Chickweedes in vertue and A 


Of Pimpernell. Chap 183. 

1 coupinicnr ener _— Lion, 11 v6 fy 6 abies, -cravgin 

4 yon wher n'do growe broad leaues, and ſharpe pointed, ſer rogither by 
$4. FE, AS29 I« whereof come foorth ſlender ndrels, eps da gn 
purple flowers tending ro rednefle : which being paſt there ſucceede fine rounde bullers, like 
, CO IA Caring, wheel conteined ſmall dyſtie ſcede. The roore confilterh of tlen- 
2 Thetemale meme ireeh not fromthe wale in any one pointy but in the colour of the 
flowers for like as the-former harh reddiſh towers , this plant bringeth foorth flowers of a malt 


#434 af 


% 


- Peiletblew colour vhereirt is the difference; | 2» 


» 
I : A 
, , < 
Or. gon grnt. #25 91147:1,69: 0.9 
Od * £5 % 
m—_— 
- #-» if j d. \\ pu_ 


, \ 
F . 
" " y, 
£* | [> 
CF | T3\X" " : 
. 4 - ; * = of 
Was #7 # - £f p k 
5 : _ 8 Ca 
4 I > I * 
» 43 > « = TT.» 
. | - IA ty tY 7s » 
* * | - 
© ai. % TH V A4-/ 
= : - 
5 C4 5 


io 


C@ IS 
I 8O 
Hf 


3 Anacallis hips. | 


Yellowe Pimpernell. 7 


* 
[ad 
Va 9 
® 1 
VASES 
4 : 
"IL ro boy , 
-_ oe / ” 
/ # > 4 WE 
- 1) 


v% The deſer DHOR, . 
* Pimperne 


3 - The ydllowe rnell hath many weake 

| andfeeble braunches tiailing vpon the! 
13 ” befer with leaues one againſt anorher like the 
- - great Chiekweed,notynlike ro Nummuleris, of 
* © Money woortezbetweenhe which and the ſtalkes, 
'* commeth foorth one\ſingle and finall render 
ſtalke, bearingac the toppe thereof one yellowe 
flower andno more. The root is ſmall &rhreddy. 

PRI iQ20Tto: "+ Theplace. 


> 


--  Theygrowin plowedfieldes neerepathwies, 
in gardens and vineyards, almoſt euerywhere.l 
founde the female with blewe flowers inachal- 

; kie corne fieldein the way from maſterWiliov 
.. \Swa/nts houſe of Sourhfleete to Long fields 
 downes,butneuecrany whereelle. | 
"PR Re flower in ſornmer, an clallyin 
\.* -» hauing to ovntorheir harueſt worke, 
5  willfirſtbeboldthe tioivers of Pimpetneli,ber 
A ..by they know the weather chatſhall | 
:. nextdayafter,as forexample: if the. flowets be 


+2: 9/- 1 » ſhurcloſevp, itberokey raifi & foul weathen 
4; 11 , +22 contrativile; if they bee ſpread abroade;/ Faire 


& The 


/ 


S. 495 


HISTORIE | OF PLANT 


* The names. | 
Iris called in Greeke drezdwvvrt in Latine allo Anagalzs,of divers as(Pliniereporteth)Corchorw but 
vncrucly; of Marcellus an olde writer Maca, the worde is extantin Di-ſcorides among the baſtarde 
names. That with thecrimſon flower being the male, is named Phenjcion , and Coralhon; of this is 
made the compoſition or receipt called Þ;acor«/hon thatis vied gain the gout , which compo- 
ſition Paulus AEginetaſetteth downe in his 7.bouke. Among the baſtardenames it hath been cal- 
led Actitis,egitis,and Sawritis: in Engliſh red Pimpernell,and blew Pimpernell. 
| % Thetemperature. 
Both the ſorts of Pimpernell are of a drying facultic without biting , and ſomewhat hot , with a 
certaine drawingqualitiezinſomuchthatir doth drawe foorth ſplinters,and things fixed inthe fleſh, 
as Galinwriteth. - | d HED 
* The vertues. | 
Dioſeorides writeth that ww? are of power to mittigate paine, tocureinflammations or hot ſwel- A 
lings, to drawe our of the bodice and fleſh, thoryes,ſplinters or ſhivers of woode,, and to helpe the 
kings cuill. Peet | | | | 
"The iuice purgeth the head by gargariſing ot waſhing the throte therewith : it cureth the rooth- B 
ach,being fnift vp intothe guts ary gore 4 inco the contrary noſthrill, EE - 
Ithelpeth thoſe that be dim ſighted, theiuice mixed with honie, clenſerh the vicers of the cie, C 
called in Latine AHrgema. | | ed 
Moreoucrhe affirmeth that it is good againſt the ſtinging of vipers, and other venemous beaſts. D 
Irprevaileth againſt the inficmities of the liver and kidneies, if the juice be drunke with wine. He E 
addeth further,how it is reported that Pimpernell with the blew flower helpeth vp the fundament 
thatis fallen downe ; and that red Pimpernell applied,contrariwiſe bringeth it downe, | 


_ Of Brookelyme,or water Pimpernell. Chap.184.. 


*+ The kindes. 7 


Here be fower ſorts of Water herbes comprehended vnderthe name Anagaliia aquatice, Or 
water Pimpernell,or water Chicken weede,whereof ſome are in vic both in Phificke and chi- 
rurgerie; the others not fo much vied,not ſo well knowne, 


* The deſeription. 


18 7 Rookelime or Brooklem , hath far , thickeſtalkes , rounde and parted into diuery 
[4 ls) P;1 braunches. The leaucsbe thicke,ſmootb,broad,and of adeepe greene colour. The 

JV flowers growe vpon ſmall tender footeſtalkes, which thruſt foorth of the boſome 

|! of the leaues,of a perfe& blew colour,not vnlike tothe leauesof lande Pimpernel!, 
£8! The roote is white, lowe creeping, with fine ſtrings faſtned theretozoutof the root 
Fring ny other ſtalks,whereby ir greatly increaſcth, | 
2 Tnegreat water Pimpernellis like vnto the precedent,ſauing that this plant hath ſharper poin+ 
ted and larger leaues, and the flowers are of a paler blewe colour , wherein confiſterh rhe diffes 
rence, | | 
3 Small water Pimpernell hath for his roote a great buſh of threddie ſtrings , from which riſeth 
Watat, thicke, ſtraight ſtalke , ſerwith longer and ſmaller leaues then thoſe of Brookelem, of an 


ouerworne green colour, placed togither by couples : from the which leaues cloſe bythe ſtalk come 
foorth ſmal tender footed: n/a 


v 


'* 


alks ſet by couples with like leaues, but leſſer: whereupon coward the top 


Come foorth little fooliſh or idle flowers,of a faint ouerworne blew colour. 
4 Theotherdifferethnot from the laſt defcribed , in leaves , ſtalkes , flowers , orrootes, ſaving 
that the lcaues heercof are rounder, broader, and more blunt at che points, wherein is the diffe- 


rence, 


I Anagallis 


= **2 + FE 
© 5 4: Y J , \ F, 
© . PX , PAYGL md - 
NA NISRS SAME Erin 
MN PA@ 
. _ - No — = Yu > 
p- 'L 
£\ * \ k. A - * » 
"+ oy : | 
> S v". 57 ; . 
440 \# l £ i f " « 
© \ I , | 4 
4 nk © ». og _—_ : ws. _ — 54 . J \ 


—=; % DC 
: wo LOT - - 


"i 


g 


allts aquat ice. 
x Punpernell, 


atcr 


WES " 
[/ kB 

| JJ ; 
x 1 _—_ 
% hs —_ 
2 ot 

* _ AY [ 


- 
£ 


<; 
% 
» 
- 


q 


TE 


Ana 
w 


» f 

. T 
- - J\4 \/ 
[FN 
Do 


A 


Y 


Pale flowred water Pimpernell, 


, 


4 Anagallis aquatica minor flore pallids. 


: = L#£ : 
" FAT <- 
” \24 DAY - 41 
% W- by - ” > 
. 4 ww 
L- p 


WNga. 
watica minor. 


w 


atet Pinpernell. 


[ 


Brooke lune, 
M4 : 5 
nall 
mY 


( 
- Þ 
[TR 
O 
p11 
D< 
© 
AQ 
Z 
_ 
Go 
T3) 
i 
| 


w 


LCP 


I Ana -allis eu Becab 


HIST ORIE) OF! PLANTS. :1 497 


hey growe by riuers ſides,{mall running brookes and waterie ditches. The yellowPimpernell I 
cd ulng x | wood necre London,and in many other woodsand coples. | 
oe Intern Dae 7 8 ll rave, | 


They bring foorth their flowers andſcedeinlunc,luly and Auguſt. 
| | | ' , DOI VAL 1 } £5 4 The names. ; J% 21 a: = I - 
Water RR called Anagallss m— : of moſt Recabagge, Which y borrowed of the 
Germanewor Bachpungyen : inloweDurch Beeckpunghen t m French Fex{, wherupon ſome 
do call it Berals; notwithſtanding Afarcelins reporterh that Beyulg'is thatwhich the Grecians call 
1-eJeui;n,ot rather Creſles : ir isthoughtto be Ce, thatis toſay, oi the garden; which Dioſcorzdes 
writeth tobe like vnto Purſſaine,whereunto this Brookelime Goth very well agree. Bur if it be there- 
fore (aid to be nie, bicauſe it growetheither onely in gardens,or for themoſt partzthis Pinipernell 
orBrookelime ſhall not be like vnto it, which growerhnowhere lefle than Foy beingalco- 
oither of his owne naturewilde, defiring ro grow in warerieplaces,and ſuch as be continually oner- 
fowen: in Engliſh the firſtis called Brockelime,and the teſt by noe generall name, Vater Pimper- 


nell; or Water Chickweede,being likewiſea kinde thereaf, © © 
' *% Thetemrerature.. ; 


Brookelime is of temperature hoe and drie like-VVater Creſſes,yet not fo much. 


Vo Thevertues, , ®- |; | 

Brookelime is caten infallads, as Water Creſles is, and is good againſt thatim;zvewr malwn, of A 
ſuch as dwell neere the Germaine ſeas, which they call Scurerbiipckezor 25 we terme itthe Scuruic 
or Skirbie, being ved after the fame maner that Water Creſles and Scuruie grafle is vied, yetis ir 
not of ſo grear operation and vertue. '' TE SL | 

The herbe boiled maketh a good fomentation for ſwollen legs,and the dropfie. B 

Theleaues boiled, ſtrained, and ſtamped in a ſtone mortar with the powder of Fenugreeke, Line- C 
ſeede, the rootes of marſh Mallowes, and ſome hogs greace, vnto theforme of a Cataplaſma or 
pultis , taketh away any ſwelling in leg orarme, woundes allo that are ready tofallinto apoſtema- 
tion, it defendeth mightily thatno humor nor accident ſhall happen vitoit.  --- | 

Theleaues of Brookelime ſtamped, ſtrained, and giuen to drinke in wine, helpeth theſtrangurie D 
agd griefes of the bladder, | | IR 

Theleaues of Brookelime, andthe tendrels of Aſparagus, caten with oile, vineger and pepper, E 
belpeth theſtrangurieand ſtone. | Eads ara k 163 


Of flinking Ground Pine. Chap. 185. 


| * The kinaes. 
FT Here be divers ſortes of Ground Pines growing neere vnto the ſea, the which may be num- 
bred among the wilde kindes of Sea Chickweedes. | 


; 


* Thedeſcription. | 
7 | Here hath beene much adoe among writers about the cerraine knowledge of the 
<2 x true Lnthylli of Dioſcorides: Lwilltherefore ſer downethatplant,which of all others 
116 Y #1 is found moſt agreeable rhereunto. Ir hath many ſmall branches full of ioints, not 
ENS 92 abone acubire high, creeping ſundry waies, belcr with ſmallicaues of a palecolour, 
—=2 reſembling Lexticals, of rather A4//eve minima, the frmall Chickweede,” The flowers 
growcarthe top of the ſtalke, ſtar faſhion, of an betbie colour like Boxe, or Sedgm minus : it toſte- 
reth his ſigall ſeedes in athree comered huske, The toote is ſomewhartlong, flender; knotsic, and - 
<<<peipphanſ into the ground like Soldencia: all the whole plane is faltiſh;bitter ih taſte, and ſome: 
atneating, 4 Þ22: Tf | | 
 Thereisanotherkind of Anthyilis, that hath been taken for Chameſe of ancient writers, which is 
not poſſible ro agree with truth, bicaule thar this platit yeeldeth-no milkie ivice at all, and Chameſice 
hath great plentie of milkelike the Tithymales 3 ſo thatof necefſitie this muſt needes be ( as Thaue 
laid)one kinde of Anthylis, or Sea Pine; which in ſhew reſemblerh Herniaria, or Chameſice.: The 
whole plant is very faltand ſharpe in taſte: the lowers ſmall, ofa white purple colour; and vnder 
theleaues the ſeeders incloſedin little huskes,much lefler than C/nopodruwmn,or the baſtard Babill, 
Ti I | CAnthyli 


THE|SECOND' BOOKE OF. THE 


| i | 
To: 57! *% The d | f01 > 1 
There is likewiſe another fort of Anchylic or Se, 
Ground Pine, bur in truth nothing elle than ; 
kinde of Sea Chickweede, having ſmall branches 
crailing vpon- the ground of. two handes bigh; 
whereupon do growe-lictle leaues like thoſe of 
Chickweede, notynlike to thoſe of Lenticulany. 
rina,or Sea Lentils: onthe top of the ſtalks (ang 
many ſmall flowers of an herbic or moſſie white 
colour. Thewhole plantis of a bitterang(altich 
taſte, » Jv hcor Hef) 4 14 
Theſe do growe inthe ſouth yles belonging to 
England, eſpecially in Portland in the gravely 
' . . . andfandie foordes, which lie Jowe and again 
g— |  theſea; andlikewile in|the-yle of Shepey neere © | 
.. the water ſide, Fre | 
They flower and fourifhin Lune and luly, 
MT *% Thenames, | 1 
Their ticles do ſufhciently ſer foorth their ſeue. 
_ >, Tallnames: in Engliſh'they may becalled Hoare | 
Salt woort,Sea ground Pine and Stinking ground 
- Pine, bicauſe als {ell ſtinkech in reſpe& of 
thoſe of the Champion ground, |: 
* The temper ature. 
Theſe Sea herbes are of a temperate facultic 
betweene co2d and drines, 
7 : | ; | | %- The wertaes. ' | oy bf 
A Halfe an ounce of the dried leaues drunke,preuaileth greatly againſt thehot piſle,the {trangurie, 
or difficultie of making water,and purgeth the reines. | 
B Theſametaken wit Oximell or honicd water is good forthe falling ficknes, giuen firſt atmor- 
ning,and laſt at night, | | | | 4 


litle idle lowers, 
place ſmall flat coddesct 


PT, 
Z 
<L 
[ 
LW 
© 
—_ 
£L 
O 
[Mp 
O / 
te / 
"F 


50s. THE SECOND{BOOKE/ OF THE 
ga BEE *% T Hf 696k, Fans 
/ This Whitelowegtaflehathſmall jagged leaues deepely cut , lying flat thewall or 
| Jo itgroweth ; among whichriſechvp a ſlender ſtem, whereupon 2 | kl yh hleaues x 
next the ground, butlefſer. The flowers growe ar the top likethoſe of thelaſt deſcribed. The ſcede 
and rootes are alſo like, | E.-14 "08 | 
The fourth kinde of Paronyehia,hath ſmall,thicke, and far leaues,cur inro three diuiſions, much 
reſembling the ſmall leanes of Rue,bura great deale ſmaller, The ſtalks are little like the former, g 
the icauesalſo; butthe caſes wherin the ſeedis contained, are like vntothe ſeed veſſels of Moolai 
Scor pioides,or Chickweede ; > ow gralle. | | [7 
There is another ſort of Whitlow-grafle or Naile woort,tharis likewiſe a low or baſe herb.hau; 
a ſmall tough roote,with ſome threddie ſtrings annexed thereto: from which riſe vp divers flende. 
rough {talkes, ſerwith little narrowe leaues confuſedly like thoſe of the ſmalleſt Chickweede,when 
of doubtlefle theſe bekindes; qpagh the ſtalkes do growe verylittle white flowers, after which 
come the ſeedes in ſmall buttons,otthe bigneſle of a pinnes head, | 4 
E- of 2 |  % Theplace, | We | 
Theſe ſinal!, baſe, and lowe herbes growe vpon bricke and ſtonewals , vpon olde tiled houſes, 
which are growen to have much moſſe ypon them, and vpon ſome ſhadowie and drie muddiewals,. 
It groweth plentifully yponthe bricke wall in Chauncerie Jane, belonging tothe Eaile of Sou. 
champton, inthe ſuburbes of London,and ſundrie other places, | | 
WD 4s © 5. nies ng PT ATY Of FRE 
Theſe flower imes in Ianvarie and Februaric, and when hot weather approcherth hey are 
no moreto be ſcene allthe yeere after. 4s Mr "Y 


4. | 6 Thenowves. | 

The Grecians haue called theſe platits mee, which Cicero calleth Redavie. There be many 
kindes ofplants,called by the ſaid name of Paropychia, which hath cauſed many writers to doubt of 
thetrue kinde : but youmay' very boldly rake theſe plants for the ſame, vntill rime hath reuealed 
orraiſed vp ſome new plant,approching neerervnto the truth: which I thinke will neuer be, ſothat 
we may call them inEngliſh Naile woort,and Whitlowe graſle, GN RE | 


| | f * The temperature and vertues. | | 
A As touching the qualitie hereof,we hauc nothing to ſet downe: onely it hath been taken to heals 


the diſeaſe ofthe nailes called a Whitlowe,whereof it tooke his name. 


Of Fluellen the female,or Speedwell. (hap-187. 


\ | | 
| T4 14: / & The kindes. 
There be two ſortes of temale Fluellens. 


* Thedeſeription. 


I He firſt kindeof Elatine, being of Fuch/ius & Xathiolas called Veronica feming, orthe te- 

| male Fluellen, ſhooreth from a ſmall and fibrous root many flexible andtender branches, 

diſperſed flat ypon the ground, ramping &creeping with leaues like Nawmmuleria, but that 

theleaues of Elatineare of an hoarie, hairic, and ouerworne greene colour 3 among which come 
foorth many ſinall lowers, of a yellow colour mixed with little grerple, like vato e ſmall Snap- 
dragon, hauing a certaine taile or ſpur faſtened vnto euerie ſuch flower, like the herbe called Larkes 
ſpur. The lower iawe or chap of the flower is of a purple colour,and the vpper iawe of a faire yel- 
low ; which being paſt,there ſucceedeth ſmall blacke ſeede contained in round huskes. 
2 _Theſecongkinde of Elatime hath ſtalkes, braunches, flowers, and rootes, like the firſt, but the | 
leaues are faſhioned like Ery/amwm,and ſomewhat reſembling a broad arrow head, which is ſhawe 
at the point : butthe ſpurre or taile ofthe flower is longer, and more purple mixed with the yellows 
in the flower, ENT. 18; | _ : 
| | 3 Y cronies 


HISTORIE/OF PLANTS. | gor 


4 Perabics famine Fuchs ſine Elatine. BY. Elatime alter 4, | 
| The female Fluellen. \ | ft Sharpe pointed Flnellen,” 


. 
WL 


AS ! 
Wy 


| | - iSpas.. | 42 ED 

Both theſe plants T have founde inſundrie places where corne hath growen, eſpecially Barley, 
25 in the fieldes abour Sourthfleete in Kent , where within fixe miles compaſiethere is not a fielde 
wherein it doth not grow, | | | 


Alf it groweth in a fielde next vnto the houſe ſometime belonging to that Honorable gentle. 
man Sir mart 1.4 at Barne-clmes,and in fundrie places of Eſſex; andin the next fielde 
vnto the churchyarde at Cheſwicke neere London,towards the midſt of the fielde, 

| *% The tone. ; 

They flower in Auguſt and September. | 
| * The nones. | 

Their ſeueral!ritles ſet foorth their names as well in Latine as Engliſh. 
% Thenathre and vertues. | | 
Theſe plants are not onely of a ſingular'aſtringent facultie,and thereby helpe them that be gree- A 

ued with the dyſenterie and hoat felling; butot ſuch ſingular efficacie to heale ſpreading &eating 
cankers & corofiue ylcers,that their vertue ina maner paſſeth allcreditin theſe Gerring res vpan 
ſure proofe done vnto ſundrie perſons, & eſpecially vpon a man whom Perareporteth to haue his 
nole eaten moſt greeuouſly witha canker or eating fore, who ſent for thePhiſitions and Chirurgi- 
ons that were famouſly knowen to bethe beſt, &rhey with one conſent concluded tocur the ſaide 
noſe off, tapreſerue the reſt of bis face : among theſe Surgeons and Phiſicions came a poore ſorie 
Barbar,who had no more $kill than he had learned by tradition , and yet vndertooke to cure the 
parient, This foreſaide Barbar ſtanding in the|companie and hearing their determination, deſired 
thathe might make triall of an herbewhich he had ſcene his maſter vie for the ſame purvote, which 
herbe E/atzme,though he were ignorantof the name whereby ir was called, yethe knewe where to 
fetch, Tobeſhortgthis herbe he ſtamped, & gaue the juice of it vntothe patient to drinke, and out- 


wardly applied the ſame plaiſterwiſc,and in very ſhort ſpace perfectly cured the man,and ſtaicd the 


reſt 9 


t, 


his bodice from further corruption,which was readie to fall intoa leprofe, | 
| Tz: 3| E latine 


502 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF. THE 


B Eltireheipeth the inflammation of the cics,and defendeth humours vato then 
boiled,and ata pultuss lied thereto. | flowing) being 


C Theleauesfoddenin! broth of a henns elveat Baiechihe dyſent eerie. | 
The new writers affirme, that the female Fluellen openeth the obſtruftions or ſto Sof the 


liver and ſplene,prouoketh vrine, driverh footrh ſtones, and clenſeth the kidneies an 2c 
cording to Paul, | 


ww 


 IThewaightofadramor of afrench crownepf the powdet of the hertle, with the like waight of 
3 gry 1g ok {gail peſtilent —_ mY . | 


Of Fluellen the male? Paul Betomee. Cpu, 


x rhe kindes, 


7 Here be divers frtsof male Fluellen, vn wy. condly aver, forme, asplace 
of growing, | 


1 Veronica vera &-m mator. . 2 FVeronicaretlamas. 


The male Speedwell. 


ke] *T bedeferipe jon. 

He Giſt kinde of Ferenies] isaſmall herbe, andcreepeth by the donnd, with hide 

and hairie branches. Theleaſc is ſomethin long and haitie , indented or ſni c 

_ abouttheedpes, The flowers are of alight blew Aw declining ro purple : ſeedeis 
contained in little flat pouches: the roore is fibrous and hairie. 

2 The ſcconddothallo creepe vpon the graund, hauing long ſlender ſtems, and ſomewhat large 

| leauesalittle hairic,and pleaſantly loft. The flowers be yellow, with ſmall round huskes like the ſeed 

velicls of Pimpernell, 


Ji} ak ' 3 Peron 
/ ; | | | 


my 


$503 


ah 


nms. 


2=—. ESTES» pc 
 OSES 


onica 


a 
Vprighe Fluellen, 


6 Ver 


The finalleſt Fluellen, 


= 


4 Feroniea reits 


Y / 5 
% 
: , hs. 
” N [1 
['S. n 
tne lg 
| IP | 


x. 
# / 7 
& | 
& 


HISTORIE| OF PLANTS. 


"Tens. 
\ 
« 


4 a ar 


eronic 
Tree Fl 


+ 


cn. 
{ F 7 : 
w_ 


| >, 
gu” 


Veronica minor. 


Little Flucllen , 
s V 


þ 


(| 
% 


504 THE SECOND ,BOOKE OF THE Oh. 
3 Thethirdkinde of Feronica creepeth with branches and leaues like vato Serpiliza, for which 
cauſc it hath been called Yeronics Serpillifolia, The lowers growe along;the ſmal and tender bran. 
ches,ofa whitiſh colour declining to blewneſle, The roote is ſmall and threddie, taking hold yon 
the vpper face of the carth, where it ſpreadeth, The ſecede is contained in ſmall pouches like the 
former,}_... —* I} i oF 
4 The fourth hatharoote ſomewhat woodie, from the which riſe vp leaues like the former, The 
imall vpright ſtalke isbeſer with the like leaues, bur lefler; at the top whereof commeth foorth 
ſlender ſ{pkie cloſely thruſt togither,and full of blewiſh lowers. : h 
5 Thefiftkinde of Yeronics bathgnany vpright braunches a foore high and ſomtimes more, 4; 
uiding themſelues into ſundrieother ſmall twigs; at the rop whereof do growe faire ſpikic tufts,bez. 
ring bright and ſhining blew flowers. The leaves are ſomewhat long, indented abourthe edges like 
a ſawe: the roote is compatt of many threds orſtrings. | TLS Tn 20 
6 Thefixtlookerh with his face vpright,haning ſundrie flexible braunches , ſer with leaves like 
vnto wilde Germander by couples, one right againſt another, deepely iagged abour the edges, in 
reſpeof the other before mentioned. The flowers are of a blewe colour, the roote is long, with | 
ſome threddes appendant thereto. Er E 
| | v4 Thephece, = 
Veronicagroweth vpon bankes,borders of fieldes, and graflie mole hils, in fandie groundes, and 
in woods,almoſt eueric where. | 4-46 | 
The fourth kinde,my good friende maſter Stephen Bredwell, praQticioner in phiſicke founde and 
ſhewed it me in theclofe next adioining to the houſe of maſter Bee, cheefe of the clarkesof hir 
Maieſties Counſell, dwelling at Barnes ncere London. The fift is a ſtranger in Englafid, butl have | 
it growing in my garden | | % | 
Theſe flower from May to September. 
| | | * The names. | | | 
Theſe plants are comprehended vnder this generall name Yeronice, with their additions, which | 
doe diſtinguiſh the onefrom the other: we do call them in Engliſh Paules Betonie, or Speetwell: 
in Welch itis called Fluellen,and the Welchpeople do attribute great vertues vnto the lame:in 
high Ducch Sz0wndhefll ; in lowe Dutch Eren pans, char is to fic, honor and praiſe. 
E ub Thenature. | | 
Theſe are of a meane temperature,berweene heate and drinefle, 
FRAY: % The vertnes. 


A ThedecoQion of Keyonica drunke, ſoderethiand healeth all freſh andolde wounds, clenſeth the 
 bloud fromallcorruption,and is good to be drunke for the kidneies,andagainſt ſcuruines and foul 

-_  fpreading terrers,and conſuming or fretting ſores,the ſmall pockes and meaſels, 
'. B Thewaterof Yeronjcadeftilled with wine, and redefſtilled fo often vntill the liquor waxe of ared- 
diſh colour : preuaileth againſt the old cough, the drineſle of the lungs , and all vicers and inflam- 


TE Og + 


4 » ow 
— vu = 
CO Oe 


| Of herbe Two pence. Chap.189. | 


| %T hedeſeription 
I T Erbe Two pence hath a ſmall and tender roote, ſpreading and ___ it ſelfe farre 


J within the ground;from which rife vp many little,tender,flexible ſtalkes trai ing vponthe | 
grounde,ſer by couples at certaine faces with ſmooth greene leaues ſomewhat rounde, 
whereof it tooke his name : from the boſome of which leaues ſhoote foorth ſmall tender footftalks, | 
whereon do growe little yellowe flowers,like thoſe of Cinkefoile or Tormentill, 
2 There is a kinde of Money woort orherbe Two pence, like the other of his kindeincch reſpec, | 
fauing it is altogither leſſer,whercin they differ, = oj | 


” " 
» ps 4 OVEN _ 
- CE ee Ou OCT, Eun a roars ago . (20 rl, 
- E ws 


. 


HISTORIE) OF: PLANTS. Wt 
I N unmularia. | 2 XN mmularis minor. 


It groweth neere vnto ditches and ſtreames,and other waterie places, andis ſometimes fouride 
in moiſt woods: I founde it vpon the bancke of the riuerof Thames, right againſt the Queenes pal- 
lace of White hall ; and almoſt in every countrey where I haue trauelled, © 

#4 The tome. | 

It Jowreth from May ill ſommer be well ſpent. | 

| __O | *% The names. ; Fo + 

Herbe Two pence is called in Latine Vummnalaria , and C rbiz: and of diuers eig/ae wi 
744. It is reported thar if ſerpents be hurtor wounded, they do heale themſelues with this herbe , 
whereupon came the name Serpentiria : it is thought tobe called Centummorbra , of the woonder- 
full cffe& which it harh in curing difeaſes; andiris called Nuwmmelarie, ofthe forme of money ,wher- 
unto the leaues are like : in Dutch Penmtunckcruyt t in Engliſh Money woorr; herbe Two pence , 
and Twopennie grafle. | ; | 


*+ The temper ature. 


Thatthis herbeis drie,the binding raſte thereof doth ſhewe: it is alſo moderately colde, 
The vertues. | | 
The flowers and featies ſtamped and laide vpon wounds and vlcers doth cure them : bur ir yor- a 
_ _—orllyeang ſtamped and boiledinoile oliuc with ſome roſen, waxe, and turpentine 
aacgedtnereto, - | | 
 Thejuicedrunkein wine.is good for the bloodie flixe, and all other iſſies of blood in manorwo- B 
man. Theweaknefle and looſenefle of the belly and lake; it helperh thoſe that vomite blood, and 


the Whites in fuch as haue them, | 


- Botked with wine and honie it cureth the wounds of the inwarde parts, and vicers of the longs, - 

andina worde, there-is nor a better wound herbe,nonot Tabaco it ſe}te,nor any other wharſoener. 
Thehetbe boiled in wine with a little honic , or meade , prevaileth much agaiaſt the cough in.D 

children,called the Chinne cough. \ Rv <4 | of 


THE SECOND {BOOKE OF THE 
Of Bugle,or Middle omfrey. Chapago. + 


I wn | 


RE bo 
ANNA 


| [| | ' $%»Thedeſeription. | 
I Peulsſpreadeth andereepeth alongſt the ground like Monie woort; the leaues be long, 
| far, and oleous, and of a browne colour for the moſt part, The flowers growe aboutthe 
' ſalkes in rundles, compaſſing the ſtalke , leauing berweene eueric rundle bare or naked 
ſpaces; and are of a faire blew colour,and often white. I found many plants of it in a moiſt ground 
vpon Blacke heath neere London, faſt by a. village called Charleton, bur the leaues were greene, 
and not browne at all like the other. mu | 
2 Bugle with the white flower differerh not from the precedent, in rootes,leaues and ſtalkes: the 


onely difference is, that this plant bringerh toarth faire milke white flowers, and the other,thole 
_ thatareblew. | | i | ÞY - 


[1] - w% Theplace. | | 
Bugaulagroweth almoſt in eueric wood and copies, and ſuch like ſhadowic and moilt places, and 
is much planted in gardens, 1 YET 
| | | | | v The F:7Me. 
Bugulz flowrethin Aprill and May, FY ©) 98 
| |.1.. :... . W[TAFApves. | _ 
Bugle is reckoned among the Conſoundes or wound hetbs : called of fome Conſol;damedis , BY 
| gulz,and Buglwm :inhigh Dutch Huntzel: in !l9we Dutch Senegroemnm; of 24a Lau enim: 
_ in Engliſh Browne Bugle: of ſome Sickle woprtzand herbe Carpenter, butnot truly, 
LET-1- *+ Themature. l.: 

Bugle is ofa meane temperature, between lac and drineſle, F rhe 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


al 
Fs ; * The VEeriaes. ' | ; 

Iris commended again! inwarde burſtings,and members torne, rent, and bruſed : and therefore A 
iris pur 1nto potions that ſerue for nodes,in which ir is of ſuch vertue,that it candi flolue and waſte 
away congealed and clotted blood, Ruellixg writerh that they commonly faie in Fraunce, howe he 
necderh neither phiſicion nor ſurgeron that hath Bugle and Sanickle, for it doth nor onely cure 
woundes being inwardly taken, bur alſo applied to them outwardly itis good for the infirmitics of 
theliver zit taketh away the obſtruRtions,and ſtrengthneth it, © | | 

The decoQion of Bugle drunken difſolueth clorted or congealed bloode within the bodice , hea- B 


lech and makerh ſounde all woundes of the bodie, both inward and outwarde. IM 
The ſame openerh the ſtoppingsot the liver and gall, andis good againſt the iaundiſe and ſeuers C 
Tenn decoctioncureth the rotten vicers and ſores of the mouth and gums. = 
Bugs! is excellentincuring wounds and ſcratches, and the juice cureth the wounds, vicers and E 

ſores of the ſecret parts,orthe bruſed and laide thereon. | 


* The deſeription. | | 
7 Ty Rnell or Brunel! hath ſquare hairie ſtalks of a foote high,beſerwith long hairie and ſharpe 
pointed leaties, and at the top of the ſtalkes growe flowers thicke ſet togither, like an care 
. , . Of ſpikieknap, of abrowne colour mixed with blew colours,and ſometimes white,of which 
= kindeI founde ſomeplants in Eſſex neere Henningham caſtell. The root is ſmall and veric threddy, 
2 Prunells altera,or after 1 Obelims and Perk Symphytum petraenm, (many plants hauin g like ver- 
_— in ſodering, conſolidating of wounds and fraftuces.) Is woodie,, full of twigs and well ſmelling, 
alngthe braunches of Orjganwm, with ſmall leaves, and the tufts of Time :the roote "> ory 
| | | nger 


08 THE SECOND, ROOKE)/OF:THE 

fingerbig,of apurple colour, 'T'o be ſhort,l cannot findechar any of our newwwriters haue affirey1 

found this plant as yer,though A1athio/u eriumpherh before victorie: but the neereſt plant theres) 

-(in mine opinion)is Coris Alonſpellienſars, and yetin ſome points they difter zand therefore 1leae 

\ this plant toaberter conſideration. [+ -Þþ ALLY | 

2 Prunells flore albo.) EE hs wa gui-l | | 
White flowred Seltcheale. | ab es * The deſcription. 


3. The chird/forr'of Selfcheale is like- vntothe 
: laſt deſcribed in roote, ſtalke, and leaues, and in 
- euery other point, fan tharthe flowers hereof 
- are of a perfect white colour, &the others notſo: 
| which maketh thedifference. - - | +: ; 
$14.1 42 19010 os Theplare, | 2 
+ -Thefuſtkinde'of Prunell or Brunel, growerh 
 verye commonly in all our fieldes throughou 
; England, > » 
: TheſecondBnmel, or $ mphytum petreum grow, 
ethna rurally vpon rocks, ftanic moun taines, and 
; grauellie grounds, ! | 
;  *% Thetime. | 
 Theſeplants flower forthe moſtpart allſon- 
: merlong. & | 
*% The names. | 
| Brunell is called inEngliſh Prunell, Carpen- 
. ters herbe,Selfcheale,and Hookeheale, & Sickle- 
| woort. It is called of the later Herbariſts Brungls, 
; and Prunell1, of HHathiolus, Conſolids minor, and 
+ Sol:dagominor ; bur ſaith Ruell;zs, the Dailicisthe 
| right Conſo/ids minor, and Solidago miner, | 
| % The nature. 
' Theſcherbsareof the temperature of Buguls, 
'%y | thatis to ſay,hot and drie,and ſomthing binding, 
| | | * The vertnes. Ke | 
A Thedecodtion of Prunell made with wine or water, doth ioine togither and make whole and 
ſound all wounds. both inward and outward, cuen as Bugle doth. Th | | 
B Prunellbruſed with oile of Roſes and vineger, and laid to the forepartof the head, ſwagerhand 
helperh the paine and aking thereof. | | | | 
C Tobeſhort, it ſerueth for the ſame thar Bugle doth, and inthe world there are nor two better 
wound herbes.as hath been often rom i | | | | 
D lis commended againſt theinfirmiries ofthe mouth, and eſpecially the ruggednefle,blackneſſe, 
anddrineſſe of the toong, with a kinde of ſwelling in the fame. Ir is an infirmitic among folders 
 tharlicin campe. 'The Germans call itye Bay, which happenerh not withour a continuall ague 
andleafie. The remedic hereof is the decoftion of Selfeheale, with common water , aftcr blood 
letting out of the veincs of the toong : and the mouth and toong muſthe often waſhed with the 
fame Aodtien, and ſometimes alittle vineger mixed therewith. This diſeaſe is thought to be vi- | 
knowen'to the old writers: but notwithſtandingif it beTonferred with that, which Pau/ws Arg/#*ts 
calleth Ery/ipels Cerebri, S. Anthonies fire of 'the braine, then will it not be thought tobe much 
differing, if ir be not the very ſame. * þ| | ; | 


Of the great Daijie, or Maudelen Wwoort. - Chap.192. 


* T; be A cription. 


x He great Daifie hath very many broade leaucs ſpred ypon the grounde, ſomewhat inden- 
| : ted aboutthe edges, of the breadthgfa finger, not vnlike thoſe of groundiwell ; among 
which riſe vp ſtalks of the height of a cubire, ſet with the like leaues, but lefler, inthe wp 


wheico! 


HISTORIE{OF PLANTS} : 509 
ewhite flowers with yellowe thrums in the middle like thoſe of the finglefickle 
Re lieabdh withour any ſmell atall:; [Theroote is full of ſtrings. | 


36 7 heplace. - 


It groweth in aides and the Lordars/of 
fieldes almoſteuery where. 4 | 
*% The tame. | 


Itflowrethand fouriſherh in Maie and Lune. 


£ 


*% The names. | 
It is called (as we haue ſaide) Bellis mater, and 
alſo Cop media vulnerarioranm,to make a dit- 
ference berweeneit and Zaguds, which is thejtrue 
Conſolidamedi: : notwithſtanding this is tolden 
ofall robe Cf nr , ora kinde of 
middle Confounde ; in high Dutch as Fachſius 
reporterh"Geftf5blume 5m Engliſh che grear 

Daiſic,and Maudleine | 


\. & The temperature, | 

] his greatDaiſicis moiſt in theendof theſe- 
cond degree, andcoldeinthe beginningof the 
ſame. l | IS, 1 

- * Thevertws. [— 

The leaues of thegreat Maudleine woort are A 
good againſt all buming vicers and apoſtemes, 
againſt the inflammation & running of the cies, 
being applied thereto, gen: 
with waxe,oile and turpentine, ismoſt excellent 
for woundes, eſpecially choſe wherein isany in- 
| flammation; and will not come todigeſtion or 
maturation,as are thoſe weeping wounds made in the knees,elbowes,and other joints, | 

The iuice,decoRion,or deſtilled water,is drunke to very good purpole againſt the ruptureor any C 
inward burſtings. | | ] | 

The herbe is good to be pur into Vulnerarie drinkes or potions, as one ſimple belonging thereto D 
_ neceſſarie, to the which effe& the beſt praftiſed do vic it, as a ftmplein ſuch caſes of great 

. Itlikewiſe aſfwageth the cruell torments ofthe gout, vied with a fewe Mallowes and butter, boi- E 

led and made to the forme of a pultis. = wg | 

The ſamereccipr aforeſaid vied in clyſters, profireth much againſt the vehement hear in agues, F 
and ccaſeth the torments or wringing of the guts and bowels: . | | 


Of little Daifies. Chap.193. 
| "*s *% The kindes. +} | | 
* Here be diuers of the ſmall Daifies differing in colour of the flowers , andalſointhe doy- 
bleneſle thereof, | | 


; 


| %* The deſcription. | *h 
I He Daiſic bringeth foorth many leaues trom athreddie rooteſmoorh, far, lbng,and ſom- 
what rounde withall, very fleightly indented about the edges; for the moſt parr lying flar 
| vpon the grounde:among which riſe yp the lowers,euery onewith his owne flender item, 
like almoſtto thoſe of Camomil!,but leſſer;of a perfe&t white colour,and very doubles 
2 Thedoublered Daiſicis like vnto the precedent ineuery reſpe#, fauing in the colour of the 
flowers:for this plant bringeth foorth flowers of a red colour, and the other white as aforeſaid. - 


I Bell 


-” 


The fame made vp into an vnguent or fales B | 


5 


5 | THE SECOND | BOOKE ' OF THE | 
1 Bells Hortenſic multiplex flore albo. | 2 Bellis Hortenſis fore rabye, 
—w ar earemn or [#77 | AD 


The double red Daiſie. 


| . 2 nefioontucr ſlveftris if 4 Alaeftrie. 
+ Theſmallwilde Daifie. = | - "The middle wilde Daiſie. 


© , £ > Z \ Rl 
= t-3 Z 2 D\) / / 
"i 7 7 - 3; Fo _ 


: {HIST ORIE/\'OF,PLANTS. TT 
* The deſeription. þ | | 
The wilde fielde Daific hath many leauesſpred vpon the grounds, like thoſe of the garden Dai- 


fie: among which riſevp fender ſteris,on the top whereof doth grow ſmall ſingle flowers like thoſe 

of Camomill,ſet aboura bunch of yeHow thrums, with a pale of white leaues,fomrimes white,now 

andthen red,andoften of both mixed togither.The roote is threddie, = | 
Theredoth likewiſe growe in the fields another ſort of wilde Daifie, agreeing with the former 


ie" reſpeR, ſawngrhar tis ſomewhat greater then the other,andrthe leaucs are fomwhat mare 


cut 1n the edges. 
- 5 Fells cerales ſave obularis, | 6 Bellic rerules Apulea. 
" The blewe rounde Daiſie. , | The Blewe [ealianDaife 


p 
a 
Ge 1T af 
* The leſeription. 


5 The blewe Italian Daifie hath manic ſmall threddie rootes , from which riſe vppeleaues like 
thoſe of the common Daiſie, of adarke e colour , among which commeth vp a fat ſtemme 
ſerrounde about with like leaues, burleſler. The flowers growe at the;toppe globefaſhion, that 
whe like a ball, of aperfe& blewe colour, verie like vnto the: flowers of Mountaine Sca- 
6 ThisIralianblew Daiſichath many leaues ſpred vpon the ground like vnto the former,bur ſom- 
what broader and more hollowed in like a ht which riſe vp flowers rounde as a ball, 
and of ableweolour. The roote is threddic. | | ded 1 
A TheFrench blew Daifie is like vnto the other blewe Daiſies in eche reſpeR , ſaving tis altogji- 
« leflerwhercin coulſiſteth the difference. | ; | | | 
| 7 . Bells 


$2 THE SECOND{BOOKE 'OF THE 
| 7 Bellvcernles Manſpeliacs. | $45 
Blew French Daiftes. | 


Is * Theplace., 
| | Thedouble Daiſies areplantedingardens; the 
| | Theblew Daiſtes areſtrangers in England, the; 
| .naturall place of aboccis fer foorth in argon 


The Daihes do flower moſtpart of the ſonmer, 
| *% Thenanes. bv 260M: 
' TheDaiſiciscalledin high Dutch aGlieben: 
 inlowe Dutch Bargrietenz in Lain Ze/is ming, 
and Conſol;da minor , or the middl, * Conſoung: of 
| Plenie Primulaveris: butthatname is morepro 
-vnto Primroſe, of certaine kindes of Mulleines; of 
| ſome Herbs Margarita: or Margarites hetbe:; in 
French Aargeerites, and Caſſandes : in Iralian jy; 
| diprimavert gentili : in Engliſh Daiſies and Bruiſe 
woort, . 
| ThebleweDaiſie is called Beflircerules: of ome 
| | | Ghobularia,of the rounde forme of the flower: it is 
| alfocalled C4phyllanthes and Frondifera : in Italian Botawaria : in Engliſh blew Daiſies and Globe 


\_ Daiſie, | = | 
 *% Thetemperature. . FS Ping 
The leſſer Daiſies are colde and moiſt and they are moiſt in the ende of the ſeconde degree, and 
colde inthe beginning of the ſame, = | 


A TheDaifies do mitigate all kinde of paines, buteſpeciallyof the ioints and gomeproceeding 
from a hot anddrie humour, ifthey be ſtamped with newe butter vnſalted, and applied vpon the 
painfull place : but they worke more effefually ifmallowes be added thereto, | 

B The lkaues of Daiſies vied among other potherbes , do make the bellie ſoluble, and arealſoput 
into clyſters with good ſucceſlc,in hot burning feauers,and againſt inflammarions of the inteſtines, 

C Theiuice of the leaues and roores ſnift vp into the noſthrils,purgeth the head mightilic of foule 
and filthy ſlimic humours :and helpeth the Megrim, | 

| D The ſamegjuentolittle dogs with milke keepeth themfrom owing great, if | 
E Theleauesſtamped,taketh away bruſes and{wellings pr ing of tome ſtroke,if they be ſtam- 
ped and laidethereon,whereupon it was calledin olde time Bruiſe woorte. ox 
E The iuicepurintothe cies cleereth them, and taketh away the watering. | 

G ThedecoGtionof the fielde Dailic (which is the beſt for phiſickes yſe)madein water and drunke, 

is good againſt agues,inflammation of the liuer,and all other the inward parts. ES 


| Of e Mouwſeare. Chap.194. 


Here be diuers forts of Mouſeare; whereof to write apart were to ſmall: purpoſe, confides 


. E ringthey may be diſtinguiſhed and yercomprehendedin one chaprer. 


- _ %* Thedeſcription, |; | Oe 
== He great Mouſearc hath greatandlarge leaues, greaterthen our common Pioſelis,of 
AG 3:81 Mouſeare, thicke,and full of ſubſtaunce. The ſtalkes and leaues be hoaric apdwhite, 
(0 Fo with afilken moſlines in handling like filke, pleaſant and faire in view.Itbeartth three 

| = or fower quatrangled ſtalkes,fomewharknortrie, a foote long. The rootes arc harde, 
woodie and full of ſtrings:the lowers come foarth at the top of the ſtalkes, like varo the ſmall Pille- 


abed,or Dandclion,of a bright yellowe colour, The 
vS - | = Y 


; : 


*The Verfues. 


— 


HISTORIE, OF /PLANT'S ||: 7 g12 

1; Theſecondkinde of Pilsſelais that herbe which we call A:ricula muris,or Mouſeare, being 2 
verycommon herbe (bur fewemore woorthy of conſideration) bicauſe of hisgoodeftet : and yet 
cleane varemembred of the old writers. Itis called Piloſellk of the rough, hairie, and whitiſh ſub- 
| ſtancegrowingon the leaues,whichare ſomewhar long like the little Daifie , but that they haue a 
{mall hollowneſſe in them, reſembling the care of a mouſe : vpon which conſideration the Greci- 
ans haue called it Adyoſoris , wherein they were greatly decciued , for it isnothing like vnto Aty0- 
: of Dioſcorides: his ſmall ſtalkes are likewiſe hairie , ſlender, and creeping vpon the ground, his 
aowers arc double , and of a pale yellowe colour , much like vnto Sonchis, or Hieracium , or 


\ 


1 Piloſells maior. , 2 Piloſelaregens. 


Great Mouſeare. | Creeping Mouſeare. 


+ The dſeriptio. 


3 The ſmall Mouſeare with broade leaues hatha ſmall, rough roote ; from which riſe vp ma- |_ 
nie hairic, and hoarie broade leauesſpred vpon the grounde: among which growerh vp a ſlender | 
ſtem; at therop whereof ſtande twoor three ſinall flowers, whichbcing ripe turne vnto 
downe thatis caried away with the winde. | of 
4 Theblewe Mouſeare hath a ſmall threddie roote, from which riſe vp many hairie leaues, | 
anouerworne ruſſet colour. The ſtalke is likewiſe hairie ,as is cuery parr of the plant:the flowers | 
RW ur ofa blewe colour: after which followe little haitic pouches or ſeede vellels, like 


heards purſe, | | 
ur lat? S 7 y 3 Piloſella 


514 THE. $ECOND "BOOKE OF THE 


Piloſells minor latifelia. 
: Brod exe Molar | 


| The place, 


Theſe plants do grome vpon ſandie bankes, and vntolled places that lic open to the aire, 
is The tive, 


They flower in Maic and Tune. | 
" 7 henemes. 


Great Mouſeare iscalled of the later Herbariſts P;loſels : the ſmaller likewiſe Piloſells, and Aw 
ricula muyis: in Dutch Nagelcrunt,and PBuyſooz, of ſome Holoſtium lecune: in French Orcile d 
rat ou ſouris:1n Iralian Pb: in Engliſh great Mouſeare,ſmallMouſeare,and blewe Mouleare. 

* 'The temperature. 

They are hot and dric of : remperature , of an excellent aſtringent facultie, with a certain hot 

renuitic admixed. | 
% T be VErtues. 
A ThedecoGtion of Pibſell ak doth ( Cure and heale all wound s,both inwarde and ourwarde, 


it curethhernies,ruptures or burſtings, | | 


B Thelcauesdriedand madeinto powder, profit much in healing woundes being ſtrawed there- 


vpon, 

C Thedecodtion ortdciuiceſs of ſuch excellencie, thar if teele edged tooles owing hot be 
drenched and cooled therein ofrentimes jirmakerh them fo hard, thar ey will cut ſtone or iron,be 
itncuer ſo hard withour turning! the edge of waxin 

D Thisherbebeing vicdin gargariſmes,curerh'the Soofenefle of ofrhe Vuula. SR 7 

Z Beingrakenindrinke ithealerh the fluxes of the wombe , as alſo rhe ha ane hs 
and Enterocele: it glueth and conſounderh pak taierh che ſwelling of the ſplecne, an the blow 


ce cxcrements procured thereby, 


F The Apothecaries of the lowe countries  nkke a ſyrupe of the iniceofthis herbe, which they vi 
tor the cough, conſurpption, and priſicke. | | 


j 
4 
n 
[4 
7 - ! 
L % L 
7 . £- : 
4 
- 


*-3z 
al 4 
> TAWw=" Br 20s 5 Wc AIG, Dn " 


" . 
? 
$ 
F 

. , 
5 £ 
, x 

: 

- 

£ 


d 


. Y Y - 
 —_ Dp 1 
E\P- DR) OP, 
=I NATE 

IJ N 1 £ ] 
of omg / 
II 

\V/ avng a "AS. 

| & i $ 5 net 
\T4 
— ; f 

\ " 


*% The deſcription. | | | 

1 T* Ngliſh Cudweed hath ſundrie ſlender and vpright ſtalks, diuided into many branches, and 
þ th as high as common Wormwdod, whoſe colour and ſhape it doth much reſem- 
le; The leaues ſhoote from the bottoine of the rurfe full of haires, in ſhape ſomewhat like 

a Willow leafe belowe, but aboue they be narrower, andlike the leaues of ? /yliamm, or Fieawoortz 
among which do grow ſiwall pale coloured flowers, like thoſe of the ſmall Conzz4 or Fleabane : the 


_ wholeplantisof abittertaſte. 


2 Theſecondbeing our common Gnaphalium, or Cudweede, is a bafe or loweherbe, nine or ter: 
inches long, hauing many ſmall ſtalkes or render branches , and little leaues, couered all ouer with 
acertaine white cotton,or fine wool,and very thicke.The flowers be yellow,and growe like buttons 
at the top of the ſtalkes. | __ | 


3 Thethirdekinde of Cudweede, or Cotton! weede being of the fa be like vnto the other Cud- 


weede laſt recited, in ſtalkes and white cotton leaues, but is altogither ſmaller and lower, ſeldome 
growing an handfull high, The flowers groweat the top of the ſtalkes in ſmall round buttons, of 
colour and faſhion like the other Cudweede. | 5:3 | | 

4 Thefourtch being the Cotton weede of the hils and ſtonie mountaines, is ſoexceeding white 


and hoarie, that one would thinke it to bea plant made of wdoll, which may very eafily be knowen 


by his picture withoue other deſcription. 


5 Thefiftkinde of Corton weede hath leques and ſtalkes like the other of his kinde, and differerh 
mtnarthatthisplant bearerh a buſh or tuftof purple flowers ,otherwiſe itis very like. | 


d 


5. Theſixtis ike vnto the laſt recited, bur greater: the flowers are of an exceeding bright red co- 
lour,and of an aromaticall (weete ſmell, | | 


: 
z 
ry 


Kkhk 2 | | 3 Gnaphalium 


w 


tothe 

ie within, and | 
hereof | 

flow | 

the middeſt of the 


3 woi 


2; andin [ 
like ynto the other of this 


aliurs montamon ſuaue rubens. 


woollie; at the 


; 


ſuch woollie leaues bordering 


all Mouſeare 


h 


4p 
Bright red mounraine Cotton weeds, 


four his deſcription, 


6 Gn 
m 
, hauing | 
elſe but wooll it ſelfe ; 
ale yellow colour, 


P 


6 nee 


=_— 
7 
—_ 
Oo 
[6] 
m2 
O 
(S] 
y 
-- 
S] 
half 
[6a | 
[0 


* The deſeiption 
or Corton weede of Cla 
long leaues,like the fi 


ww, O 
g Intle 


fide. The talkes in like manner are v 


phat; 


hrof nine or ten inches,havin 


Purple mountaine Cotton weede. 


<< 


montinum 


py. \ 
id © DN DV KB Q % / . 
Q LN N > AW a a” 2 j , * o 
1 Vil OS 


» 
-” os —_ 
Ny 


S \ Is = . 


alum 


W/ - - 
41-&; 


ph 


eſeuenthkinde of Gzz 


4 Gra 


1h 


> of anhoarie colour on the our 
abour, that a man would thinke it to be noth 


flower come foorth fundric ſmall heads of a! 
The ;oote is blacke,and ſomewhat fibrous. 


commeth foorth a faire flower and a fitant 


HISTORIE 


4 
4 
4 


OF PLANTS. © $19 


o* The deſcription. | 


Thereis a kind of Cotton weed being of greater 
beauty thenthe reſt, that hath ſtraight & vprighr 
ſtalks, three foote high or more , conered with a 
moſt ſoftand fine wool, 8 in ſuch plentiful maner, 
thata man may with his handes rake it from the 
ſalke in great quantitie :which ſtalke is beſet with - 
many ſmall, long and narrow leaues, greene von 
the inner ſide, andhoarie on the other fide, fa- 
ſhioned ſomewhat like the leaues of Roſemarie, 
bur greater. The flowers do growe at thergp of 
the ſtalkes in bundles or tufts, conſiſting of many 
ſmall lowers of a white colour, and very doyblc, 
compact or as it were conſiſting of little filuer 


: 


ſcales, thruſt cloſe togirther, which do make the 


ſame very double, Whenthe flower hath long 
flouriſhed, and is waxen old, then commeth there 
in the middeſt of the flower, a certaine brawne 
yellow thrum, ſuchas is in the middeſt of the Dai- 
fiez which flower being gathered when it is yon, 
may be kept inſuch manner as it was gathered, [ 
meane in ſuch freſhnefſe and well liking, by the 
ſpace of a whole yeere after in your chett or cl(c- 
where; wherefore our Engliſh women haue called 
it Liue long, or Live for euer, which name doth 


aptly anſwer his effects, 


9 Filago ae Herbs inpia. | | 
Heibe thpious pewicked Cudweede, . 


Hl \ / 
: 
ny 
. . . 
CY i 
. N f 
a. 
>Q>\ \IF 
| 
* *. 3. '> 
mm 
% : 
fe . a" 
— Y 
NR.» 
" #) 
\ i JD . 
KAN X 
S 
\-V % | 
il. . 
* 
\ \\ 
X x \J 
 * 
as. > 
—_— 4 
> 
COD 
by >IX\ [ 
W 
) 
- y " 
— - 
" dl 
\F 7 
. " 
\ | 
/ S l, 
J f 
N 


- 


" SE - ""M ma po 4 \\ 
* 1 G - = % % % . 
" = » » 
Gs HESS k A 5 
F ” 4 - 
/ ——_—— 
PLE 


- W BY 
C ” Aa 
RXRRSS 


538 THE SECOND; BOOKE OF THE 


$ Thecightkindeof Cottonweede is called Fi/ago, to make ſome difference tharir may be gi. 
ſtinguiſhed from Gnafal/zm: yet without doubt it is owe of the kindes of Gnafatiurs, as the others 
are. This plant hath three or fower ſmall grayiſh,cotronie or woollie ſtalks,growing ſtraight from 
the roote,and commonly without branches. Theleanes be long,narrow,whitiſh, ſoft, and wodllie 
like the other of his kinde. The £-wers be rounde like buttons, growing verie many rogither at the 
top of the ſtalks, bur nothing ſo yellowe as Mouſeare, which turne into downe.and are caried away 
with the winde. | | 11 | 
9 Theninthis like vnto the laſt befoze mentioned,in ſtalkes,lJeaues,andflowers, but is altogither 
ſmaller & much lower, & for the moſt part thoſeflowers which appeerfirſt are the loweſt & baſeR. 
and thoſethat comeafrer growe =, erg children ſceking to oucrgroweor ouertop their paren ts, 
(as many wicked children do)for which cauſe it hath beene called Herba ipia, that is,the Wicked 
Herbe,or Herbe impious. 


_ 10 Leontopodiuan frur Pes Leoninus. 4 It Leontopodium: arumn. 
Lion Cudweede, | 11 Small Lion Cudweede. 


Ek * The deſcription, | 

Io The echrh plantcomprehended vnder thetitle of Gnafalium , (being without doubra kinde 
thereof,as may appeere by the ſhape of his lowers and ſtalkes , couered oher with a ſoft woolllike 
vnto the other kindes of Cotton weede) is an handfull high or thereabours , beſet with leaues like 
Gnafalinm anglicwn, but ſomewhat broader, Arthe top of the ſtalke there groweth a flower of 2 
blackiſh browne violetcolour, beſet about with rough, and woollic hairie leaues, which make the 
whole flower to reſemble the rough haired foote of a Lion, ofa Hare, or a Beare, or rather in 
mine opinion,of a rotigh footed Doue,'ſhe heads of theſe flowers when they are ſpred abroad,car- 
rica greater circumference then is required in fo ſmall a plant, 8 when the flower is faded, the ſeed 
1s wrapped in ſuch'a deale of wooll,thar itis ſcarſely to be founde out, + | 

11 This finall kind of Zeentopodiam being likewiſe a kind of Cotton weed, (neither by Dieſeorider, 
Fuchſius , or any other auncient writer once remembred ) hath one ſingle ſtalke-nine inches in 
height, $teaues of Gnafalummontanwm : which leaues and ſtalkes are white , with a thicke hoari 
Ne » bearing at the top pale yellowe flowers like Gnafalium HMontanwn: the roote {lender 
421d WOOddale, | = 1 h 


| | | * The lace. (1 mary 
ihe firſt growerh in the darke woods of Hainbſtodde, and the woodes neere vnto Derforde by 
Lond, The comet ypon drie ſandic banks. The thirde growethat a place called Mere 
zcy,lixC tailes from Colcheſter,nccre vnto the ſea fide. i Th 
| 4 | 7 4 6 
| ot” 


x 


n 


—- HISTORIE: OF PLANTS. 71” 519 
Thereſt grow vyporemountaines and hillie grounds,and barren paſtures. . | 


]he kind of Gaaphafiwm newly fer foorth, growerh naturally neerewnto the Mediterranc an ſea , 
from whence it hath beene brought and plantedi in our Engliſh _—_ 


*% The time. 
They flower for the moſt pace from Inne| ro the cnd of Augult. 


% The names. 

Cotton weede is called in Greeke z-apa21c; and it is called "P73 bicauſe men vſe the Cabder 
leaues of it in ſteed of Bumbaſte or Cotton, as Paulus CAEgineta writerh 3; Plinie faith it is called 
Chan : as though he ſhoulde Nba Corron ;or ichath aſoft and white cotton like vato 
humbaſte , whereupon allo it was c of diuers Tomentitie, and Cotonaria: of others Centurcu- 
lus,and Ceptuncaderis,and Albinwn,which worde is founde among the baſtarde names.But the later 
worde by reaſon of rhe white colour doth reaſonably well agree withir. Ir is alfo called Zombzx, 
hun;lis filego and Herba kypis,bicaule the yonger,or thoſe flowers that ſpring vp later,are higher, F 
and ouertop thoſe that came firſt, as many wicked children do vnto their Parents,as before rouched 
in the deſcription :in Engliſh Cotton weede, Cudweede, Chaife Ws pn peric Corton. 


' % Thenature. | 
Theſe herbes hs ofan aſtringentor binding and drying ay] 


*% T he wvertues. 
Gnaphalinon boiledi in ſwogler, .clenſeth the haire from nits and ice: :alſo 7 herbe being laid] in A 
wardrobes and preſles, keeper apparell from morhes, 
The ſame boiled in wine and drunken,killeth wormes,and bringeth Soy foorth, and prenailech B 
againſt the birings and ſtingings of venemous beaſts. 
Thefume or ſmoke of the herbe dried, and taken with a funnell, bein ldadtherin, & receiued eo: 
inſuch maner as we vle to take the fume of Tabaco, that is,with acr pipe made for the ſame 


urpoſe by the potter , preuailerh againſt the cough of thelun O the tache or paine of the 
let clenſeththe breſt and inward _ hd A P 


; OfGolden *Mothwoort,or (udweeds, Chap.196. 


+'The kinder 


T Herebe divers ſortes hereof,c onteined vnder divers YR of one ſtocks or orkiardandale 
them Cudweedes,or Chaſfewcedes,or Conon weedes, ....;| | 


* '# The deerption "Y F _ ET a7 


Olden Mothwoort bringeth ſoorthlender ſtalkes camels hard PTAs divided 
into diuers final braacke®: whereup upon do growe leaues forewhat rotgh, and of a white 
1 $111 *: colour, very: auth tagged tike South OR, whichthe grayerhath omitted inthe pic- 
ture, The flowers ſtand on the top of the ſtalkes ioined cogitheri intuftes of a'yellow erm © aa | 
ring like golde 7iv forme reſewbling theſcalie flowers of Tanſic, orthe nid boco'of 
ersof Camomil,which being kn before they be — remain beaurifulfoh An 
afrer,as my ſelfe did ſee in mo a4 FE of Maſter Weg one of the of hir Maicſties Counſell, 
which was ſent him amonge char idgs from Padua inIralie. For cauſe of long laſting, the 


Images and carued CE e woontto weare garlanids therof, wherupon ſome haue called it Gods 
flower, For cp pupoſe Ptolemie kingof Anggpodid molt —_— olferus them, as plinie 


bh er ILY rs ;nhich LOketmcalehComa.ape, of the gpden 
theplane. 
*4. | I Elchryfon 


Wiiteth, oy 
ST), 


Ferre 


y, © 2 
'S 


520 THE SECOND BOOKE 
4 Eves axrem | "8 
coin Wor} 


\ 
* The place. | . 
They growe in moſt vntilled places of Italicand Spaine, in medowes i "Ol the ſoile is barren, 
and abour the banks of rivers. They are ſtrangers in England. | 
 » Thetime, 
They flowerin Auguſt and September, ron rheghat and Phzie do number 
them among the flowers of the ſpring. 
h liedof Diſeorid fam oebryſow , and likewiſe 
| GoldenMothwoort is called of Dioſcorides *hizgumy: Plenie calleth it Hel , and 
Theophraſtus >Gazarranſlatethir Free :in Englith Gold lower Golden Does 
Cudweede; being doubrleſle a kinde of Gnaphalum, or Cudweede, 
* The temperature. 
Iris (faith Galen Jof power to cut and make __ 
-  * Thevergats.. - \ 
A Doſe orides reached that 2 "branch theregf fdrunke i in wine, is = qd them tharcan hatdy 
make water; againſtſtin ging of ſcrpents, pains of the huckle bones ;: and raken in ſweerewinei 
diſoluethcongealed blood. 


B Thebranches and lcaucs laid, among cotheokeepul chem from cots 6 whengapon ihatbens | 
called ms Mothnerde os, MPO þ IE \- q 


”_E 3 


- His cone Se cont or Hl ': coy m—_ calledof the Sa hear Vl 

_ M@cades,is a plaritthar hath ſtalks of {panlong,and ſlender,wher memo 

Es white ard hs amy ————— tops ofthe c res 
con 


; HISTORTE OF PEANITS. © HT wt. 
goodfme dfabtright yellowe 
colour, which being garhered before they be ripe,do keepe their colour nee long time with. 


. 


. *% The deſcription. 
O 


3 About Nemaufium and Mountpellier, there groweth another kinde of C hx3/ocome,or as it may 
be called Starch as Citrinaattera; but that as this 5 is in all points Vke, ſoinall reſpeRts iris lefſer 
& ilenderer,blacker,8& not of ſuch beaurie as-the forme wing more neer vito an alhiecglotr, 
conliſting of many ſmall twigs a foote' Tong. The r ſtr ings aneIEs 

fs afid ra ties. This plant is 


flowers , but 
dens... 


kinde are broade? and 
ndbearcth the verie 


flowers of Stachas Citrinaaltera, ng 
egreſs, The roote is like the former, witho 


woolly or flockey 
growewith their ſceds 


——- 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF! THE 
oco | bl 134. 4 AMT ant hus Galeni. 
Galens Mothwoorr. 


£ | 
(-/ FT T3 


Heliechry fos filneftris, | | 1 
Wilde Goldilocks, ; * The place. 


Theygrowe in rough and grauellie places a 
moſt eueric where neere vnto the Rhene , elpC- 
cially berweene Spira and Vormacia. | 


%*T, he time, 
They flower inilune and Iuly. *_ 


| Thenames. | 
| Golden Flower.is.called in Latine Coma aures, 
\--: of his golden lockes orbeaurifull buſh, andalſo 
...- Twneraria: mihops Stechas citr ins Amaranthu 
| -» diters Fuchſit, & 7 rag; : of lome Linaria awres, 
' 1. -butnotrruely: in Greeke Chryſocome + in Dutch 
- Reynbloemen, and Fotten cruyt : in lcaliao 
*  Amarantho Gialo : in Engliſh Golde Hower, 
x*. Gods Flower,and Golden Stcecados. 


| * Thetemperature and vermues. | 
© Theflowers of Golden Stoxchadosboiledin 
wine anddrunke, expell wormes our of the 
lie; and being boiled in lee made of ſtrong aſhes 
doth kill lice and nits,, iftheybe bathed: rhere- 
with. The other faciillies axe referredrothefor- 


© - 'merplantsmenrionedinthelaſt chapter. 


— 


W- 1 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS: | | ond 
of Coftmarie and «Maudelein. Chap198. 


1 Bulſamitamas, | | 2 Balſamits famina. 


| Maudclein, 
Coltmaric. | ud 
fl WO INIANT; MOCDODGAR 
JN SANE UPTUDIS 2567.7 
Ya ” 
WAY V; $99; oy , ” #71 
VOY VV (bas Ny 
. Fa . A 


J 


% The de [cription. | | | 
1 Oſtmarie groweth vp with round hatd ſtalks two foote high, bearing long broadleaues 
finely nickedin theedges, of an ouerwotne whitiſh. greene colour. The tuttor bundle is 

of a golden colour, conſiſting of many little flowers like cluſters ioined togirherin a 

rundle, after the maner of Golden Staechados, The rooteis of a wooddie ſubſtance,by nature very 
ducable,not withour a multitude of lictle ſtrings hanging thereat. The whole plant is of a pleafanc 

{mell,ſauour andraſte, Dr | | 
2 © Maudeleinis ſomewhartlike vato Coſtmarie (whereof itis a kinde) in colour ſmell, raſte, and in 
thegolden flowers,ſer ypon the tops of the ſtalks in round cluſters. Itbringeth foorth anumberof 
alkes,flender,and round. The leaues are narrow,long, indented, and deepely cut about the edges. 
cluſter of flowers is leſſer than thatof Coſtmaric , bur of a berter ſmell andyellower colour. 

Theroores arelong laſting andmany, | = & 1 
There is anotherkinde of Ba/ſamits, which we haue called Agrratum, as alſo thar other with the 
white flowers, that is all one with Baiſamita,& youmay cal them at your pleaſure cither Ageratwm,or 
Baiſanta: the Grecians call it 4yienv, which isin Latine CMeeratum, wel non ſentſeens : calledin 
ſhops (though vneruly) Eupatorium. The flowers arc of a beautifull and ſeemely ſhew, which will 
not looſe their excellencic of grace in growing, vntill they be very olde , and therefore called of 
Meſue wa cy tens, as before; andare like 1n tufts to E/rochryſon , but of a white colour, and is 
the rrueand right <Ager atwy of Dioſcorides , although there hath beene great controuerſie which 

ſhould be the true plane. Pf HS 5, | WP: - 


% The 


114 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
 % Theplace. | | 
They growe euery where in gardens, andare cheriſhed fortheir ſweete flowers and leaue, 
They bring foorth their tuſtes of yellow flowers in the ſommer monethes, 
* The names. wo | 


Coſtmarie is called in Latine Balſamita maior Or mas : of ſome Coitus hortoram: it is alſo called 
H1:nthaGraca,and Saracenica officinarum : of Tragus Aliſma: of Mathiolus Herba Greca: of other; 


| Saluis Romana,and Herba laſſulata : of ome Herba D.Marie: in Engliſh Coltmarie,and Alccoatt. 
in high Dutch Frauwenkraut t in lowe Dutch Hepdutſch windkraut tin French cog. 
Mandelcin is without doubt a kinde of Coſtmarie, called of the Italians Ginla: of Y alerin, Cer. 
dus Mentha Cov wab;fer 4,and E upatoritm Meſa: of Dioſcorides A eration, oe Coitus minor hortenſz. 


in Engliſh Maudelein, = 
| . _ %*Thenature. 
They arc hot and dric in the ſecond degree. 
: | | * Thevertues. j 
, A Theſeplants are very effetuall,eſpecially Maudelcin,and raken either inwardly or outward! 
prouoke vrine,and che fume thereof doth the like,and mollifieth the hatdnes of the matrix, 
B Coſftmaricisputinto ale toſteepe,as alfo into the barrels and ſtands among thoſe herbes wher.. 
with they do make ſage ale z which drinke is very profitable for the diſcaſes aforeſaid. 

C Theleaues of Maudleine and Adders toong ſtamped andboiledin oile olive, adding thereto 
3. little waxe, rofin, anda little turpentine,mnaketh anexcellent healing vnguent, or incarnatiue ſalue 
h co raiſe or bring vp fleſh from a deepe and hollowe wounde or vicer, whercofI haue hadlongexye- 

rience. | | | iv 

D Theconſerve made with the leaues of Coſtmarie and ſugar,doth warme and drie the braine,and 
opcneth the ſtoppings of the ſame : ſtopperh all Cararrhes, rheumes, and deſtillations,taken in the 
quantitie of a beane, | | | | . | 

E , Theleauesof Coſtmarie boiled in wine and drunken, curerh the gripingpaine of the bellic, the 

guts,and bowels,and cureth the bloodie flixe. ; 
F ltis good for themthat haue the greene {icknes, or the dropſie, eſpecially in the beginning, and 
it helpeth a{rhathaue a weake and cold liuer, ' " 


y do 


G Thelſcedtexpellethall manner of wormes out of the belly,as wormleede doth, 


Of Tanſe. Chap.199. 


% The aeſicrption. ; 
Anſie groweth vp with many ſtalkes,bearing on the tops of them certaine cluſteredtufts, 
with flowers like the rounde buttons of yellow Romaine Cammomill,or Feuerfewe(with- 
out any leaves paled about them) as yellowe as golde. The leaues be long, made asitwere 
of a great many ſet togither vpon one ſtalke,like thoſe of Agrimonie , orrather wilde Tanfie, veric 
like rothe female Ferne,bur ſofter and leſſer, and eueric one of them ſlaſhed inthe edges as arethe 
lcauesof Ferne. The roote is tough, and of a wooddic ſubſtance. The whole plant is bitter intalte, 
and of a ſtronge ſmell,bur yerpleaſanr. | 14 | 
2 Thedouble Engliſh Lanke hath leaues infinitely iaggedand nicked, andcurled withall, like 
vnto a plume of feathers:it is altogither l:ke vnto the other both in ſmell and taſte;as alfoin flowers, 
but more pleaſantly ſmelling by many degrees, wherin eſpecially conſiſteth the difference. _ 
3 The thirdekinde of Tanfie hath leau-s, rootes, ſtalkes, and braunches like the other, and dif- 
tereth from them,jin that this hath no ſmell orſauour ar all,and the flowers are like the common ſin- 


v 


ele Fetherfewes | | 


5 
[ 


4 Thefourth kindeof Tanſie hath broadilehues much jagged and well cur, like the leaues of Fe- 


therfew,but ſmaller and more deepely cut, The ſtalke is ſmall, a foote long, whereupon do grone 
little tufts of little white flowers, like the tuft of Milfoileor Yarrow. The herbe is in ſmell and fauour 


like the commog Tanfic,bur not alcogither ſoſtrong, : 
44 | | : 1 Tanacchun 


HISTORIE OF/ PLANTS. 


1 Tanacetum. = 2 Tanacetwn criſium Anglicwn. 


Tanlie. wngig odboats: 4 Double Engliſh Tanke. iF- 


ih 


EYE 


OE Ln 


po a 


T e_—_— non odorum. 
Vnſauorie Tanſte. 


_— 


i# —_— - 
NA IISIE 


526 THE SECOND| BOOKE OF THE 


* The place. 
The firſt growerh wildei in ficlds as well as ingardens:the others growe; in my garden. 
* T he time. T 


They flower in Iuly and Auguſt | { 


KG WS 
The firſt is called Tanfie,the ſecond Double Tanſie, the third Vaſauorit Tanſie, the laſt White 
Tanſie: in Latine Tanacetwn, and Athanaſia, as chough' it were immoral 1 bicaule the flowers do 
not ſpecdily wither: of ſome Artemifubut vatruly. 
t* Thenature. 
The Tanſies which ſwell fireerare hocin the ſecond degree, and dric in te third. Thatwithow 
{mell is hot and dric,and of ameanc temperature, : | | 
* Thewertnes. | 
A Intheſpringrime are thade with the leaties hereof newly Guocins 4 with egs cakes or tan- 
ſies which be pleaſant in taſte,and good for the ſtomacke. For if any bad humors cleave thereunto, 
it doth perfe&tly conco@rhem, and {cowre them downwards. Theroote preſerued with honie or 
ſugar,is an eſpecial! ching againſt the gowr, if cueric day for a certaine ſpate,a reaſonable quantitic 
thereof be eaten faſting, 


- B Theſcedeof Tanſiers a fingular and approoucd medicine againſt wormes,fori in what ſort ſever. 
it be taken, it killeth and driveth them foorth. 


C  Theſamepownd, andmixed withoileoliueis very good againſt the paine and ſhrinking ofthe 


{inewes, 


D rar. —_— wine.it is grodagyiibe peg inddoynd when a mancannot 
_ piſlebutby crops. | 


of Fares. | Chap.200, 


I Mitricara. | 


HISTORIE: or PLANTS.” wh 


TVET - Thedsſerip fon: - | | 

' hs —_ foorth many little round ſtalkes , dinided into certaitc branches. The 

þ leaues are tender, diuerſly torne & lagged, and nickt on the edges like the firſt and neathet- _ 

moſt leaues of Coriander,bur greater./The flowers ſtand on the top of the branches ,with a 

ſmall pale of white leaues, ſer round abour a yellow ball or butron, likethe wilde fic!d Daific. The 

roote is hard and rough: the wholeplanr is of a lightwhiriſh greene color, of a ſtrong ſmell and 

r taſte, 

_ ſecond kinde of Feuerfew . Matricaris, or Parefvining, differerh fromthe former, in thatic 
hathdouble flowers z otherwiſe in {mell,leaues,and branches,itis all one with common Fenerfew: 

There is athird ſort called Mountain Feucrfew, of Cerolws Cluſixs his deſcription, that hath ſihall 
and fibrous rootes3 from which proceed ſlender wooddieſtalkes, a foote high and ſomwhar more, 
beſet or garniſhed about with leanes like Cammomil!, deepely iaggedor cur, of the fauour or ſmell 
ofFeuerfew,bot not ſo ſtrong z inraſte hot,bur nor vnpl ant. Ar Erop of the ſtalkes there come 
foorth ſinall white flowers not like vnto the firſt, bur rather like vnto New abes, or White | 

oormwood. 
"e which kinde I haue growing in my node another forelike vnto the firſt kinde, but of a moſt 
+ pleaſant fvecre ſauour,inreſpeR ofany of thereſt. | 
* Theplace. | | | 
The common _ le Feuerfewe dba in hedges, gardens, and Fee olde walles. Ic ih to 
owe among rubbith. There is oftenrimes founde when it is digged vpalittle coale vnder the 
Frings ofthe roote,and neuer withoutit, wherof Cardane in his booke of Subcilities te) downe 
divers vainc and rrifling things. RIF = | 
%* T he time. | | 

They yower for the moſt part all the ſommer long, | J 
*% Thenames. | 

Fenetfewe is called in Greeke of Dzoſcor idts repYnor, of Galen & <5 one of his Ty ns win 
Latine Parthenium, Hatricaria,and Febrifuga,ot Fuchſias Artemiſia Tenuifolia: in Iralian Ama 
rele; in Duzch Moeder crupt t in French Eergoute : in n Bngliſh' Fedderfewe,, and ops 
ken from his force of driving awaic agues, | | 
&* The temperat | 
Feuerfewe doth manifeſtly heate : it is hotin the gi. WR bf drie i in the ſecond it cen 
ſerh,purgeth,or ſcoureth,openerh and fully performeth all thug birter things catz do. | 

% The vertues. _ 

Itisa grea t reatremedie againſt the diſcaſes ofthe matrix it procurerh womens ſicknes with peed; A 
| irbringe foorth the afte:birth,and the dead childe,whether itbe drunke in the decodion, or boi- 
let inabath and the woman firouer it; or the berbes fodden and appligh to the cm, part, in n man- 
ner of a cataplaſme orpulris. | 

Dioſeortdesalſo reacherh thar itis paokradlie applied ro Sainr Anchichiles fire; to all infantnai-B 
0n5,andhot fivellings,if it bElaide vito both flowers and leaues.. bt | 

The ſame author affirmerh,thatthe powder of Feuerfewe drunke with oximell,or ſyrupe of vine- C 
ger,or wine for wantofthe dagaeach ayay flegme and melancholy,and is good forthemthae 
are purſte,and haue their lun ſtuffed with dee. and is porn $66; pan wy drunke againſt 
ihe ſtone;as the ſame ky wth 

Feuerfew dried and made in der, andriwo-drains of it: with honid pep/foctts wine, D 

purgerh by melancholic and feeme;whereforeiris verP good for them thar aregiddicinrhe - 
heas » or which hauethe turning called Yer#go,, Way ae oh as ne Alſo 


itisgood for ſuch as be melanc 
hcherbc is good againſt CEN hehe hardne and ſtopping ofthe E 
lame. being in winc 
Thececottionof the ſameis good for womento fitouer, forthe albiefad bþ 
Iris viedborh;jn drinks,and bound to thewreſts with bay ſal, and yonkroſgianped 
Me NG poogns ER | 


F; —* } 


5 
© % 
4 k $ £3 
ue 7: _ 0 
ic 2 
ba . 


528 THE SECOND BOOKE OP THE 
Of Poley,or Pellamountaine. Chap.zor. 


Of Pellamouncaine there be diuers ſorts,as (hall be declared in this preſent chaprer, 


2 Polrum montanun lutew. 
Yellowe Poley mountaine. 


— < 7 
— 


HATE 
nil 


\ WV : 
- Fo» 
w—— x 
7 : 
£* by 


W 
) 


y 
SY 
\ o 
=_ , Fwy 
Fg , 
# \ b 
” Y 
"> 
” + ro 
Ps I 
A 4)! - 
= ys £ [4 
"x < 
b 
4 - <4 . 
"=. # 


\ 


wo 
- - LG 
: ny 


* 
A 
IW.." 
% =. 
% 
7, d 
þ / 
F 


\ 
=->\\ 
W 
R 


abrabch 4 % The dfeription Sd nit 
I He firſt kinde of Polizm,or in Engliſh Poley of the mountaine, is a little tender and ſweete 
- ſmelling herb,veric 1rd irtooke his namezfor it is not only hoarie in part,but 


his hoarie flockineſle poſleſſeththe whole plant, rufrs and all, being noleſſe hoatic then 
Gmaphaliuen , eſpecially where it groweth neere the ſea ar the bending of hils , or neere the ſandie 
ſhores of the mediterranean ſea: from his wooddie and ſomewhat threddie roote,ſhooteth foorth 
ſtraight fromthe carch 7"ww wen of linall round ſtalkes nine inches long , and by cerraine diſtances 
from the ſtalke proceed fomewhatlong leaues like Gnaphalium , which have light nickes aboutthe | 
edpes, that ſtand one againſt another, incloſing the ſtalke : inthe roppe of the ſtalkes ſtande ſpokie 
rufts of lowers, white of colour like Serpilluns.: This plant is ſtronger of ſent or ſauour thenany of | 
thereſt following whichſent is ſomewhar ſharpe and affe<ting the noſe with his ſveerenefſle. = 
2 Thetuftes ot che ſecond kind of Polewn, arc; Jonger then thetufrs or lowers of thelaſtbefore 
mentioned,and are of a yellowe colour,otherwiſe theyare very like, | © | w— 
3 From the wooddie roortes of this thirde kinde of Poli, proccedea greatnumber of ſhootes | 
like yncoche laſt rehearſed, lying flat vprighit ypon the grounde, whoſeſlender branches take hold = 
wo the vpper partof the carth where they cteepe. The flowers are like theother, bur of a purple 
COIOUuT, 1 [i033 >; | 8:11} » *; 
4 The laſtkinde of Poliwm, and of all the reſt the ſmalleſt , is of an indifferent good ſmell, inall 
points like vato the common Pola, bur thatit is fower times lefler. © | 


Polium 


_ nn 9g C999 Rn eras 


HISTORIE /OF PLANTS. | Fs 


6 | ; HSI : 7 I 
7 3 Polium montanum þ.-| | 4 Poli mont ann minimuwn. 
Purple Poley. | Creeping Poley. | 


CO 
WF « 


4 


\\ 


* The place. | | | 
Theſeplants do growe naturally vpon the mountaines of Fraunce,ltalie, Spaine,and other hor 
gland; notwithſtanding I haue plants of thatPoleywith yellowe 


regions. They are ſtrangersin En 
koben by ha gift of L'Obeliue. | 
% The time. | 
They flower from theende of Maie,to the beginning of Auguſt, 

*% The names. | ' | 
Poley mountaine is called in Grecke m1, of his hoarineſle , and in'|Latinealfo Po/arn. Diuers* 


ſupe& that Poliwmis Leweas,and thar Dioſcoriars hath twilſe intreated of that herbe, vnder diuers | 


names; the kindes, the occaſion of the name, ;and likewiſe the faculties do agree. There be rwo of 
the Lexcades, one4w1i, thatis, of the mountaine the other ueess, which is that with the broader 
leafe: it is called Lewes of the whitiſh colour ; and Polio of the hoarineſſe,bicauſe it ſeemeth like to 
amans hoarie head for whatſocuer waxeth hoarie,is ſaid to bewhite. | | 
| * The temperature. | | | | 
Polegis of temperature drie in the thirde degree,and hotinthe end of the ſecond. 
| ; % The vertncs. ] | 


Dioſcoridesſaith,jt is a remedie for them that haue the dropſie,the yell 


? 


. 


we iaunders , god thatare 


troubled with the ſpleene. | | | 
Ir pronoketh vrine,and is put into mithridate,treacle,and OY p | 
Trprofiteth much againſtthe bitings of venemous beaſts , and driverh away all venemous beaſts 


fromthe place where it is ſtrowed or burnt, | | 
The ſame drunke with vineger,is good for the diſeaſes of the milt and ſplecne; it troubleth the 
ſtomacke,and afflifteth the head,and prouoketh the looſcnies of the bellie. [ 


' 


\ 


Of Germander. Chap.202. 


| Fe *% The kindes, | | | 
T He olde writers haue ſet downeno certainekindes of Germander,yetwe have thought it good 
* andnot without cauſe,toentreat of mo ſorts then haue beene obſerued of all, deuiding thoſe 
=_—_ the _ of Temcr inn from Chamedries ; althoughthey are both of one kind; but yet differing 
) R0tabue, | | | | 


Ll 1 | I \Chamedry: 


BOOKE OF THE 
| 2 Chamedrys minor. 
Small Germander, 


<————— wa _ — 
——— PLS C2 - 


an 


ECNIIEEIECAIEEVINES NSN EN. h 


/ among the leaues of a bright redcolour,in _ like thoſe of red Archange 


HISTORIE|OF PLANTS. | 531 


| * The deſcription. | | 
' He ficſt Germander groweth lowe, with very many braunches lying vpon the grounde, 
T rough , harde , and wooddie, ſpreading it ſelfe heere and rhere : whereupon are placed 
{mall leaues ſnipt about the edges like the teeth of a ſawe z/reſemblingthe ſhape of an 
oken leaſe. The flowers arc of a purple colour, very ſmall , fanding cloſe tothe teaucs rowarde the 
rop of rhe braunches. The {cede is liule and blacke, The roote flenderand toll of ſtrings, creeping, 
and alwaies ſpreading within the ground,wheteby it greatly increaſeth. - | 
> The ſeconde Germander riſeth vp with alittle ſtraighr ſtalke a ſpan long, and ſometimes loh- 
er,woodie & hard like vntoa little ſhrub: it is afterwards diuided into very many little ſmall braun- 
ches. Theleaues arc indented and nicked about the edges , greater then the leaues of the creeping 
Germander : the lowers likewiſe ſtande neere tothe leaues, andon the yþper varrs of the ſprigs, © 
colour ſometimes purple , and oftentimos rending to blewneſle : the roote is diuerfly ciſperſed with 
ſtrings. : v | 
: The ds Germander hath many threddie rootes,from which riſeth vp aſtiffe and rough ſtalk, 
diujding it ſelfe from the ground tothe top into diuers braunches,oneter oppoſite againttanorhex ; 
wherupon are placed by couples broad leaues, ſnipr ortoothed abour the _ eas grow 
| Our ener, | 
4 Wilde Germander hath little ſtalkes, weake and feeble, edged or cornered, ſomewhat hairie, 
and ſetasit were with joints of a cubite long : about che which bycerraine diſtances thereconje 
foorth leaues ſomething broad, nicked in the edges, and ſomewhatgreater than the leaucs of cree- 
ping Germander, and ſofter. The flowers be of a gallant blewcolour, madeof fower ſmall leaues 
apeece, ſtanding orderly on the tops of the tender ſpriggie ſpraies ; after which comein placelicele 
huskes or ſecede veſſels. The roote is ſmall a nd threddie, he | 
| % Theplace. q | 
Theſe plants do growe in rockie and rough grounds, and in gardens they do eaſily proſper. 
The wilde Germander growerth in many places about London in medowes and fertill ficldes,and | 
incuerie place whereſocuer Lhauerrauelled in England, | wk | 
 *% Thetone. | 
They flower and flouriſh from the ende of Maie,tothe later end of Auguſt.” | 
*% The names. '\ | Wa J 
. Garden Germander is called in Greeke ;=,«idyve, Chamedrys : of forne Trifſage, and Trixags, arid 
likewiſe Quereula minor ; notwithſtanding moſt of theſenamesdo more properly belong to Seory) 
wn , or water Germander tin Italian Overc;uols : in Engliſh Germander, or Englith Freadle : in 
Freach Germenare.Betore creeping Germander was knowne,this wilde kind bare the name of Ger- 
mander among the apothecarics ,& was vſed for the right Germander inthe compolitions of medi- . 
cines: bur after the former were brought to light, this began to be named Sylne#ri#, and Spuria 
Chemadrys, that is wilde and baſtacd Germander:of ſome 7 eucrium palaſtre,and without errour ; bi- 
cauſe allthe ſorts of plants comprehended vnder the title of Teacriwmn, are doubtleſſe kindes of 
Germander, Of ſome it hath beene thought to be the plant that Dioſeoridles called it-Gorri, Hier g- 
botane;that is to ſaie, the Holic hetbe, it ſo be that the Holic he tbe, and Perbenacs, orVeruaine, 
which is called in Grecke mempor, be ſundrie herbes. Djoſcorides maakerh them ſundric herbes , de- 
ſcribing them apart}the one after the other: but other authors as P.rulws Actin , and Oribaſins, 
make no mention of Herba Sacra,the Holic herbe; but onely of Periftereonand this fame is founde 
to be likewiſe called Hijerabotane, or the Holic herbe; andtherefore it js evident that itis one, and 
the ſclfe ſame plant calicd by diuers names; the which things conſidered, if theyſaic fo ,-andfaic 
truely, this wilde Germander can not be. Hjerabetazeatall, as diuers haue written and ſaideir is 


! 


' 
'2A 
i 
1 


kinde of Veruaine,whereynto it hath beene referred,,..... +, 01 // * | 
aZigt mM. 3} of T3 4095 5 *%.7 he temperature... | eea:l 063 ther SLA 
Garden Germander is of thinne parts,and hath acurtiog faculiie: itis hot anddriealmoſt in the 


thirde Gegreceuen as Gelen doth writc of Teacriwn,or wilde Germander, } | 
Thewilde Germander is likewiſe hot and dcie, andis not alrogither without force ot power tb 
openandclenſe:itmay be counted among thenumberof them that do opentheliuer andſpleene. 
| ate ., *% Thevertaes,', | | Þ 
Germander boiled in water and drunke,dcliuereth the bodie from all obſtruQtions or ſRtoppings, A 


L1'z diuiderh 


=_ THE SECOND \BOOKE OF. THE 


diuideth and cutteth rough and clammic humours : being recciued as aforeſaide, is good for them 
that haue the cough.,andſhorrneſie of breath,the ſtranguric or ſtopping of vrine,and helpeth thoſe 
. which ateentring into a dropfic | | 4 | | 


fie. = | 
B Theleaves1 ith bby and ietiogd, and a drop at ſundrie times putinto the cies, taketh | 
aivay the web,and hawein the ſame,or any dimneſle of ſigh, i 
CE: prouoketh mightely the po Ge yoy in wine, and rhe decotion drunke with a fo- 
mentation or bath made alſo thereof and the ſecret parrs bathed therewith, 
- 


Of Tree Germander. Chap.203. | 


1 Teucriun latifolium. | | 2 Teucrium Pannonicum, 
Tree Germander with broade leaues, = Hungaric Germander, 


"7 &» Z SW? Ly - mv Pu , bo. fo £TD NN 
NES AAS Z IN 
YZ IR DEE ITE : | 2M. 
\ 1 ms ſ; WWE | 4 hy | Op! 
— , 4 V "l $% 3, k - - Z v —- 22 " \ = be 
—_— 1 # 4 > — p " c S" 
: Y % \ Y _ % «; 


$54 
' o 


= 


4 FE 37 SW. 
A] W's >? 
PIN -— 2 _ \% * 
o A # 


| 
"WE 
"y 


+ The deferption | | 
I He firſt kinde of Tree Germander riſeth yp with a little ſtraight ſtalke a cubire high, wood- 
| die and harde like vnto a fmall wooddic ſhrubbe. The ftalke diuiderh ir fromthe 
 botrome to the top intodiuers braunches, wheron are ſerindenred leaves nickt aboutthe 
edges,inſhape nor vnlike the oken leafe. The flowers growe among the leaues of a purple colour. 
The roo:e is wooddie,as is all the reſt of theplant, "P 
2 The Tree Germander of Hungaric hath many tough, threddie roots,from which riſe vp divers 
weake and feeble ſtalkes , reeling this waie and thatwaic; nareſer togither by 
long leaves iagged in the edges, not wlike thoſe of the vpright Fluellen: ou the toppes of the 
_ ſtande the flowers ſpike faſhion thicke thruſtrogither, of a purple colour tending to blewe- 


3 Tewerm 


 other,ofanouerworne hoarie colour, and vpon themare placedleauesnot much vnlike 


* HISTORTE  OF' PLANTS.” $33 
1% Teacrian Boeticwn. | 4 Texcrium Alpinum Ciſti fore. _ a 
Se p Tat Cermimer of Boeria. Tree Germander with Sage toſe flower, 


ox" 
bY, 
We 


"HAED 
+ 


I 


-— — - > 
3 


[ - - — 
/ F /, ” wo AE 
<a 
/ 


, 


3 This Germander of Boetiariſeth vp oftentimes to the height of aman, in maner of a hedge 
buſh withone ſtiffe ſtalke,of the bignefle of a mans little lingers coucred ouer with a whitiſh barke, 
cevided fotimes into other braunches which are alwaics placed by couples, one right > an 
com- 
mon Germander. The vpper parts whereof are of a grayiſh hoarecolqur, &the lower of a deepe 
cregne ;of abitrer taſte,and ſomewhat crooked, turning and winding themſelves after the manner 
of a weir, The lowers come foorth from the boſome of ; leaues, ſtanding ſmall tender foot- 
ſtalkes of awhire colour, reſembling the ſhape of alittle helmet , hauing in the middle that ſtand- 
eth foorth many threddie ſtrings.The whole plant keeperh greene all thewinterlong.. $ x1 
4 Among thereſtofthe Tree Germanders, this isnot of leſt beautie and account, hauing many 
weake and feeble branches trailing vpon the ground, ofa darke reddith colour, hard and wooddie z 
atthe bortome of which ſtalkes come foorth many long, broad,iagged leaues, nor vnlike the prece. 
dent,hoarie vnderneath,and greenc aboue, of a binding and drying taſte, The flowers growe atthe 
top of the ſtalkes, not vnlike to thoſe of Ci##us famina, or Sage role, white of colour, conſiſting of 
eght of nine leaues; in the midele whereof do growe many threddie chiues, without ſmcll or ſa- 
vour : which being paſt, there ſucceederh a tuftof rhreddie or flockic matter, not vnlike tothole of 
w ———_ Pulſatilla. The roote is wooddie, and ſerwith forne few hairje rootes faſtened to 


x 


» * 4 [ 


| *% Theplace, See VILLE Ws 
 Theſeplants do ioy in ſtonie: and rough nn and drie places, andſuch as lic opento; 
theſunne and aire, and proſper well in gardens. And of the ſecond fort deſcribed , I hauerccei- 
uedof Maſter Geryer Apothecarie one plant for my garden. "1 | | 
ORIG * The time. Coro oe 
They flower,Floutiſh,and ſeede when the other Germanders do, | _. Fanny 
cid SES 0 | * T8 


$34 THE:'SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Tree Germander is called in Greeke zauap:c, retaining the name of the former Chamedrys,amq 
-4422,aCcording tothe authoxitic of Diſcordesand Plane : in Latine Teweriam : in Engliſh great 
Germander,vpright Germander,a nd Tree Germander, | 
| | *% Thetemperature and vertuts. Mr ei hen | 
Their temperature and faculties are referted vnto the garden Germander, bur they are norof-/ 
ſuch force and working, wherefore they be not much vied in phiſicke, | | 
| | 


Of Water Germander,or Garlicke (Germander. | Chap.204.. 


I Stor d117 71 41th, 1 t 1 þ 2 Stordigho mince. 
Great Garlicke Germander, | | Small Garlicke Germander, 


4 .  « 5 f . _ T/ 
Co | | : £< F | Wy, EPI -T 
UE s v© f 4 »f ' F G - >” m j; nA Y ww 
WJ. Es MACS 4 ME - 5 "*I< > As mn - 
Ts A "< / f : » - "2, 8 - wo i - x 
k : & . —_— Bt ; : > \ vo ? 
WI $4 > > Fai eh ES 4 : C A 
\/, z b - ' : - 4 : = "A 
: - "4; 4 _ _ y 4 4 4 
\ 'nS . - x - J, — t : : C4 5 T 
7 % ” A "_— ; At - i 
\) e \ C *. \ &Y x j - 4 4 
\. ” = - b, b+ 4L.. 
- 


I 
\Y LS 5 
=_ N - (1: 


4 %Y ne J 


N% F! T- % MY; 5s , 
PRA 
ZE > "AS % ; 


|. 4 I» "Ae WA 7 
> a3 "ww Ys 
' SM 48 8 
L —IJ< > % &-] 8 & frm 
Le >. Sy Q 
Ault 


| %* The deſcription. on , ; 
Cerdiums or water Germander, hath ſquare hairic ſtalkes, creeping by the ground, beſet with 
{oft whitifh crumpled leaves, nickt and/ſnipt round about the edges like a ſave : among: 
which growe ſmall purple flowers, like the flowers of dead Nettle, The roote is fmalland 
threddie, creeping inthe grotnd very decpely, The whole plant being bruiſed ſmelleth like Gar- 
licke,whereof it tooke tharname Scord/am. | | ff 4,nowviihh 
2 Thiskinde of Germander of P/izjes deſcription, hatlygreat broad leaues like vnto the great 
water Germander, but much ſmaller, ſet vpon {lender ſtems ; ar the top whereof growerh foortha 
ſtalke, branching it {elfe into ſundric other twigs; garniſhed with ſmallpendulous flowers like vato 
Sage. The rqote 1s threddie ane ſpreading, This plant being bruiſed dorh ſmell like Garlicke, as thc 
other kinde doth;buris not ſo common, © 7): of 4s { / | 
T |_| 0 {tb Theta 3 Sns erode "wy 
Warer Germander groweth neereto Oxenfard, by Ruley on both ſides of the water, angins 
mecowe by Abington called Nietford , by the relation of a learned Gentleman of S. lohns _ 
, A | | = | | al 


[7 * 


Gid rowne of O xenford,a diligent 9:-Cr2r3r my very good friend,called Maſter Richard Slater Allo 
ir pres in great plentic in the ylc of Elic,and in a medow by Harwoodin Lahcaſhire,and divers 
| es. No * DOE's ; a wki: 5 S254 i 
M os 4 Amer scn ee ey Z | 
| owers e inIune 2 ie: iC.is beſt to gatherthe herbein Auguſt; ir periſherh in 
—_ —_— ——— in ſommer:the roote ns freſh all Te Te: & | 
nigh int yn; ang The names, | FITY | 
| The Grecians call itZpdtor, the Latines keepe that name Srordiwn : the Apothecaries haue no 
othername. Itis called of ſome Trixago Paluitris, Ouerculs, andallo Mithridatrum of Mithridates 
the finder of it Out. It tooke the name of Scordiam from the ſmell of Garlicke, which the Grecians 
call x4g;425 and Nerquor, of theranknes of the {mell : in high Dutch UT1aſker battenig 2 in French 
Scordion :in Italian Chalamanar ina patutre : in Engliſh Scordium,Warer Germander, & Garlicke 
Germander. NEO 2 | | | 


-HISTORIE OF PLAN 


! 


| *% The temperature. | | | 
' Water Germander is hor and dric : ithath a certaiac bitter taſte, harſh and ſharpe, as Galen 


witnelleth, | | 
: Vid,  % Thewvertnes. tk | 
_ Warer Germanderclenſeth the intrals, andlikewile olde vicers, being mixed with honie accor- A 
ing toart : it prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the monethly ficknes : jr draweth our of the 
thicke legme and rotten matter. Itis good for an olde cough, paine in the ſides, which com- 
meth of topping and cold, and for burſtings and inward ruptures, | 
The decoion made in wine and deunke,is good againſt the bitings of ſerpents, and deadly poi- B 
ſons :andis vſedin Antidotesor counterpoiſons with good fucceſle, = >zc ,©x- 1 
Iris reported to mitigate the paine of the gowt, being ſtampedand applied with alictle vineger C 
and water. wr (% | | | 
* Some affirme,that rawe fleſh being laid among the leaues of Scordium, may be preſerued along D 
timefrom corruption....... - "NY | 
Being drunke with wine,it openeth the ſtoppings of the liver, the milr,kidneies, bladder, & ma- E 
trix,prouoketh vrine,helpeth che ſtrangurie, that is,when a man cannotpiſle but by drops, andis a 
molt ſingular cordiall,tocomfort and make merrie the harr. Ws 55:44 | 
The powder of Scordion taken in the quantitie of two drams in meadeor honied water, cureth F 
and ſtoppeth the bloodie flixe, and comforreth the ſtomacke. Of this Scordium is made a moſt fin- 
gular medicine,called Diaſtordimm,which ſcrueth very notablyfor all the p aforeſaid. 
Thefſame medicine made of Scordium is giuen with good fuccefle vnto children and aged peo- G 
ple,that haue the ſmallpockes, meaſles, or onal , orany other peſtilenricknes wharſocuer, 
eucn the plague it ſelfe,giuen before the ſicknes hauc vniucrſally poſlefled the whole bodice, = 


Of Wood Sage,or Garlicks Sage. Chap.205. 


* The deſcription, 


Hatwhichis called wilde Sage, hath ſtalkes fower ſquare, ſomewhar hairie, abour which are 

- | Jeaues like thoſe of Sage, but ſhorter,broader, and ſofter : the lowers growe vp all vporrone 

fide of theſtalke which che grauer hath omirred in the picture) open and forked, as thoſe of 

dead Nettle but leſſer, of a pale white colour 1 then growe the ſeedes fower togither in one huske. 

The roote is full of ſtrings : Itis a plantthar liveth bur a yeere, it ſmelleth of garlicke when itis 

Tomy o_ akinde of Garlicke Germander , as appecreth by the ſmell of Garlicke wherewith 
elled, oP | 


a: | Storodania 


Too ie owe ei” ar Rs > bs <tr nn, 


THE SECOND, 


drmdunc for 8d #is. 
Wood Sofa oats 


mon LAST. 
DN, 
DSN ">; 2 
ED f re = 


—A 


l q! 


7% 
- 
Wt EO, 
> OL. 
E es NV by 2 J 17 4 TE» 
I IC Py y 
& eh E a - \ . c 
1 ; 


BOOKE -QF|THE 


* Theplace.. Bj 
| — vponheathes and barren 
itis alſo foundin woods, and neere vnto A 
rowes, and abourthe borders of ficldes- :i fe] 


whart delighteth in aleane ſoile, and 
gither barren and drie, . NN 


+ The time, | 
It flowreth and ſeedeth in Iune.lulie, and Au. 


guſt, anditis then robe gatheredand laidyy, 


* The nanies. 1 
Itis called of the later Herbariſts po 


: of diuers alſo Ambroſe, but true Amby 


which is oke of Cappadocia differerh fromhi 


' VYalerime Corduwsnameth it Scordonia, or ary 
| nia, and Scordium alterym. Ruellizlaithitis cal. 
| led Boſciſaluia, or Seluis Boſei + inhigh Dutch 

- UWaildtſi tin _ Wilde Sage, Wood 
Sa 6 nas ke | 
: t eemerh to be Theophys aw his endanih | 
| cow, which is alſo ken forte fall Sg tu 


| not rightly. | 

* The temperature. | 
Wilde Sage isof temperature hot and drie, 
yetlefle than common Sage 3 therefore it is hot 
Boar cmang'r Þ 


* Thewertwes. | 

, drie beatings, and againſt wounds : thi decoction thereof] is 
iven tothemthar fall and are —_ bruiſed.It alfoprouoketh vrine. 

B © Somelikewiſe giue the decoCtion hereof to drinke with good ſucceſle rothem that are infefed | 


with the French poxe: for itcauſcth ſiveate,drieth vp vicers, digeſteth humors, waſteth away and | 
conſumeth ſwellings,if itbe taken thirtie or fortie daics togither,or put into the decoRtion of G#;«- 


cum inſteed of Epithimanand other adiutories belonging tothe ſai comm. 


i i=£ 
\ YT. 
- 
, y / 4 p 
£ n) j4 ” — 
” | : 
. Po a — 
* » if - " *. ” - '4 
i 1 js 
% \F/ A 1 
NY " ' — - K 
. 14 ov oY A ['s x PR 
_ "24 LN %. 4 
£/£..4 — 
i 4A 
k. | 7 12 - ” > _ _ 
AF C — i 
- — | 
| 
j 


A ltis commended 


= 


oY Eirih (hap.206. 


* The dfeription 


V phraſia or fiatllightli a ſmall lowe herbe,not aboue two handful high, fullof branches, | | 
covered with little blackiſh leaues,dented or ſniper abour the edges like a ſawe :the flowers = 


are ſmal and white, ſprinkled and poudered on the inner life with yellow & purple ſpeckes 
mixed therewith. The roote is ſmall and hairie, 


2 Thereis another kinde that hath ſmall threddie and fibrous ks vaco hefirſtfromwhich | 
ring vp lender ſtalkes nine inches long diuidingthemſelues into many collaterall braunches, de- 
ſet with lirtle leaues, long, and parrowe, bluntly dented about the ,and arthepoint, 

themoſt of them oy or hanging backward,or downward, The flowers be of a lewcolour. © 


1 Enphraſ 


Theſe plants growe indrie medowes,in greene and grafſie waies, and paſtures ſtanding againſt 
the ſunne, ; "BEL 
Fly ebarwoct September 
. Eiebright beginneth to flower in t, andconri vnto £ , and muſt be ga- 
thered ek owreth for philicks v  LEIEET . 
"Pekin | rs norvichſtanding th 
tiscommontly called Exphraſue,and phroſyne : notwithſtanding there is another Euphyo- 
ſme.and thatis Bugloſſe is namedof ſome Ocularis.and Ophthaimica,ot the etfe: in high Dutch 
Augen troft : in low Ducch Doghen rooſt; in Iralian, Spaniſh,and French, Z«#4/ic, after the La- 
une name: in Engliſh Ejebright, | | 


* Thenature. 
Theſe herbes are hotanddrie,burt yet moredrie then hot. 
*% The vertnes. | | 
Itis very much commended for PT 9 1 it ſelfe alone, or any waic elle, itpreſerueth A 
theſight, increaſeth it, and being feeble and loft it reſtoreth the ſame. Ir is giuen moſt fitly being e. 
caten intopowder: oftentimes a like quantitie of Fenell ſeed is added thereto, anda lictle mace, to 
thewhich is put ſo much ſugar as the waight of themall commer to. | F50 
evright ſtamped and laid the cies , or the iuicethereof mixed with white wine and drop- B 
ped into thecies, or the deſtilled water; raketh awaic the darkneſle and dimneſle of the cies and 


En. RPM Ir" 

| ceparts of the of Eicbright, and one part of maces mixed therewith,taketh away all C 
urts rom the cies, comforteth thememorie, andcleereth the ſight if halfe a ſpoonefull be taken 
cucry morningfaſting with acup of white wine. SF RG 


of 


533 THE SECOND. BOOKE" OFTHE 


| 2% | 4 Y 4 © i i PEIBRE nia 
OfeMarierome, Chap.207. iid * 


Great Sweete Maricrome. 


VI 


RL 
We 


| | % Thedeſeris 0H. b 1% 

Weete Marierome is a lowe and ſhrubbje ain ,of a whitiſh colout and marnellous fiveete © 
ſmell.a foote or ſomewhat more high. The ſtalkes areflend&, and parted into diuers braun- 
ches: about which,growe foorth lictle leaues,ſoft, and hoarie. The flowers grow atthe top 

in ſcalic or chafhe ſpiked cares, of a white colour like vnto thoſe of Candice Organie, The roote is. 
compa® of many ſmall threds. The whole lang andeuery part thereof is of a moſtplealant caſte, 
and aromaticall imell,and periſheth at he firſt a proch of winter. LE So 
2 Pot Marierome or winrer Marketome ha: many threddie rough rootes, from which riſe im- 
mediately diuers ſmall hraunches,whereon are placed ſuch leaues as the precedent,burnot ſohoa- 
ric, nor yet o fweete of fimell, bearing atthe'rop of the braunches tufrs of white flowers tencing to | 
purple. The whole fangs oflong continuance, and keepeth greene all thewinter , whereupon our | 
Engliſh women haue | led it,and that very properly,winter Marierome. :: | 
3 Marierom gentle hath many branches riſing from a threddic root, wherupon do grow ſoft and | 
ſweete ſmelling leaues, of an ouerworne ruffetcolour. The flowers ſtand at the trop of the ſtakes, | 
compadt of diuers ſmall chafhe ſcales ,of a white colour tending to a bluſh, The whole plant's 
alrogither like the greatſweere Maricrome, auing thactit is altogitherleſler,and far ſweeter, whern 
eſpecially conſiſteth the\diference, | | þ SY 
4 Epimaiorent is Ikewileg kinde of fine Marierome, differing not from the laſt deſcribed, ſawns 
in thar, that thisplane ; ak m his naturall countrie of Candia, and not elſewhere ſomelaces 3 of | 
threds faſtened vnto his branches, ſuch and after the ſame manner as thoſe are, and dogrow vp! 
Sauorie,wherein is the difference, [1 . | 
| 1 | I: -*- ©, © Ma 


y v- 
7 


- 


HISTORTE / 


| Mainant tenutfolia. [9 SEP; A = ngiey eve; wh 
; Maricrome gentle. Y | k" Laced Maricrome, 


PFs + The pace. Lt, th 
Theſe plants do growe in 5paine, Iealie, Candia, ind other lands thereabout ,wilde,and inthe 
field;;from whence we haue the ſecdes for the gardens of our cold countnes, am 
"IR"  # The time. 


They are. ſowen in May, and bring foorth their ſcalie, or chaffic hugkes or earesin Auguſt. They . 


areto be watered in themiddle of rhe day,when the ſunne ſhinerh hotceſt, even as Baſill ſhouldbe, 
andnotin thecueningnor morning,as moſt plants are, ; HEE LS, g 
*% The names. | ; 
Maricromeis called in Latine Majorana, and Amaracus, and allo Sempychwe of others: in high 
Dutch Bayozan: in Spaniſh Ilazorana, Moradux, and Caimoradyx : in French Mariolaine : in 
Engliſh Sweete Maricrome, Fine Maricrome, and Maricrome gentle; of the beſt fort Maioranc. 
The pot Marierome is afocalles, Winter, Marierome. "The calaatthename of thismoſt ſweere 


 andpleaſant herbe is not determined,except it came through the faining of the Poets, who report. 


that thoſe of Cypres fawning vpon their kihg Ciara, imagining topleaſehis humor, ſaid that his 
ſonne in time ot his youth,caried a boxe full of fragrant ointment, ouerthe fieldes of moſt pleafanr 
herbes,which by miſchance he ſpilt vpon.che faidherdes awwhich being moiſtened therewith,yeelde 
wnto this day that excellent ſauovr, wherein we do ſo much delight. This boy mourning torthe 
loſle of his ointment, the gods (as the poets faine)in.confideration of his parentageandexcellent 
perteGion,did change ks boy into that herbe, which is called Amaraczs, after his 
owne,name, Some have made a doubtwhether Aarorane and Sonpyehum be all one 3 which coubr, 


651takeit, is bicauſe that Ge/cn maketh a difference between them intreating of them aps and 


arributeth to either ofthem their operations. But _Amarecus Galenty is Partheniim, or ew, 
DBrofeerides likewiſe witneſſeth, tharſoine do call Amaraeas, Partheniums andGlenin his books 
of the faculties of fimple medicines, doth in no. place make: mention of P4rth:1mm, bur bythe 
name of CAmaracus, Plineinhis 21.booke ; chapter 2,witneſſerh, that Dzortesthe philition, and 


they 


% 


Lg 


7? 


549 THE SECOND BOOKE OF ThE © © 
they of Sicily did callthat _Aamaracus , which the Acgyprians and the Syrians didcall Sampfichun, 
Lireil in the fiſt of his tnerdes ſhewerh, that the ſhrub Hmaracau beareth flowers » Writing 


taus, 
| -Fbimelie dnaricw Hum 
= CF aulci aſpirans complettitur cadre, | 
cbeds of Tume,and Tclerons fo ſoft, | 
And luſtic flowers in greene wood ſhade,him breathes; in comforts oft. 


Likewiſe Canliucin Epichalows or mages ſongof Iukand Melius ich, 
| Cinge trpora floribue 
5 iv nemo fibebe avichf 
pas the temples of the hea owres, 
Of Area affoording ſweere ſauours. 


Norvithſtandingft maynot ſeeme ſtrange, chat Maiorane is vſed in Reeds of Sem hum, ſeeing 
that in Galens time alſo, arwn was inthe mixture of the ointment called egy. wnguentan, 
intheplaceof __— he himſelfe wirnefſceth in his firſt booke of «M45 


*% The temperature. 
Bf are hot and my in the ſecond degree after ſome copies,hot pode Sic in the third on 


* Thewvertues. 

Sweete Marierome i isa | cabal _—_ cold diſeaſes of rhe braine oY head, being taken any. 
way to your beſt liking z put vp into the noſthtils ir prouoketh ſneeſing, and draweth Seach = 
baggage flegme: it exleth the roothach being chawed inthe mouth being drunke ir prouoketh | 
vrine, and draweth away watcriſh humors,and is viedin medicines againſt iſon. 

The leaues boiled in water and the decoRtion drunke , helpcchr tare*entering into the | 
dropſic : ircaſeth them that are troubled with difficultic of making water, and ſuch as are giuento | 
ouermuch ſighing,and eaſerhthe paines of thebellie, | 

The leaues drigd and mingled with honie,and giuen, diſſolueth congealed orclorred bloodjand 
putteth away blacke and blew markes aftcr {tripes and bruſes,being applicd thereto, 

The leaucs arc excellentgood to be pur into all odotiterous ointmenrs,waters,powders,brothr, | 
and meates. 

= Thedricd leaves powdered, and finely ſearced, are good ro beputinto Cerotes,or Cerecloer,. | 
and ointments,profitably againſt colde ſwellin 98.and members outof ioint. | 

There is an excellent vile to be drawen foorth of theſe herbes, good I the ſhrinking of 
ſinewes Hamper foguiiiens, andall aches progeedin g ofacoldcaule. 


3 


: — 


Of ville IL Ro Chap.208 


* The ris 


Aſtard Marierome groweth ſtraight with ere od ales ofa reddiſh eau, ll fullof i 

branches,a foote high and ſometimes _ The leauesbe broad, Henk june | 

of awhiriſh oe), 865 WES ap on the top of the branches ſtandlong ſpik — | 
which ſhoore foorth little white fomersJke the flowring of wheate, The wholeplant is ofa ſrecte 3 
 ſmell,andſharpe bitingtaſte, | {K 19s 
2 ThawhiOrpn, debeP3cd Maricrome with whice GoWWGrd. iffereth little from theprece 106 
dent, bur incolour and ſtature. 12 II Age peep aims andalſormuch highes, {TE 
whence Hep: By | 
| | —_ Wo en © Org" 


_ — 


542 ' THE SECOND; /FOOKE) OF THE 
| # The defeription | 


3 Baſtard Marigtorh of Candi ic hathmanyt threddic roots 3 from which riſe vp Ciuers weake 'F 
ſceble braunches trailing vpon the grounde , ſer with faire greehe leaues, not vnlike thoſe of pen. 
nic roiall, but broader and ſhorter : ar the top of thoſe braunches ſtande ſcalic or chifficeares of a 
purple colour. The wholeplant is of a moſt pleaſing ſweere ſmell. Theroore endured inmy Y garden 
_ andtheleaues alſo call this winter long, 1597. although i it hathbeen ſaide thar it dot periſh 
at the firſt froſt, as 258 Marierome doth, 
4 Engliſhwilde Marierome is exceedingly well knowne to all,to haue iba Rtiffe,and hard Ralkes 
of two cubits higſ,;ſer with leaues like thoſe of ſfveete Marierome, but broader and greater,ofaruſ. 
ſer greene colour : onthe top of the braunches ſtande tufts of purple flowers , compoſed of manie 
ſnall ones,ſer wYBE yerie cloſely vmbell faſhion, The roote creeperhs in the ground andig wy 
laſting. * Theplice. 
Theſe plants do growe wildei in the kingdomes of Spaine, Italie, andother of thoſe hot 
 Thelaſtofche fower doth owe wildein the borders of ficldesand AY i ,in moſt ou” of 
England, | 
; *% The time. 
' They flower and gouriſhi in the ſommer months,afterward the ſeede; is perfected 
* The names. | 
| Baſtarde Macierdab called in Grecke : 3e5are5,& that whichis farnaked Heracleot icum WM 
5:-xa7%)-of divers it is called Canils,in ſhoppes Origenum Hiſpanicum , Spaniſh Organic: ourEn- 
gliſh wilde Marierome is called in Greeke of Di#sſcorrdes, Galen, and Phinie ovine, Onitis , of ſome 
Agrieriganum , Or Sylueftre Origamm: in Italian Origane : in Spaniſh Oregano :in French Maris. 
{ame ba#erde : in Engliſh Organic , baſtarde Myariyrome: and that of os wilde Maricrome, and 
groue Marierome, | : 
| *% The temperature. h | 
All the Organies do Cur,attenvare, or makethinne,drie and beheeand hari inthe thirde _ 
and Galenteacheth that wilde Marierome is more forceable and of greater ſtrength z notwir 
ding Organie of "Candie which is brought dric qur of a amag rn I ave a Fplaie _ 
is more biting thenany ofthe reſt,and of grearcſt heate. | 
% The vertaes. | 7 
anic giuen in wine is a remedie againſt the bitings and ſtingings of VENEMOUS beaſts andew- | 
_ them that have drunke Opiam,or rhe iuice of blacke Poppic,or Hemlyckosphpechlly ifitbegi- 
ven with wine and raifons of the ſunne, | 
B Thedecoction of Organieprouoketh vrine \ bringecs downe che monthly courſe. , and isgiuen 
with good ſucceſle to thoſe that haue the dropſie. | 
(5-2 In. vledi ina > ai a medicine to © licked 7 an old neck the n | 


the lungs. 


H The Gecoion mic the SH and voideth Lhoke, and druttke with v | 

mitics ofthe ſpleene,and drunkein wine helpeth againſt all mortall poiſe Sifortharcae itis ; 

- purinto mithridates and treaclespreparedfor tharpurpole. . =" | | 

I Theſe plants are eafie tobe takenin potions. , and therefore 20 = au dax when be vied | 

and miniſtred vnro ſuch as cannot brooke their meate,, and | ea fomerorſquait | 
and waterie ſtothacke 45. alſo wiiks the ems or paſhon ofthe 


Of 


% 


'HISTORTE" OF” PLANTS.” 
Of (oates Marierome,or Organte. Chap.20 9. 


; bop. hy rt = F. Trago enum Clef, = 
: Cortes Marierome. 4 | Can Gomes Maricrome, 


MIN 


= VV AW o/ 
a0 f 
Y 


TAN f 
VUN 1 
7A F : I 1 

M\W/ / 1H}. - 
\ 17 Yo 


% The deſcription. | | 
I He ſtalkes of Goates Organie are flender, harde and wooddie ; of a blackiſh cojour, 
whereon are ſet long leaues,greater then thoſe of the wilde Time, ſweete of ſmell, rough, 
and ſomewhathairic . The flowers be ſmall and growe ou of little crownes, or wharles, 
rounde about the top of the ſtalkes,tending to a purple colour, The roote is ſmall andrhreddie, = 
2 CeroluCluſuhathiet foorth in his Spaniſh obſcruations another ſort of Goates Marierome, 
growing vplike a ſmall ſhrub. The leaues are longer and more hoarie then wilde Marierom, and al- 
lonarrower, ofa ſharpe ſower taſte, but of a ſweete ſinell, though notverie pleaſant. The flowers 
ſtande at the top of the ſtalkes in ſpokic ge awhite colour, Theroote is thicke and wooddy, 
% Tye place. EYES | | 
Theleplants do growe wilde in "ET ns por hot countries.The firſt of theſe I founde 
growing in diuers barren and chalkic fields and high waies neere vnto Sittingburne and Rocheſter 
inKent,and alſo neere ynto Cobham houſe, and Southfleere inthe ſame countie. | 
* The time. | | 
 Theyflowerinthemonth of Auguſt :I remember ſaith Dodonew that once I ſawe Tragoriganum 
n the Lowe countries inthe gardens of 929272167; thatis, of thoſethat :pplic their whole ſtudic to 
the knowledge of plants,or as we way ſaic,in net gardens of cunning Hetbariſts. | 
Fe + 6 *%* T henames. | 
Goates Organie is called in Greeke 522015: in Latine likewiſe Trageitiganwn : in Engliſh 
goates Organie,and goatcs Marierome. | | | | 
" *% Thetemperature, | | 
Goates Organies archot and dric in the thirde degree: they are ſaith Galenof a binding quality. 
£ - | 70 *: The 


s 
: 


544 THE SECOND'BOOKE OPF THE 


Tragoriganwnor Goares Maricrowe,is very good againſtthe wambling of the ſtomact | 

the ſower belchings of the ſame,and Rich be elite to vomite,eſpecallyarſca. "7 
 Theſebaſtardekindes of Organic or wilde Marieroms,hauethe ſame force and faculties tharthe 

-- other Organies haue for the diſcaſes mentioned inthe ſame chapter. ; | | | 


* The deſcription. [+ 


I He Engliſh and French Herbariſts ar this bake docall this plant Maſticke or Maſtiche,ts- 
T king this name Marwn, of Maro king of Thrace; though ſome rather ſuppoſe thename 
corruptlie to be deriued of this worde Amararhum, the one plant being ſo ke the other 

that many learned haue taken them to be one, and the ſelfe ſame plant z others haue taken Merwn 
for S«xpſuchus, which doubtleſſe is a kinde of Marierome. Some, as Dodewews, hauc called Maru 
by the name of C/mnopodiumwhich is alſo another plant and not Maſticke.'! | 
2 Ifany bee delirous to ſearch for the trye M:irwn , let them be affured that the plantlalt 
mentionedis the ſame : but if any do doubt of the ſame, for noue!ties ſake , heere is preſented vnto 
wo viewe a plant ofthe ſame kinde (which cannot be reie&ed) for a ſpeciall kinde thereof, which 
ath a moſt pleaſant ſent or ſmell, & in ſhewereſembleth Marierome and Origanum, conſiſting of | 
ſmall twigs a foote and more long : the heads tufted like the common Marierome,bur theleaues lef- | 
fer and like Ayres: the roote of a wooddie ſubſtance, with many ſtrings hanging thereat. 


There is another kinde heereof ſet foorth by ZObelius : which 1 haue notas yer ſeene , nor him- 


*; 


{elſe hath well deſcribed,which I leaue to a berter conſideration. 
B* | t% Thepuace. OY * 

Theſe plants are ſer and ſowen in gardens of Englandand there mainteined with great care and | 
diligence fromthe injuric of ourcold climate, | - © "ot "vr Y 


HISTORIE OE PLA 

*% The time, | 

They flower about Auguſt,and ſomewhatlaterin _— ſommers. | 

* The name | 

ſicke is called of the new writers Marwm : of Dioforides Clino « Dioſcorides ſhewerth 

MD x" rey is 367, thatis toſay,a little ſhrub : of ſome itis _—_— and of the La- 
tines Lecr/pe 


545 


J % T he nature. 
Theſeplants archotand driei in the third degree. 
*% The vertues. 
Dieride writeth, that the herbe is drunke, and likewiſe the decodtion thereof, againſt the bi- A 
tings of venemous beaſts,rampes and conuulfions, burſtings and the 
The decoction boiled in wine till the third part be conſumed, and drunke hopper the laske, in B 
them that hauc an ague, and vntoothers in water.” 


Wy Pennie royall,or Tomy aſs kin - 


2 Pulegiummas. 


\ 'M = $'> { 
CSE SA 4 A 1 \ 
| V/ CENA Wd 4a \ 
IV. 0 F 
WAN, 
C35 SAL 
= h/ 


%* The deſcription. | 

V iegium regium vulgatwn js (0 exce well knowne to a our Engliſh nation, that it 
needeth no pug er fens. mp0 our common Pennie roiall. = 
2 Theſecond being the male Pennie roiallis like vnto the former, in leaves, flow ers, and 
{mell.and differeth in thatthis male kinde groweth vpright of himſelfe withoutcreeping, much like 
in Row vnto wilde Marjerome. 

3 Thethirdekinde of Pennie roiall groweth like vnto Time, and is of a wooddie ſubſtance, ſome- 
what like vnto the thine leafed Flip, of the ſauour of common Pennie royall. 


Mm i —_ 3 Pulegium 


£c<46 THE SECOND BOOKE OF!'THE 
Faleziun anguFifoliun. 4 
Ne we Pennie royall. 4 | *% The place. 

-* *% js  ThefirſtandcommonPennie royall, growerh 
E naturalliewildeinmoiſtandouerflowenplaces, x; 

| inthe Common neere London called Mileser.;, 
- abouttheholes and pondesthereof in ſundrie pla- 
' ces, from whence poote women bring plentieto 
| feltin London markers, andir groweth in ſungrie 

+ other commons neere London likewiſe, | 
' | Theſecondgroweth in my garden: the thirde] 

| hauenotasyerlcene. | | 

| | aig =" is 1 

' } They flower from thebeginning of Tuneto +; 
. ende of Auguſt, j | 8 | Sy 

þ | «4 The Aunes. | 


* Pennieroyalliscalledin Grecke 945391, and of 
| tentimes 44269: in Latine Palegium, and:Palcgiy 
| regale, for difference ſake betweene it and wilds 
' Time, which of ſome is called Pulegiuon montangy. 

; .inlralian Palegio: inSpanith Poles: inDurch Þg, 
FN \ {Yep in French Poulet : in Engliſh Pennic royall, 
Pudding grafſe,Puliall royall,and of fome Organic. x nf 
| | | *% The nature. | 
Pennie royall is hot and driein the third degree,and of ſubtile parts,as Galen ſaith. 
| | * The vertues. - | 
Pennie royall boiled in wine and drunken, prouoketh the monethly termes , bringeth foorth the 
ſecondine, the deadchilde and vnnaterall birth; ir prouoketh vrine, andbreaketh the ſtone eſpeci. 
ally of the kidneis. es ET p [ | 
B Pennieroyal! taken with honie, clenſeth the lungs , andcleereth the 


thicke humours. 1 = | 

C The-fametaken with honie and Aloes, purgeth by ſtoole melancholic humours ; helpeth the 

crampe and drawing togither of finewes., i | pa 

D The ſame taken with water and vineger, aſfwageth rhe inordinate defire to vomite , &thepaines 
of the ſtomacke. $ | [1 

- E Ifyouhauewhenyouareatthe ſea Penhie royall in great quantitie drie, and caſt into corrupt 

water,ithelperh ir much,neirher will it hurt them thar drinke thereof, | Þ 
A Garland of Pennie roiall made and worne/about the head, is of great force againſt the ſwim- 
n_ the head,the = and giddines thereof. | | | 


e breaſt from all groſſeand 


1 


'G e decoction of Pennie royall is veric good againſt ven roſitie,windines or ſuch like, & againſt 
« the hardnes and ſtopping ofthe mother being vſed in a bathe or ſtew for the womaa to fit ouet. 


Of Baſill. Chap.212. 
© uh Thedeſeription. } 
I Arden Baſill is of two ſortes, differin one from anotherin bignes. The firſt hath broad, 


ts 


thicke, andfatleaues, of a pleaſant fweete ſmell, and of which ſome one here and there 


are of a blacke reddiſh colour, ſomewhar ſipt about the edges, not vnlike the leauesof 

French Mercuric, The ſfalke groweth to the height of halfe a cubire, diuiding it ſelfe into divers 

branches, whereupon do ſtande ſmalland baſe Coen ſometimes whitiſh, and often tending toa 

, Farke purple. The roote is threddie,and dicth at the approch of winter, | | | 4 

2 LIhemiddle Baſill is We like vnto the former, bur it is altogitherlefſer, The whole plant 1s 

of 2 moſt odoriterous ſmell, nor vnlike the ſinell ofa Limon,or Cicron, whereof it tooke his ſur 
name. - 3 2 55 &, [| 


1 Ocinuwn 


- **HISTORIE OF 
jthum ma | 
| ; GrearBalill ++ | 


A 2 : G 

- OY KK "fi 
> '& «C o» 
S 


Nay 


KEN $9 Np ow. 

1 IN je NY 
#\ — - \y > ; 
\ Z N= 47 £4 hx 


t- 


/ Pt 


3 Ocinmun Win Guriphylanen. 


Buſh Baſill, L R 

3 BuſhBaſill,or fine low epithet pant, 
having aduakl roote, rs which riſe vp manic 
ſmall and tender ſtalkes, ant diuers armes 
..or boughes, many little leaues, 
leſſerthanthoſe of Pen i plant is 

ofa mo gen T5 | 
| Bafillis beribp ectntincnten or If 
LON Ee &  commeth *F moiſture, ex- 
SAVE. 87> = cept in the middle. f the da ay coker] if ir bee 
WEL  fowenin ,the ſredewillpurrifie, and 


| growe into 


orflime,andcotmero -—__ 
» tay hy 4 


\ % 
Baſill is called 
FIlable', Fuuy in xs "a > differeth from Ocymum which-we 
haue po miiare ne inthe Hiſtoric of Graine. Thelatter Gretians have calledir 
Baſilicum , 3nd Reginm: in Spaniſh4/bshaca: : in French B wt 
eater Baſiltroyall, the leflec Pail grotk, and Buſh 

or Lioue Baſill, 


548 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 


+ The temperature. 
Bafill as RE ITET is hot in the ſecond degree, but it hath \oined with ir aſuperfluoug 
moiſture, by reaſon whereof i irisnot like, thatit ſhould be raken wh hs 5 but being applied out: 
wardly,j aitis good to digeſt oc Ciſtribure,and roconcoct, 
- % The vertnes. | 
A | Dioſcotinles faith chat if Bafillbe much eaten, irdullech the fi ghr; ir mollificeh the "FOI 
winde; prouoketh vrine; drieth vp milke,and i is of hard digeſtion. | | 
'B Theinicemixedwith fine meale of parched "i oile of Roſes and' YR, is good againſt i 
flammations. andthe ſtinging of venemous beaſts. | 
C Thejuice drunke in wine of ch7os,or ſtrong Sacke,is good againſt head ache. 
D The iuice clenſerh "I the dimneſle of the cies, and dricth vp the humour that Falethin into 
them. 
©. E Theſecddrunkeis a Lemhedie for melancholicke people; for thoſe chat are ſhort winded, & chem 
that can hardly make water. 
F Iftheſame be ſnifrvp intothe noſe, it cauſerh often neeſing :alfo the Lerhes it ſelfe doth the nk 
G Therebethat(hunn Baſil and willnot cate thereof, bicauſethat ific be chewed and laidin the 
+ ſunne,itingendreth wormes. 
H Theyof Africke doalſo affirme, chat chey bh are ſtung of the Scorpion and haueeatenof i i, 
ſhall feele no paine at Il. 
I Thelatterwriters o 4; Worn Simeon Lethyi is one, doteach,that the ſmellof Baſill is good fie 
the harrandfor the head. That the ſeede cureth the infirmities of the hart , taketh away loronful: 


neſſe which commerh . f melancholic an pakyeh a man merric and glad. 


Ot! 
li 
il 


| Of wilde Bj H. Chap. hs 


* Sons Ball 


CY 


HISTORIE: oF PLANTS. | 549 


*7 he aeſerip Hon, | 
He wilde Baſill or _Leynes , calle of! Pena ad PL __ eat ſquare hairie ſtems, 
beſet with little leaues like vnrothe (mall BaGll, or nes aller, andmorce hairie, and 
flowers of a purple colour, faſhioned like vnto the garden Bafill, The roote is full of hairie 
threddes , and creepeth along the grounde and ſpringerh vp! yecrely atiewe Wi it ſelfe*wirhour 
n 
ma kinde of wildeBaſill called among! the Grecians 410, which by incexpreration is Size ſe- 
mine,or Sterilis, hath cauſed fundrie opinions and great doubrs conceming the words of P/nic and 
Theophraſtus, affirming that this herbe hath no flowers nor ſceds,which opinions Iam ſure of mine 
- owne knowledge to be withoutreaſon; but to omit controuerſies; this plant beareth purple flo- 
wers, whatled about {quare ſtalkes ,roughtE leaues and hajrmons like in [age varo Baill. 


Vcymoides re | | 
[ Creeping Cone Baſill, * We - > Cription. 
|| 3 Creeping Ocymoides growerh not onely in he 
ſhadowic and wooddie valleies of Caadie, about 
| | hedges, buteuenin the graſſic places and ſhado- 
| | wie waieſidesaboutriuers and flouds, and'in the 
| | cliffesof rockes,withthinne {talkes jointed , cree- 
|  pinginthe grounde, render and crooked like the 
| | great Chickweede zqutof which come two leaues 
»  Tightoppoſlite oneagainſt the other: che flowers 
| | are in ſhape like vntoFleawoort, andofrhe {ame 
' | colout,but nnich ſmaller. The roote is thiane; and 
| | the vſe thereofnor found our. 
|! Serapio and others have ſet foorth another 
\ | wilde Baſill vaderthetitle of Mobochit;and LObe- | 
| | Lins after the minde of fobm Brancion, calleth ic 
| | Corcoros, which we hane Engliſhed Fith Bafill, | 
| | the ſeedes whereof the ſaide Brancion receiued ; 
| from Spaine, ſaying that Corcoros Pliny hath the 
| | leaues of Baſil. The talks are wwo handfuls high, 
\* the flowers yellowe, growing cloſe to the {talkes, 
| | bearing his ſeede in ſmall bullets. The roore is - 
| | compact and madeof an innumerable companic 
| 1'of ſtrings, creeping farrc abroade like runniag | 


e—— 


* The plare. _ 
The wilde kindes doe growe vpon ly 


| grounds by water {ides,and eſpecially I foundthe ; 
three laſt in the barren plaine by an libuſe in Kent, f 
two miles from Dartfordecalled Saint "Ri ina village called Sucto$z 3 and Ns eek anlgare / 
growethin grear plentie vpon Long fielde downes in Kent. ; | 
% The time. 
Theſeherbes flower in Ine and1 uly. [2 
% The names. | 
Voprofirable Baſill, or wilde Baſill, is called of ſome Clmpodiam: OT is caltedi in Boghh, 
creeping Cowe Baill, 
% ri 
The ſcede of theſe herbes are of complexion hor and dric. 
*% Thevertnes. | 
Wilde Bafill pore with wine appeaſeth the _ of the cies, Ty the juice doth mundife the A 


ſame,and putreth awaie all obſcuritie and dimnefle, all catarrhes and 8 the bumours that fall into 
thecics being often droppedinto the ſame. | 
Thewilde Bafill howſocuer ic be taken Roppeth thelaske, ; B 
M m 3 FEE? of 


THE SECOND! BOOKE OF. THE 


* Of Ball Valerian. Chap.g.) 


I Yaleriana rabrs Dedonss. j 2 Behew album | 
Spatling Poppie, 


* Thedeſeription. 


L He firſt kinde of Ocymeſtruwmn,called of Dodonem V alerieans rubragbringerh foorth long and 
brittle ſtalkes two cubits high,full of knots or ioines , in which place is ioined long leaues. 
much like vnto great Baſill, bur greater, broader, and larger , or rather like the leaues of 

Woade, Arthe toppe of the ſtalkes do growe verie pleaſant andlong redde flowers , of tlic fa- 
ſhionef the flowers of Valerian, which hath cauſed Dodorzas to call theſe plants redde Valerian; 
which being paſt,the ſeedes are caried away with the winde being few inniimber, and little in quan- 
ritie, ſothat withour greatdiligencethe ſcede is not to be gathered or preſerued: for my ſelfehaue 
often indeuorued to ee an yet haug loſt my labour. The roote is very thicke,and of an excellent 
ſweeteſauour. | BE 2145 ll 

2 Theſecondisraken for Spumewsn pepazer, inreſpett of thar kinde of ftothie ſpattle, or ſpume, 

which we call Cuckow fpittle, that more aboundeth in the boſomes of the leanes of theſe plants, | 

then in any other one plant that is knowne ; for which cauſe Peng calleth it Papauey ſummewn, that 
is frothy, orſpatling Poppic; his flower doth veric little reſemble any kinde of Poppie, but onely 
the ſeede and cod or bowle whetein the ſeede is contained, otherwiſe ir is like the other Ocyme- 
firumsthe flowers growe at the top ofthe ſtalkes hanging downwards, of a white colour, and ists | 
ken generally tor Behen slbam: the roote is white, plaine, and long, and yery tough and hardeto | 


breake, | | 


E 'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 11": TT 
| areas -+ >| 55 ne 
: Double Spatling poppic. | ld 4/500 1 

. <5 >> 3 #Therc is founde in Germanic gnother ſort of 

{ JD < Ocymt1ſtrun, or Valerianthon (Which Taber mon- 


Nas 


WS ZNL) tenw hath ler foorth) inleaves;ſtalks, and rootes, 
- (TP P like the precedent, only it hath double white 
7 flowers, daſht oner with a little bluth colour , 
which maketh the difference, _ 
 *%'Theplace. | | 
The firſt growerh ple nrifukyin my garden, be- 
ing a great ornament to the ſame , and not com- 
mon in England. | | 
The ſecond growerh almoſt in every paſture. 
= * The time. 


a. W- 


of Augult, % The names. 

Red Valerian hath beene focalled of the like- 
neſle of the lowers, and {poked rundles with Va- 
lerian, by which name we had rather have it cal- 
led, thenrafſhly to laie vpon it an vaproper naine. 
There are ſome alſo who would hauc ir tobe a 
kinde of Zehen of the later Herbariſts, naming 
the ſame Behen rubrwn, tor difference berweehe ir 
and the other Zehen album , that of ſome is cal- 
led Ocymrſtrum, and Pa ſpumenn , which I 
haue nel Spacing Pop 3 andisin truth 
| |  anotherplant, much differing from Beven of the 
| Sn 0=_Arabians: Ir is alſo called a/er:anthor, S.uyona- 
ris alters, Struthizon Aldroand; , and Condurdam : in Engliſh red Valerian, and red Cowe Baill, 

Sparling Poppieis called Beher a/bumr , Ocymaſtrum 4'terum; of forme Polemoninm, and Papaney 
ſumenm: in Engliſh Spatling Poppic, frochie Poppie, and white Ben, — | 
| | * The nature. b--/ 

Theſe plants are drie in the ſecond degree, | 


* The vertues. 


Theroote of Behen a/bwn drunke in wine , is good againſt the bloudic fluxe : 41d being pounde A 


leaues & flowers,and Jaide to,cureth the Ningings of ſcorpions & ſich like venemovs beaſts; inſo- 
much that whoſo doth holde the ſamein his hande, canreceiue nodamageor hurt by any vene- 
mous beaſt whatſoeuer, Ti | 


ric, and paines about the backe andhuckle bone, _ 


541 Of <Mints. Chap.215, | 


| hs yagi ſod oro 5 + Fi kinds IY | 
Here be diuers ſorts of Mintes; ſome of the garden; others wilde , or of the'ficlde; andalſo 
* ſomeofthewater, "| | * The deſcription. TEA | 
I "[Hefirſt tame or garden Mine, commeth yp with ſtalks fower ſquare of an obſcure redeolour 
ſomwhathaitie, which are coueredv found leaues nicked in the edges like a ſawe, of a 
deepegreene colour: the flowers are little and red, and grow abourthe ſtalks circlewiſe as 
thoſe of Pennie roialf:the roote creepeth aſlopeinthe ground, hauing ſomeſtringson it, and now 
andrhen in ſindrie places ir buddeth out a freſh; The wholeherbeis of apſeaſant fnell, andir ra- 
ther lieth downe than ſtandeth vp, whe! £5 © LEN | 
2 Theſecondis likes the firſt in hairic ſtalkes ſomething round, in blackiſh leanes , in creeping 
rootes,and alſo infmell; butthe flowers donor at all compaſie the ſtalke abour, but ſtand vp in the 
tops of the branches being orderly placed in lirtle cares,or rather carkines ot aglers, | 
| ahh as Mma © ' 1 Mentha 


| ThedecoQtion of theroote made in water and drunke, prouckerh vrine, ic helpcrh the ſtrangu- B 


. " " } 


Theſe wy do flower from Maic tothe ende 


* 


55% THE'SECOND|BOOKE OF THE 
1 Mentha ſetinarubra. | 2 Mena cruciata. MA 
Red Garden Minrs. | Croſſe Mint,or curled Mine. 


: £2 


| % Thedeſripticn. 
3 Thelcauesof SpearcMint are long like thoſe | 


' of the Willow tree, bur whiter, ſofter, and more 
| hairie: the flowers are orderly placed in the tops | 

' of the ſtalkes, andin caresllike thoſe of the ſecond. 

' The roote heereof doth alfo creepe no otherwiſe 

_ thandoththatofthe firſt vnto which iris like. 

' Thereis another ſort of Mint which hath long 
©. Jeavcsliketothethirdin little ſtalkes,yer inleaues = 

7 andinrootes lefler; bur the lowers heereofſtand 
'notin che tops of the bratihches, but compaſle the 
3 ſtalkes abour circlewiſe as doe thoſe of the firlt, | 

'  whichbeofalighrpurplecolour. | 
\ + Likewiſetherebemany other ſorts, whereofto 


" - 
F:£4” 
- 
$9 


wr 
*. 
Bos 


* wa of, 
- x _ 
v ['*% 6 # - ww 
- ©iexy - 


_ |,_ Mint is called in Greeke #/%9;and +5): the 
| Fiveere ſmell (ſaith P4je in his 19.bookechap.$) 
| hath changed the name among -the LR 
| | Wien 


F 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 553. 
when as otherwiſe it ſhould be called Mintha,from whence our old writers haue ecriued thename: 
fori/% ſignifierh ſweer,and 57s ſmell : The Apothecaries, Itatians, and French men do keepe the 
Latine name Mentha: the Spaniardes docall it Teryebuens, and Orzelana:inhigh Durch Euntz t 
:1lowe Durch Yunte 2 in Engliſh Mint. - 7 | | | | 

The firſt Mint is called inhigh Dutch Dfement t in low Dutch Baupn he © he tharwould 
:ran{lare it into Latine , muſt call it Sacre nigricaps, or the holy blackiſh Mint: in Engliſh browne 
Mint, or red Mint, = | | 

The ſecondis called in high Dutch Rranf3 diemcent, Krauſs muntz,and Kraul5 balſam : thc 
is to ſay, Mentha cruciata tin French Beawne creſpn tin Engliſh crofle Mint,orcurled Mint, © 

The third is called of divers Aerths Sarraccnita, Mentha Romana,Saluts Romana,ot herba Sant 
Mariz:itis called in high Dutch Balſam munt3Onſer frauwen muntz,Spitzer muntz, Spit- 
3cr balſam: ir may be called Mentha anguſtifolis : that is to fay, Mint with thenarrow leate: and 
inEngliſh Speare Mint, common Garden Mint,our Ladies Mint, Browne Mint, and Macrell Mint. 

' _ Thefourthiscalledin high Durch Hert3kraut, as though it were robe named Cardiace, of Car- 
dice Mentha: in Engliſh Hart Woort, or Hart Mint. 4 | 
| * The temperature. | | 

Mint is hot and drie in the third degree. It is ſaith Ga/enfomEvhat bitter and harſh,and iris infe- 
rior to Calamint. The ſmell of Mint ſaith P/7nte doth ſturre vp the minde , and the taſta greedic 
defire to ineate, | | | 


| % Thewertnes. | | 
Mintis maruellons wholſome for the ſtomacke , it {taierh the hicket, parbraking, vomiting and A 
ſcowringinthe cholerike paſſion, if ir be raken with the inice of a ſowre pomegranate, | 
Ir ſtoppeth the caſting vp of blood,being giuen with water and vineger,as Gafer teacheth, B 
Andinbroth, faith P/zzie, it ſtaicth the lowers, and is ſingular good agairfſt the whites, that C 
_ ktofay,that Mine which is deſcribedin the firſt place. For it is found by experiextce,that many haue 
had this kinde of fAluxe ſtaied by the continnall vic of this onely Mint: the fame being applied ro the 
forchead,or to the map Pl:nie teacherh,doth rake away the headache, | | p 
"Iris againſt warring cics,andall manner of breakings out in the head, and againſt the iufir- D 
miries Ive f cog ip : ik a ſure remedie for childrens fon heads. | 
Itis powred intothe cares with honic water, Ir is taken inwardly-againſt Scolopenders, Beare E 
wormes,Sea ſcorpions and ſerpents, | | | | 
It is applied with falttothe bitings of mad Gcogs.Itwillnot ſuffer milketocruddle in the ſtomack, F 
(Plinje addeth to waxe ſower.) Therefore its put into milke that is drunke for feare thatthofe who 
haucdrunke thereot ſhould be ſtrangled. + © | | | 
Itis thought,cthatby the ſame vertucit is ancnimie to generation, by ouerthickening the ſecede. G 
| Dioſcorides teacheth,that being applied to the ſecrer part of a woman before the a&t, it hindrecth = 
conception. = 
Garden Mints taken in meate or drinke warmeth and ſtrengrhenerh the ſtomacke, and drieth vp H 
all ſuperfluous humors gathered in the ſame,and cauſcth good digeſtion. - \ pac 
Mints mingled with the meale of patched batlie,conſumeth.uynors and hard fvellings, | I 
The water of Mints is of like operation in diuers medicines, it cureth the trenchings and griping K 
paines of the bellic and bowels,it appeaſcth headach,ſtaieth yexing and vomiting. - 


5 F 


| aa inſt the grauell and ſtone in the kidneies,and againſt the ſtrangury, being boiled L 
nwine and drunke, , - Ce WL x as es wx. | 
They laie ur to theſ ;inging of walpes and bees with good ſucceſle. 6: Fra. b M 
Of Nep,or Cat Mint.  Chap216; 


* Thedeſeription, © 208 
l At Mint or Nep growethhig th f 


h;icbringeth foorth ſtalkes aboue a cubic long, cornered, 
A, ,, chanfered, and fullof branches: the leaues are broad, nicked in the edges like thoſe of 
./ . ..., Bawme;or of Horchound,burlonger, The flowers are of alight yellow, and whitiſh with- 
all they pardly compas abourthe yppermall ſprigs,andpartly.in the very rop,they arc ſcrin manner 
like ancare,or catkin: the roote is diverlly parted,a afallof ſtrings,and enduteth a long time, The 


| | whole 


$54 THE 'SECOND BOOKE OF |THE 

vhole herbe togither with the leques and ſtalkes is ſoft, and covered with a white downe leflet than 

ogy Mints it1s of a ſharpe ſme!l, andpearſerhinto the head : it hath a hot taſte with accrtaine 
itcerneſle, | [i be, | ] | | 

2 Thereisalſoanorher kindc hereof, thathath alopger andnarrower leafe, and notof ſowhite 

acolour : the ſtalkes hereof arc fower ſquare; the flowers be more plentifull, ofa red light purple 

colour inclining to blew,ſprinkled with little fine purple ſpeckes: the {mel hereofis ſtronger burthe 


taſte is more biring. 


1 Mentha Felina, ſea Cattaria .. | | 2 MentaCattaria alters, 
Nep,or Cat Mint, | _ | Great CatMinr. 


15 


* © "4 « b 3 

4 +) Yo : 

RICE 
AY 


They growe abour the +6 ited ons k 87 5 Re to rough bankes, ditches , and com- 


mon waies: itis delighted withmo 


The Car Mints flouriſh by arid by after 


and waterie ſoiles zitis brought into gardens, * 
*+Thepome, oO 777 I 
eſpring : they flower in Iuly and Auguſt. 
'% Thenames. © -F 


The latter herbariſts do call it. Herbs Cattarga, and HerbaCatti, bicauſe the cars are very much 
delighred herewith for the ſmell thereof is ſopleaſant vnto then, that they rub themſelues wont, 
and wallow or tumble in it, and alfofeede on the branches and leaues very greedily. Itis namedof 
the A aries Xepeta ;but Nepets is properlycalled ( as we haue ſaig)wilde Pennic royall: in 
hi cch Katzen Yunt3: in lowe Dutch Catte crutit : in lcalian ag or Herba Gatts: 
Spaniſh Teras Gatera:in Engliſh Cat Mint and Nep. | 

| : F 4". % Thetemperature. _ ; 
Nep is of temperature hotanddrie and hath the faculties ofthe Calamints. | 

A lItiscommended againſt oldepaines of the head, ſtomacke, and marrix, and thoſe diſeaſes that 
groweofflegme, and rawe humors, and of winde, Iris a preſenthelpe for them that are burſtenin- 


q: 


7 HISTORIE "OF"PLANTS. | 5355 
wardly, by Meanes of ſome fall recciued from an high place, and chat are very much bruiſed, if the 


vice be g1uen with wine or mcade. 20t- f 4 
Icis viedin bathes and decoQtions for women to i1t ouer, to bring downetherr ſicknes, and to B 


make them fruitful. | 
Of Horfe Mint,or W. ater Mint. (hap.117. 


1 Mentha aquatice. WATT 2 Siſymbria Mentha. 
Water Mint. Sweete Vater Mint. 


| | *% The deſcription. | 
I Ater Mint is a kinde of wilde Mint, it is like to the firſt garden Minr,the leaues thereof 
areround, the ſtalkes cornered, boththe leaues and ftalkes are of a darke red colour: 
the rootes creepe far abroad, buteuerypart is greater, andthe hetbe itſelfe is ofa 
ſtronger ſinell; the flowers in the tops of the braunches are gathered togither into a long ſpikie 
eare,in ſhape like the red Mace,of a purple colour, | 
| 2 Theſecondkind of water Mint ineche teſped is like the others, ſauing that the ſame hath a 
more odoriferous ſauour,being lightly rouched with the hand; otherwiſe being hardly rouched,the 
lauouris ouer hor to ſinell vnto,and beareth his flowers inſundric tufts toward the toppe,of alight 
purple colour, | | | 
* Theplace. | 
JF grow in moiſt and waterie places, as in medows neer vnto ditches that haue waterin them, 
y rivers, Po 


% The time. 

They flower when the other Mints do,and teuiue inthe ſpring. 

a ; a1: IL *% The names. 
© Triscalledin Greek zunj&w»: in Larige Siſymbriam:in high Dutch Roſ5munts, 
n French Aenthe /anuage: in Engliſh Water Mint,Fiſh Mint, Brooke Mint, and Horle Mint. 


*% The 


556 THE SECOND BOOKE. OF THE 
| i} 4 * Thetemperature. | | 
Vater Mint is hot anddric as is the garden Minr,bur it is of a ſtronger ſmell and operation, 
| | I [109 |  ThEwoyars. Atkins 
A ltiscommended to hauethelike vertues chat the garden Mint hath: and alſoto be goodagainſt 
the ſtinging of Bees and Waſp&s,if the place berubbed therewith. . | 


4 


B Thefauour or ſmell of the water Mine reioiccth the hart of man, for which cauſe they ſtroweitin 


&- 


bf 


chambers and places ofrecreation,pleaſure,andrepoſe,and where fealts and bangquers are made. 
C Thereisno vic heereot inPhiſicke,whileſt we may haue ehe garden Mint, which is ſveerer, and 


= 


more agreeing to the nature of man. 


Of mountaine eMint,or ('alamint. Chap.218. 


34 | w% Thehkindes, | 
There be three Calamints,as.Djoſeorides reacheth. Thelater writers hatie found more. 


1 Calamintha montana ville aris. | 2 Calamintha mont 411 1+ 4-070h; 
Calamint,or mountaine Min. * The more excellent Calamint, 


>< % 
WW", IS 
\s 


41} | * The deſcription. x 
Ountaine Calamintis alowe herbe, feldome aboue a foote high, parted into manybran- 
ches : the ſtalkes are fower ſquare, and haue ioints as it were, out of cuerie one w cok 
growe foorth leaues ſomething rounde, leſſer then thoſe of Baſill, couered with a veric 
thinne hairie downe, as are alfothe ſtalkes,ſomewhat whitiſh, and of a ſeete ſmell: the roppesof 
the branches aregallantlydeckr with flowers, ſamewhar of a purple colour, then groweth the 
whichis blacke : the rootes are full of ſtrings, and continue, .| 


2 This moſtexcellent kinde of Calamint hath vpright ſtalkesa cubire high, coucred oucr witha 
woolley moſlines beſet with rough leanes like a nertle, ſomewhat notched about the edges; among 
the leaues come foorth blewiſh or skie coloured flowerszthe roote is wooddie, and the whole plant 
is ofa very good ſmell. £ * 4M] || mY ks. 


Her 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. $57. 

There is another kinde of Calamint which hath harde ſquare ſtalkes,coueredin like manner as 
the other, with a certaine hoarie or fine cotton. The leaues be in ſhape like Bafill, burthar they are 

hzand flowers growing onely by oneſide ofthe ſtalke among the leaues , ſometimes three or 

"9-4 von aſtemme,of a blewi 4 colour, Theroote is threddie, = = | 

There is akind of ſtinking Calamine,thar hath alſo ſquare ſtalks covered with ſoft corton,and al- 
moſt creeping by the ounde,hauing euermore two leaues ſtanding one againſt another, ſmal,and 
{ofr,not much vnlike . leaues of Penny roiall, gong, on they are larger and whiter: the flowers 
prowe about the ſtalkes like wharles or garner a blewiſh purple colour; the roote is ſmall and 
*reddic:the whole plant of a bad ſmell, | | 


* The place. . | | 
It delighteth to growe in mountaines,andinthe ſhadowie and grauelly {ides thereof: it is found 
in many x ar of Iraly and Fraunce, andinother countries: it is brought into gardens where ir 
roſpereth maruellous well,and very eaſily ſowerh it ſelfe. I haue founde theſe piants growing vpon 
the chalkie grounds and high waies leading from Graues end vnto Canterburie, in moſt places, or 
euery where. 51 | 
a ab * The time. 
It louriſheth in ſommer,and almoſt all the yeere thorowe : it bringeth foorth flowers and ſeede 
fromIune toAutumne, = | | 
*% Thenames. | 
Itis called in Greeke wawwi/vt», as though yee ſhoulde fay,Elegans aut viids Mentha, a gallant or 
profitable Mint : the Latines keeþe the name C1lamintha : _Apulcinsallo nameth itamiſle , Men- 
teftrum, and confoundeth the names one with another: the apothecaries do call it Montane Cula- 
minth:, Calamentwn, and ſometime Calamentium montanume in French Calament :in Engliſh Moun- 
taine Calamint, | | 
| : *% The temperature, | 
This Calamint which groweth in mountaines, is of a feruent taſte and biting , hotte, and of a 
thine ſubſtance,and drie after a ſort in the third degreezas Ga/ep ſaith; it digeſteth or waſteth away 
thinne humours, it cutteth and makerh thicke humours thinne, = | 
| * The wertues. | ; 

\ Therefore being inwardly taken byit ſelte,and alſo with meade , or honied water, it doth mani- A 
feſtly heate,prouoketh ſweate,and conſumeth ſuperfluous humours of the bodie, it taketh away the * 
ſhiverings of agues that come by fits. | 

The fame alſo faller oyle performeth, in which it is boiled , if the bodie. bee annointed and B 


| wellrubbed and chafed therewith. 


The decoRionthereofdrunke prouoketh vrine, bringeth down themonthly ſickenes, and expel- C 
leth the childe, whichalſoir doth being bur onely applied. | 


— 


It helpeth thoſe thatare bruſed , ſuch as are troubled with cramps and conmulons, and that D 


. Cannot breath vnleſle they holde their neckes vpright(that haue the wheafing of the lungs ſaith Ga- 


fen )andit is a remedie faith Dzoſcorzdes for acholericke paſſion, otherwiſe called the Felonie. 
| Irisgood for themthat haue the yellowe iaunders, tor that ic remooueththe {toppings of the E 
liver and gall, and withallclenſcth : being taken aforchande in wine, jt keepeth a man from being 
irc 6 : being inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, it cureth them that are bitten of ſerpents: 
eing burnedor ſtrowed it driueth ſerpents awaiez ir taketh awaie blacke and blewe ſt ots that come 


byblowes or diie beatings, making the skin faire and white , but for ſuch things ( ſaith Ga/es) itis 


better to be laide to greene thendrie, . | 
Itkillerh all manner of wormes of the belly, if it bedrunke with falt and honie: the juice dropped F 


 Mmwthe cares dothin like maner kill the wormes thereof, 


Plinie faith,thar if the juice be conucied vp into the noſthrils ,'it ſtancheth the bleeding at the G 
noſe, andthe roote ( which Duoſcoredeswriterh to begood for nothing ) _ the {quincie if it be 
gargarized,or the throate waſhed therewith,being vied in Cute,and Myrtle ede withall.. 

Iris applied rothoſe that haue the Sciarica, or ache inthe huckle bone, for irdraweth the humor H 
from the very bottome, and bringerh a comfortable heate to the whole ioint; Paulus AF grnets 


| ſaith, that for the paine of the haunckes orhuckle bones,jtistobe vſed in gliſters, 


Deng much eaten, it is 
Or 1t, as Dioſeorides wi 


for them thar hautheleproſie,ſo that the patient drinke whaie af- I 


CAPulcims 


$538 THE SECOND BOOKE' OF {THE 
K - bn ESA 164; the leauesbe often caten, they areaſure and cetraine remedie againſt the 
leprotie. | | : : ue againſt | 


Thereis made ofthis an antidote,or compdſitioti,hich Gee in his fourth booke of the gour 
ment of health deſcriheth by the name of Diacaleminthos , that doth not onely norablie : ; d 


AC— 


LETY 
2 


waſte awaic,but alſo ts maruellous good for 2 15, ima want their courſes, if their 
be firſt well purged,for in continuaunce of time it bringeth them downe yerie gently without force, 


Of Bawme. Chap.21g. 


< | * Thekindes. 44 
T Here be diuers herbes comprehended vnder this generall title Meſs, or Bawme, taking thejr® 


denomination of their natiue countries. . 


oh 


2 Mels be Tar cicae 


x 
- 
4 


Pirftrum,or Me | uv Ba many ſn 


uour ynto a Citron: the gowers are of a carnationco- 


\. HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 259 
4die, and dierh atthe firſt approch of winter, andmult be fo MM Ns 

Ines AE war rhe coun Fudd | , andm owen ance in the Heginning 
Fachſaz 1ertech foorth al kinde of Balme hauinga ſquare ſtalke; with leaneslike vnto common 


Bawne, but larger and blacker , and of an evill ſauourz the flowers white; andmuch greater then 
thoſe of the common Bawne : the roote hard and of a woodie ſubſtance 


Thereis akind of Balme alled Herbs 1nd:jca, which L Obelimecalleth Tetrahit , thathath many oy 


weake & tender ſquare hairie brancheszſome leaning backward, & others tuning knward, dividing 
chemſelues into ſandric other ſmall armes ortwigges , which are beſerwith long rough leaues den- 
red about,and ſmaller than the leaues of Sage. And growing in another {vile or climate, you ſhall 
ſee the leaues like to the oken leate; in other places like Marrubium creticam, veric hoarie, which 


cauſed Dioſcorides to delcrihe it with ſo manyſhapes , andalſo the flowers, which are ſometimes 
blew and purple, and es white : the roote is ſmall and crooked with ſome hairic ſtrings fa- 


ſtened thereto. All che whol plantdraweth eo the ſauour of Balme,called Meliſſa. 


4 Molucea ſprnoſa. 
Thornie : Baume, 
M4 | = vs 


— _ 


IT . " 


WY £7 


Ju \ PI. 
X \..* 
= 
WE 
\ 
W194%” 
p 7 


[ 
o 


WW; 


1 


aq” 4 
w_ 
A \ {y 


ACS 


ww AY 
þ ns 


- 
- 
ol 


wat 
Rent ' —} 
” [ i 1 
SINN 
14-47 "+ 
Iv. 


% The deſerittion. | | 

3 Therebealſotwo otherplants comprehended vnder the kinds of Balme, the one very like vnto 
theother, alrhough not knowne to many Herbariſts , andhaue beene of ſome called bythe title of 
Cardiaca; the firſt kinde Pena calleth Cardiica Metica , or Molucca Syriaca , focalled for that it was 
firſt _ hrout of Syria: it groweth three cubirs high,and yeclderh many ſhootes from a wooddie 
roote 


of many whitiſh ſtrings: the ſtalkes be rounde, ſomewhar thicke , and of a reddiſh 
colour, which are hollowe within , with certaine obſcure prints , or ſmall furrowes along the 
ſalkes wich equall ſpaces balie kneed or knotted, ahd at euery ſuch knee or ioint ſtand two leaucs 


one againſt another, tufted like Melt//a, but mote rough and cepely indented, yernot fo deepely 
#5 Our common Cararecs, called Mo erwoort,nor {gtharpe pointed: about the knees there come 
foorth ſmall little prickles, withſixe or cight ſmall open wide bels , having many corners, thinne 
like parclunent,and of the ſam colour ſomewhat ſtiffe and long; aid at the top of the edge of _ 

| ell, 


_— 


560 THE SECOND; BOOKE OF THE 
bell,it is cornered and pointed with ſharp prickles ;&outof the middle of this prickley bel!,riſeth x 
flower ſomwhat purple tending to whiteneſle, not vnlike our Lamiwmn,ot Cardiace, which bring «th 


foorth a cornered feede, the bottome flat andfinallertoward the top like aſtceple: the favour of 
the plant draweth toward the ſent of Lamiwm. : | 


- 
% 


4 Theotherkinde of Melice,otherwiſe called Xolacca afperior, (whereof Pcnawriterh) differeth 
fromthe laſt before mentionedzin.that the cups or bels wherein the flowers growe are more prick| 
theq the firſt, and much ſharper , longer , and more innumber : the ſtalke of this is fower ſquare 
lightly hollowed or furrowed: the ſeede three cornered, ſharpe vpwarde like a wedge 3 the tunnels gf 
the lowers browniſh,andnor ſo white as the firſt. t | | 
$ +1 * The place. ſte v7 |: 
Bawme is much ſowen and ſetin gardens, and oftentimes it groweth of ir ſelfe inwoods ang 
mountaines,and other wilde places z it is profitablie planted in gardens as Fline writeth in his 21, 
booke 12.chap.about places where Bees are kept , bicauſe they are delighted with this herbe aboue 
others,yhereupon it hath beene called _{pie#rwn: for ſaith he, when they are {traied away, they 
do finde their way home againe by it: as Y;rga{writeth in his Georgicks; ; | 
- Huc tuinſſos aſperge liquores, 1 
- Ty ita Meliphylla, & Cerinthe ignobile gramen. |. 
Vie heere ſuch helpe as husbandrie do viually preſcribe, | 
[Þ Baulmme bruſed in a mortar and bale Honie woorrt beſide. | 
all the which I hauc inmy garden from yeere to yeere. j 


| ; The time. ; | ; 
\ Balme flowreth in Iune, Iulie, and Auguſt ; ir withereth in the winter, but the roote remaineth, 
which in the beginning of the ſpring bringeth foorth freſh leaues and ſtalkes. 
Theother ſorts do likewiſe flower and flouriſh in Iune,Iuly,and Auguſt; bur they do periſh when 
they haue perfeRed their ſeede. | ; ' | 
| *% 7 henames. | || | | 
Bawmeis called in Greekewpooiomr , of Plyy Melirtis :in Latine Meliſſa ApiaſirumX Citrags, 
of ſome AMelſſephylon , and Meliphylbn: in Dutch Conſfille de grevn: in - 4; Poucyrade ow 
Mel;ffe:inlalian Cedronellaand Arantiara : in Spaniſh Torengil : in Engliſh Balme,orBawme, 
j | {| t i heremperatere. || 
Balme is of temperature hotand drie , as zen ſaith in the feconde degree: Galenfaithit is 
like Horchounde in facultie. | | t 1 | 


1 
i 


=  _*% Thevwertnes. © 5 | 

A Bawmedrunke in wine,is good againſt the birings of venemous beaſts z comforteththe hart, and 
driverth away all melancholic andſadnefſe. | 's | 

B Common Balme is good for women which haue the ſtrangling of themorher,cither being eaten 
or ſmelled varto. | by | EE ns _ 

C The iuicethereof glueth togither greene woundes, being pur intooile , vnguent or Balme, for 
that purpoſe, and maketh it of greater efficacie, {1 

D Theherbe ſtamped and infuſed in 4qus vite, may be vicd vnto the purpoſes aforeſaide (I meane 
the liquor and not the herbe) ahdis a moſt cordiall liquor againſt all che diſeaſes afore ſpoken of. 


E Thehiues of Bees being rubbed with the leaues of Balme,cauſeth the bees to keepe togither,and 


[5 


cauſeth others to come vatothem. | 


F Thelaterage togither with the Arabians and Mauritianes, affirmeth Balme to be ſingular good 
forthe harr,and to be a remedie agus the infirmities thereof; for CAawier in his booke written of 
the infirmities of the hart,teacherh that Bawme maketh the hart merrie & ioiful,and ſtrengtheneth 
che vitall ſpirits, | 1 7-0 | T8 

G Serapioaffirmeth itto be comfortablefor a moiſt and colde ſtomacke, to ſtirre vp concoction,to 
open the ſtopping of the braine,and to driue awaie ſorrowe and care of the minde. ; 

H Droſeorideswriteth that the leaues drunke with wine or applied outwardly, arc good againſt the 

— ARiingings of vencmous beaſts, and the bitings of madde dogs; alſoir helpethr roothach the 
mouth being waſhed with the: decoction, andis likewiſe good forthoſe that cannot rake breath - 
lefle they holde their neckes vpright. E yg on 

I Trhelpeth (faith the ſame author) the leaughbeing mixed with falt, the kings cuill, of any othet 
hard ſwellings and kernels,and mitigaterh the paine of the gout. 1 "it coi 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. $61 
- es Bawmezor carpenters Bawme,.is moſt ſingular to heale vp green wounds thatare cut K 
yr —_— the ruptufein ſhort time z it ſtaterh the whites: Doſcorzdes and Plnyhave at- | 
— Ie vertues vntothigkind of Bawme, which they call Iron woort. Theleaues faic they be- 
"gz ed. cloſe vp wounds without any perill of inflammation : Plinie faith that iris of fo great 
— at though icbe bur tied to his fworde that hath giuen the wounde,irſtancheth he bloode, 
ertue,that "7x | 


Of Eorehbound. Chap.22.0, ; 


| *% The hkindes. | 

Ioſeorides and others of the auncient wtiters haue ſerdowne two forts onely of Horchoundes, 

D the one white Horehounde, and the other blackez notwithſtanding the later writers haue di{- 
coucred and founde out mor forts,as well wilde as tame,as ſhall be declared, 


1 Marrabiumalhum. / | 2 Marrabiun candidum. 
White Horchound. / Snowe white Horchound. 


<DA<7 (9/4 IZ7 


* F 
#9 17 


1 


+ - 
3 ATE 
NF AITANER 
» A 1 © £ 


4 
AL 


-4 - 
T 
A 


o 
Wn | 
S4 


TY 


= 
FL 
- 
= * 4 ® 
- * S : = —_ 
- _- % * 
oF / %14 ” bg 5 . 
, A *A " 
" jad j by L- 
” ; a . 
” » C 
= ” . A 
"F . 4 Gy > 5 k pe 
- \ —_ — F —_ ; bi FAC. 
% ” fe = *: 
; s - 
4 A - 
4. "4" . — 
_ - FAT 34 » % . 


=Y 
4 = 
Oc 
m 


* The deſcription. 

I Hite Horehound bringeth foorth very many ſtalkes fower ſquare, a cubite high,coue- 
red ouer with a thin whitiſh downineſle ; wherupon are placed by couples at cerraine 
diſtances, thicke whitiſh leaues ſomewhatround, wrinkled, and nicked on the edges, 
andcoueredouer with the like downipeſle: from the boſomes of which leaues come foorth imall 
flowers, of a faint purpliſh colour, ſet round abour the ſtalke in round whatles, which turne into 
ſharpe prickley huskes after the flowers be paſt. The whole plantis of a ſtrong ſauour, butnor vn- 

pleaſant. The roote is threddie. | F- | | ; 
2  Theſccondkinde of Horehound hath ſundrie crooked ſlender ſtalkes, diuided into many finall 
branches,conered over with/a white hoarinefle,or cortonie downe. The leanes are likewiſe hoaric 
and cottonie, longer and narrower than the precedent. lightly indented about the edges,and ſharp- 
ly pointedlike the Turkic Ba ine, and of the ſame biBneſſe, hauing ſinall whales of white flowers 
| Nan Tx ; and 


5% THE SECOND/BOOKE OF/THE 
and ipgckly rundles or ſecede veſlels : aboutthe ſtalkes be cerraine diſtances. Theroote is likens 
 threddic. | : ; i | | 


| 3 Marrubium Hiſpanicum. = (OE og, MarrubiamCreticam. 
Spanith Horchound. [4:4 ' © "Candice Horchound. 


Py 


$9 SW 
L212. 
Vo IN BE 
al 


. A yo 

' o : Ay # £ 
Y9 , 4 by wy 'F 7 
$5 b, « Pu 4 


"85 « 5 = 
3 Spaniſh Horchoundhath a ſiffe, hoarie, and hairie ſtalkez dividing bortome int 
cwo wingsor armesatidlikewiſe toward thetop with two others, whereups dby coup 
atccrtaine ſpaces, faire broad leaues, more round than any of. the reſt; and 
and hairie,” The flowers groweat the top of the ſtalkes, ſpike faſhion;.comp 
flowers,ofapurplecolour; The wholeplant hath the fauour of Staxchados. 
4 Candie Horchound hath athick and hard roote, with many haitiethted 
which riſe vp immediately rough ſquare ſtalkes, ſer confuſedly with' lapgle 
of a moſt pleaſant ſtrong ſmell. The flowers growe towardthe top 
ofa pale yellowiſh colour, | = # L 
263 He FS [2 * The place. | 1.4 
The firſt of theſe Horehounds, being the common kinde, groweth plentifully in all places of 
England,necre vato oldewals,high waies,bcaren pathes,jn vnroiled places. Thewhich growethin 
all other countrics likewiſe where it altereth according to the ſituarion ane of the conntries: 
tor commonly that which groweth in Candie, ant!in Hungarie, is much whiter, atid of a{weeter 
imell, and the leaues oftentimes narrower, and leſſer than that which groweth in England, and 
theſe northren regions, Hy *% Thetime. : >. 
They flowerin Iuly and Auguſt,andtharin the ſecond yeere after the ſowing of them, 
| 15 * The names. | WEEN 
. Horehound is called in Grecke emer: in Latine Marrubium : in ſhops Praſdum, and ofren 
Marrubium.Thece be certaine baſtard names foundin Aralring, as Melitrent, Labeonia, and Vie 
rartz :in Italian Afarrubyo : in Spaniſh U4arrauts : in Dutch Falroue ; in Frieach Marabin ; 1 
Engliſh Horchound, ||.  _:. ; | as 
| R % Tie 


| 
| 
|} 


Horechound,as Glen teacheth, is hotinthe 


caſte. | 


Common Horehound 


and vicerations 
he nd boiledinwina 


breſt and lungs,and preuaileth greatly againſt an old cough, the paine of the ſide, ſpitting ofblood, 


ISTORIE-OF PLANTS. 46z 
*+ Tic: '" abit o 
econd degree; anddrie inthe third, andofa bitter 


5 He! * The vertaes, | | 
ed in water and drunke, openeth the lier aud ,Clenſeth the A 


fthe lungs. | 


nddrunke, bringeth downe the termes, expellerh the ſecondine, after B 


- bicth,ordeadchilde andallo caſcth thoſethat haue ſore and hatd labour in epnbroningy | 
Wy inſt thecough, C 


orweb inthe cies; 


The iuice prefled foorth 


freſh leaues 'and ſugar, is a moſt ſingular remedie ag 


ully and aboue credit, eaſe ſuch as haue lien long ficke of any D 
hath beene often prooued by the learned Phiſitions of our London 


thathaue drunke poiſop, ortlhat hae beene bitten of ſerpents, The E 
to clenſe fowle and filthie vicers. Irſtaieth and  backerhe 


of the leaues; and hardened inthe ſunne, is very goodfor the Jane F 


L 


things, eſpecially if it be mixed with a litlewine and honic, anddropped into the cies ithelpeth 


Being drawen vp into the 
aud watering of them. - 


vo 


neſthcils;je clenſerh the yellownes ofthe cies, and aieth the running G 


wilde Horehound. (hap. 221, 4 


I Stachys. 


* 
* 


v 
& 


| 


P 
= 
- N 4 
- 
kw, \ 4 - 
<Q dy, ON + 
k Lk». 
Wl. AY ” 4 
Vn IX , 6 
wh 
bo 


”\ 
OT. 


564 THE SECON D{BOOKE OFTHE 


* The a 11ft top. 


Ide Horchound | is allo like rocommon Horchound: chead rife from the roote hee: 
of agreatnumberof takes highoriointed, andour of cuery foint a couple of leaye 
oppoſite or 6 pa another,fomewhat harde, alictle Jonger then r Gafcum? 
mon Hiceboond ,andwhitet, as allo the ſtalkes are ſer withſofr haires, andofa ſiveete ſmell: the 
flowersdo compalle the ſtalke abouras thoſe doof har ron 1ong « qpanpre are yellow, and 
the wharles be narrower : the roote is wooddiehknd durable. 
2 Beſides this theie js alſo anorher deſcribed by Fachſtvy the ſtalkes: hexreof arethicke; FER 
ſquare, ngwve and then two otthree foore long:the leaues be broad,long,hoarie hoarie,nickedintheedge, 

' hairieasmealſotheftalkes, andmuuth broader then thoſe of common Horehound: Tom. g 1 
the whotles which compaſlerhe ſtalke abour;ate of a YY _— the » M0 is roundandbjackiſh, 
the roote hard and {omthing cllowe. ONT 

x6, is a kinde of wilde called Sreebys S 0 7 
_ 190108 ha map wt rant 


TH Lartbe 


Ge fag 


c ep #9 Scordium , (aue hos eG ſomewh Sm r, more wrinckledor 
curled and hairie then Terrahre, or Tudaical herbe: the flowers doreſemble thoſe of common Sauo- 


ric,in taſte bitrer, and fan arowaricall fauour, | 
| Monnraine Srderitiveing alſo of the kindes of Horchound,was firſt founde by Viderande Dots 


r4az,in the mountaines of Sauoy,reſemblin ng very well the herbe either 0a 1/1 , burthe leanes are 
much narrower,otherwiſc like,hauin g ſmallrough rundlers or rufts, pale of colour like Merrobium 
or Tetrah:t: the roote long and bending,of a wooddic ſubſtaunce,and purple colour,birterinraſte, 
but ay La: 237 vertue is yet vaknowne. L 


| * The | 
Theſe herbes are borreiners, 7 gowe in ag and barren places, qoniann I haue 


them growing in my garden. | | 
Thpfanerindehupmermomtn, and wither ks winter : therooreremane as. 2 


certaine rime. 


. 


*T be HAMECS. 
The formeri is taken fc nets achys which i is called in Grecke ae A; is vaknowne in ſhops 
and cuerie where : ſs liſh yellowe Horehounde,and wilde Horchounde. | 
Theother wilde H und, Geng ir hath no name, js tobe called $:achys fpuria:foritis not 
rherighr,ncither is it Sphacelws, (as mot haue ſuſpeRed) of which Theephrafims hath made men- 
ion :itiscalledinEng iſh purple Horchound , baſtarde wilde bn af and Fuchſau wilde 


Horchound. | | 
|  * + The relepentiabn; 
Theſe herbes arc of biing and bjccer ale, and are tne tid dg acorn ro 


Galen. | | 
| *% The theytucs. 
The decoction of dela drunk doch draw downthe menſes and te ſecondin as Djoſcort- 
aes EN . | 4 


of 


HISTORTE |OF PLANTS. 


GS "RT 


% 
>, 
" " 
AL5 w Sr) 
p< 


Q 
FL, 
£3 
ww, * «” 
” 
4s 4 % . 
3% 


ESLEL< | 
— Ld/ V\XY" % iy 
4 6t, 0 


* The deſcription, 


1 \ Ater Horehound is very like toblacke or ſtinking Horehound in ſtalke and dowred 
--V cups,which are rough, pricking,. and compaſſing the ſtalkes rounde about like gar- 

\  landes:thelcaues thereof be alſo blacke,bur longer, harder, more deepely gaſhedin 
the edges then thoſe of ſtinking Horehound, yetnothairic at al, but wrinkeled : the flowers be mal 
and hang the m_ is faſtned with many blacke ſtrings. 

2 Sarpepointed water Horchound hathan vpright rovgh ſalke, and hairie, which divideth i 

Savage Fo m other branches,whereon do Tm IA rough leaues, havepoltnct | 
Aattrong imell. Lhe flowers growe at the top of the ſt if ur : thi | 

KY XR Ia Ha MG. any atthe top of the alkes ofa purpliſh colour : root is tough 


They growe in brookes on the brinkes * m_ » and necre ynto {AP for it requirerh 
ſore of water,and growethnotin drieplaces, | © | | E? 73 
i | : -- -* The time. 
ey flouriſh and flower in the ſommer month,jn Iulic and Auguſt, 
Iris called _Lqaar; * The 8ames, || | KN; 
= = Fe apes and Paluftre Marrubiam tin Engliſſwarer Horchound,and marriſh Hore- 
oES, Tathiolus taketh it to be Species Sideritidis 3 ora kinde of Iron woort, which Dioſcorides 
Jeicribed in the firſt place 3 but with this doth better agree that which is called Herba Tudaica, 


or Gli 


a Te evoer zirmuchlefſc agreeth with Siderjtisſccunds, or the ſeconde Ironwoort, which thing 


by 
£ 
, 


his fauorers, for itis like in leafe to none of the Fernes. Some allo thinke good tocallic 
| . | a” N n3Z Herba 


455 THE SECOND|BOOKE OF+THE 


Herba AFEeptia, bicauſe they that counterfer themalclues Egyptians (ſuch as many times wan. 


derlike vagabonds from citictocitein Ge vie with this herbero giue themſelnes 2 {wart 


colour, ſuch as the Egyprians and the people of Afrike are of; for the juice of this herbe doth ie 
eucrie thing with thi kinde of colour which alſo holdeth fo faſt, as thatizgannot be waſhed ©; 
wiped awaie:"in fo much as; linnen cloth being died heerewith , dath alwaies keepe thar 


4. _ | 
lour. | 


j it F< L. Th 
2 a * Thetemperature. © TY 
- It eemeth to be colde,and withallvery aſtringent or binding, - 

There is little vſe of theſe water Horchoungs in Phiſicke, 


"py Of blac e or ſinking Horehound. Chap-223. | 


Marrabiuon nt rum. | 


— ww. 
k wE 
"IS 
i 


rl 


=, 
$3. 5 
: 


: ;6 74 - . ay _ 
F A 
4 7 + 
LY g P 
__— , IS; F; ; 
? - [ \ ' w 
- : 's\ *71 2 
# w__ , #'s X 
ET 
® "©. 


 } ſwartor oy colour, ſomewhat, 
- of Nettles, ſniptaboutthe edges, of an vn; 
and ſtinking favour. T 5/7 bans ar 
- ſtalkes in certaine ſpaces; of a-purple colour, in 
- ſhape like thofe of Archangell or. dead Nettle, 
_ © Therooteis ſmall andthreddie. © | 
| th Theplare, 
' Iris found ingardehts among pot herbes, and 
| oftentimes among ſtones and rubbiſh in dric 
© ſolles. 4-7 ' 
| *% The time. 
It lowreth and flouriſheth when the others do, 
* The names. 
; TIriscalledin Greeke fwau7i, and iz negnmas 
. Plinteteſtificth in his 27, booke,8;chapter; of forme 
4 Marrubiaſtrum, or Marrubium ſpur ivon, ot baſtard 
' Hoxchound: in ſhops Prz/awnfatiqum, and Balbte: 
| Wn Ent vis RAE 4 in py  Marrauio ve- 
' £70: in French Marubin nozr & puant : inEnglih 
; Prnking Horchound, 41. jp dog 
* The temperature. G 
IAN), === - _ Stinking Horchound)1s. hot and. drie , and as 
- ELSE ERISSRERES Paulus Acginetateacheth,of a tharpe and clenbng 


: facultic, | 


ry 


Being ſtamped with ſalt and applied,ir cureth the biting of a mad dog, againſt which iris of great 


efhicacie,as wie, foe ne? : 


Theleaues roſted inhotembers do waſte and conſume away hard umpes or knots in orabout 
the fundament.Ir alſo clenſerh fowle and filthieylcers,as the ſame author reacherh. wy 


Of. Archangell,or dead Nettle. Chap. 224. 


F 
þ 


EL 1 
—_ 


TP Herebe divers fortes of dead Nettles; of kindes'of Horehourd hong, differing in many notabk 
$5544 5 : \ : | [| I Lanwn 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


Yellow Archangel! 


- 


i < 
OY #2 
I > 
© F 
A 
« 


HI. 
$ 
< 


* 
wih. 8 
bl k.. 
Wi..ztz 
SIS 
wn #4 7,” 


"+ The deſeription. 


1 Hite Archangell hath fower ſquare ſtalkes, acubitehigh, leaning this way and thar 
V V way, by reaſon of the great waightof his ponderous leaues, which are in ſhape like 
| thoſe of Nettles, nicked round abour the edges, yer not ſtinging at all, but ſoft, and 
as it were downie. The flowers compaſle the ſtalkes round at A on as thoſe 
of Horchound do, whereof doubrleſle this is a kinde, and not of Nettles, as hath beene generally 
holden, which flowers are white of colour, faſhioned like to lictle gaping hoods or helmets. The 
roote is very threddie. ahora dt ; 8 
2 Yellow Archangel] bath {oper ſtalkes riſing from a threddie roote, ſerwith leaues by couples, 
very much cut or hackt about the edges and ſharpe pointed. The vppermoſt whereof ate often- 
tires of a faire purple colour. The flowers growe among the ſame leaues of a gold yellow colour, 
faſhioned like thole of rhe white Archangell bu greater,and more wider gaping open. | 
3 RedArchangellbcing called Prtica non mordax,.or dead Nettle, hath many leauesfpred vpon 
the ground; among which riſc vp ſtalkes hollowe and hairie, whereupon do growe rough leaues of 


» 


anouerworne colour, among, which. come foorth purple flowers, ſetabourt in round wharles, or 
rundles.The roote is ſmall,and periſheth ac the firſt approch of winter, | SIE 
4 Dead Nettle of Hungarie bath many rough leanes very much curled or crumpled, like thoſe of | 
the ſtinging Nettle, of a darke greene colon, ſniptabout the edges like the teeth of a fawe , ſer yp- + 
on afower ſquare ſtalke by couples ;, from. the boſome of which leaues come foorth the flowers 
cloſeto the ſtalkes, of a perfe&t purple colobr, in ſhape like thoſe of the white Archangell, gaping - 
like adragons mourh, che lower chap whereof is ofa bright purple ſported with white, which be- 
ng paſt, there doth tollow ſeede nclof-dz 1 xough husks, with fine ſharpe points ſticking our, The 
rooteisthicke, rovgh, conſiſting of wany threds and long ſtrings. | | 4 

| ] N# 4 | 2 Lammn 


THE SECOND: -BOOKE 'OF THE 
3 Limmun rabrun:. L Y 4 Lamm Pannonicwn, ſue Galeoplis, 
Red Archangell. | EEERS Hungarie dead Nettle, ia 


L - 
fk. 
£87 1 
Cf ig 
«4 . 
S, 


Ls 


Yo The place. 


Theſe plants are founde valler hedges, oldewals;common waies, among rubbiſh, inthebor- 


ders of fields, and in carable grounds, oftentimes in gardens ill husbanded. | 
"Thatwith the yeilow flower groweth notſocommon as the others. Thaue found it vnderthe 
hedge on the left hand as you go from the village of Hampſteed neere London to the church, and 
in the wood thereby, as alſo it many other copſes abour Lee in Eſſex, necre Warfotdand Buſhic 
in Midleſex, and in the woods belonging to the Lord Cobhamin Kent, | FINES TEAR | 
They flower for the moſt partall the ſommerlong. 4 
— Archangell is called of ſome 7tica imers, and XMorerua,of forme Lomium: inEnpliſh Atchangel, 
blinde Nertle, and dead Nettic, WE | ek CO ANAL 


A 


: 45-44 *% The temperature, 4 
They are horter and drier than Nettle, approching rothe temperature of Horchound. 

A Archangell ſtampedwith vineger, and applied in manner of a pultis, taketh away Wens and 
hard ſvellings, theKings cuill, inflammation of the kernels vnder the. cares andiawes, and alſo 
hot fierie inflammarions of thekernels of the necke,armeholes,and flanks; 2 

B Iris good to bathe thoſe parts with the decoQion of ir a$.Doſcordes and Plinie ſaic. 

C Thelater Phiſitions thinks __ the white flowers of Archangelldoſtaie the whites, and 

 famepurpoſediuers do iake of them a conſerue;as they call ig,of the flowers and ſugar,whichthey 
aypqntro be taken for certainedaics togither. * | 8 5 | 


£ 
: 
.* 


[1 
8 


- 


D e flowers are baked with gar as roles are ywhichis called ſi rRoſet :25 alſo the diſtilled was 
ter of themgwhich is vieEto make-the hart merriez tomake a og colouiin the face, andromake 
the vitall ſpicits more freſh and liuely, da 'f nu 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
Of eMother woort. Chap 225, 
cCodiae. © Rot | PE) 


Mother woott.  - Fo el | - "FP The defer /ptrom. | « 
| | F Other woorr bringeth foorth alks fower 
{quare, thicke, harde, wo cubirs higl:, 
of an obſcure or overwotne red colour, 
The leaues are ſomewhat blacke ; like thoſe of 


Nettles, but nuns bevtier then theleancs - 
of Horchound , deepely indented or cut oh che 


$69 


edges. The huskes are harde and pricking which 
do compaſle the ſtalkes abour like whales , or 
lictle crownets, obit of which do growe putplith 
flowers , not vnliketo thoſe of dead Nettle, bur 
leſſer. The roote is compa ofmany ſmal ſtrings, 


NI _— 22 | thewholc plantis of a verie ranke ſmell id iT 
A EAYS tertaſls. © - + _ 
JI | | + Theplace, W- A 
P24 = | al" | 4 . | 
2 ZE LT, _—Y Itivieth among rubbith , in ſtonie andother 
WW SIP 023 24 "SFM IY 


| barren and roughplaces , eſbecially aboug Ox- 
ford ir vrofired well in gardens. ay 
' *&Thetine. Te 
It fouriſheth,Alowreth, and ſeederth,from Ine 
to September: the leaves and ſtalkes periſh in 
winter.burt the rooteindureth. | | 
* The names. ++ 
Iris called in our ageCardziaes :in high Dutch 
Hertzgeſpozr ; in low Dutch Þertegeſpan: in 
SRZDS |_| French Agripanime: in Engliſh Mother woot. 
PE. =, 3” f == | | Somethere be that make it akindeof Baume; i: 
ſeemeth thatit may alſo be referred to Sideritis Herenlane,or Hercules Iran woort, 
| * Thetemperature. © | | | 
Mother woortis hot and drie in the ſecond degree, by reaſon of the clenfing and binding quali- 
tie that it hath, *%'The wvertwes. ES | 
| Diuerscommendiragainſt the infirmities ofthe haze: iris iudged to beſo foreeable , thar it is A 
thought it tooke his name Cardiacaof the etc. kn, -— WRT, N 
Itis alforeported to cure conuulfions and cramps ,and likewiſe the palfte : to opentheobſtrufti- B 
ons or ſtoppings of the intrailes : to kill all kindes of wormes ofthebellie, | Job: | 
The powder of the herbe giuen in wine, prouoketh not onely vrine;, or themonthly courſe; but C 
alſo is goodfor them that are in hard trauell with childe. LY E TON. $rere's” | 
Moreoyer, the fame is commended for green wounds: it is alſo a remedie againſt cerrgine diſea- D 
ſesin clit the cough,8& murren,$for that cauſe diuers husbandmen oftentimes much defireir, 


 * Thekindes.” 
n There be diuers forts of Nettles as ſhall be declared. | | | 
* The deſcription. © | AL 
I He ſtalkes of the firſt be now and then halfe a yarde high,cound, and hollow within: the 
leauesare broad ſharpe poifted,cur round abourlike af RR rough on both {ides, 
and couered witha ſtinging downe, which with alight touch onely icauſerh a-greathur- 
ning, and raifethhard knors in the skin like bliſters, and ſomerirnes maketh'it red. The feede com. - 
meth fromthe rootes of the leaues in-round pellers, bigger than Peaſe z' it is flipperic , glirrering like 


Y 


\ 
Y; 
ELIF 


£1: 


p A\ 
4 ) 


. 


Line ſeede.but yet lefler and rounder.The rootc is ſet with ſtrings, 


1 Yrtica 


999 THE SECOND BOOKE' OF 'THE 
1 Friita Romana. . © : 2 Yriia w1Hs, 
1744 Common ſtinging Nettle, 


\% ©. 


_—_ 


s, 
a 
Ss 
wh 
of " 
dd. 
F=IJ 
4 < WY ns 
- BR Þ 
D 
, ” 
% % 
6 


: 11 HIST O'RTE/OF-PLANTS. $7 
2 Theſecond Nettle is like tothe former in leaues and ſtalkes, but epaneperace del and - 
more fullof branches : itis alſo coucred with a downe that —_ and burrerth as well xs the 
other ;the {cede hereof is ſmall, and growerhnor in round bullets, but onlong flender ſtrings, asic 
were in cluſters,as thoſe of the female Mercurie Oy alongrhe ſtakes and branches abouc 
| the leaves, very many. The roote is full of ſtrings, of colour ſomething yellow, andcrceperh all 


nes thirceis like to the ſeconde in ſtalks;leaues, and ſeede, thatgroweth by cluſters, burlefſer, 
& commonly conan of branches,ot 4 lightgreene,more burning and ſtinging; the roote is ſmal 
and not without S, j 2B June Bs EO a) 
a" fourth being our common red Netrte;is knowne berterto ſome then deſired andtherefore 
neederhno deſcription. wi x eb = 
7 *% The place. | | | | 
| Nettles growe invntilledplaces,and the firit in thicks woods,andis a ftrangerin England; not- 
withſtanding it growerhinmygarden, | | * ITY ET Wh 
The ſeconds more common andgroweth of it ſelfe neere vnto hedges, buſhes, and brambles, 
ndolde wals. | RL GABLE s 
The thirdeand fourth alſo commeth yp in the ſameplaces, whichnotwithſtanding groweth in 
gardens,and moiſt earable groundes, * | | | ERP 
| *% Thetime. : | | 
Theyallflowriſhin ſommer,che leſſer ſuffereth the winter colde; the ſecde is ripe and may be ga- 
theredm Iuly and Auguſt, 1 0 Ye bn: * 
' ** The names. » | 
Iris called m Grecke Awwn:in Latine Y7#zca, ofhis burning and ſinging qualitie:whereuponzas 
Macer ſaith: | | | =o / | 
-—mec mmer ito nomen ſunoſſſe videtur, 
'— "Tataquodexurat digitoswrticatenentis. ; 
The Nettle ſcemes her name tortake of no vndeſeruedthing, [ie + 
Wehichhurtesthe handofhimchactoucheth her, with apiercing ſting, | 
And of diuers alfo »»i/y, bicauſe it ſtingerh wich hurtful down:in high Dutch Nefſel:inIralis Ortica: 
in Spanuth Hortigs : in French Ox7e: in Engliſh Nettle. The firſt is called in low Ditch 
TAXelen, thatis Romana V rtica, or Romain nettle : & likewiſe in high Dutch UT1aliche Nefſelen + 
thatis, 1ra/:ca v7tica, Italian Nettle, bicauſe it is rare and groweth but infewe places, and the ſeed 
isfent from other countrics and ſowenin gardens for his vertues : itisalſocalledof divers Price 
mgs:andof Dijscorides Vrtita ſplueftrts.or wilde Nettle,which he ſaith is more rough, with broader 
andlonger leaues,and with the ſeede of Flaxe, but leſſer. -linie maketh the wilde Nettie the male, 
andin his 21.booke, chap.15.ſaith, thatir is milder & gentler: itis called in Engliſh Romane Net- 
tle, Greeke Nettle, male Nertle. The ſecondis called Priica {emina,and oftentimes Yrtica maior, 
that itmay differ fromthe thirde Nettle :in Engliſh female Nettle, great Nettle,or common Net- 
tle. The thirde is named in high Dutch ÞHepter Neſſel: in the Brabanders ſpeech etite —_ 
ſocalledofthe ſtinging qualirie : in Engliſh ſmall Nettle, ſmall ing Nettle: bur whether this 
_ bethatornowhich p/zniecallerthCanca,or rather the firſt, let the Students conſider. There isinthe 
wile nettle-a more ſtinging qualitic , which, ſaith he, is called Cania, witha ſtalke more ſtinging, 
hauing nicked leaues. it / PDE SIE] 


RIS te Thetemperature:. By | N 
Nettle'is of temperature drie,alittle hor,ſcarce in the firſt degree,jtjs of thinne and ſubtile parts, 
forir doth not therefore burneand tinge by reaſon it is extreme hot : butbicauſe the downe of it is 
ſiffe and hard, pearcin glke fine liccle prickles,or ſtings andentring into the kin : for if it be withe- 
Tegorboiled,jieſtingeth-nor acall, by reaſonthar the Niffeneſſe of the downe is fallen away. 


%* Thevertues. | 


: 


Being eaten, or as Dinſearides faith, boiled with Perywinkles, irmaketh the bodie ſoluble, and A 
dothtitby a kinde of clen{ingqualitie : iralſo pronoketh vine, and expelleth ſtones our of the kid- 
Fa TY deinghoiled with barly creame, it bringeth vp rough humorsthar ſticke in the cheſt, as'ir is 

yh cr: . of k # | [ ' " 5 R ks | 


Being hamped; andthe purvp.jnro thenoſtrils, ir ſopperh the bleeding of the noſe: the B 


Thy 


, 


572 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


C Theſeede ofNettle ſtirreth Wi luſt, eſpreially drunke with Cure: for (a5 Galen faith) it hathin ie 
.  acertainewindineſle, 

T) Irconcodteth anddraweth obriofthe cheſt rar hinbedl 

E Iris good for them that cannotbreath vnleſſe they holdtheir neckes 1% and for choſe thar 
haue the Pleuriſie, & for ſuch as beſicke of the inflammation of the lungs,itit betaken inaloache 

_ orlicking medicine, and alſo againlt the rroublefome m__ that children haue, called the chinne 
cough, 

F Pd. affirmerh xhar itis a atemedic againſtthe venemous qualitie of Hemlocke Muſhrome, 
and Quickſiluer. 

G And apoloderts faith,rhatir is R counterpoiſoh for Henhane rpents ad ſcorpions, 

H As >lniewirnellicth, he ſame author writcth, , that the my of it raketh pray the ſtinging which 
the Nettle it ſelfe maketh. | 

I Theſamegroſlely powned, : and drunke i in wie wine ,isa moſt f ingular medicine againſt the 
ſtone either im the bladder,or in the reines, as hath beene often prooucd to the great cale and com- 
fort of thoſe, that haue been grieuouſly tormented with thar mgladie. 

K I expelleth grauell,and cauſeth to make ware. 

L Theleauecs of any kindeof Neatle,or the ſeedes, d , do worke the like fg bur not with that g00d 
Es ko ſoafſurcdly as the Rotmane Nettle, : 


WW Henpe. | hp. 227. 


* The afrpricn 


Empe bringeth forth round ſtalks,ftraight, 
hollow, fiuc or ſixefoote high, full of bran- . 
; ches, and that whenit groweth of it ſells 

wilde: : burwhen itis ſowen in fields, irhath 
few orno branches atall.: The leaues thereof be 
| hard cough, ſomewharblacke, and ifthey be brui- 
SRL, ZN WAZERN fed they be of a ranke ſmell, made vp of divers 
Fs ONE Eh a to . - - DN licrle leaues ioincd to ther , cueric particular 
UNS rx »/ PN = 2 7A 7/5 leafe whereof is narrow, ang, ſharpe pointed, and 
WE A SSA nicked inthe cdges.: the ſeede commeth foorth 
from Ws, of the wings and leaues, being 
round, ſomewhat hard, full of white ſubſtance. The 

xootes have many ſtrings. | 

 Therejs another being the female Hempe, yet 
barren and withour ſeede; contrarie to the nature 
of that ſexe,which is very like ynto the other being 
the male, & onemuſt be c ghihered before the other 
beripe, elſe it will wither away, and come to no 
good purpoſe, | 


| & The plice. 
| - Hempe,as Colwell: writcth,delig hrerh ro grow 
in afar dunged and warterie ſoile , or plaine and 
| ſpoiſt og deepely digged. 
h + The time. 
Y Hempei is ſowen in Match and Aprill. The firſt 
js ripe inthe end of Auguſt,the other in Iuly. 
| % The names. | 4 
This is named ofthe :Grocizhl wivelt,alfo of the Latines Cannabts : the Apothecaries kee ch 
name: in high Dutch 3amer hanff: of the Italians Cara ape :of the Spaniards Canams : in 
Chanure : of the Brabanders Kemp: in Engliſh Hempe.| The mal is called Charlc Hempe, ap 
Wincet Hempe. Theſraule Bagren —_—_—— Ty rg F 


4 


HISTORIEE' OF PLANTS. 573 
x The temperature anduertues. | | 

' The ſeed: of Hempe, a5 Galen writeth in his bookes of the faculties of {mvle medicines, is bard A 
of digeſtion, hurrfull ro the {tomacke and head, and conteineth init an ill iuice, notwithſtanding 
forme - do vie to cate the ſame parched,cum als tr agematis,wwith iunkers, 

It conſume:h winde, as the {aid author ſaith in his booke of the faculties of medicines, and is lo B 
greata dricr,as that jt drieth vypthe feede,ifroomuch be eaten of ir. | 

Dioſeorides (aith gthat the iuice ofthe herbe dropped into the cares  affwagerh the peing thereof, C 
proceeding as I rake jr,otobſtruction,or ſtopping,as Galen addeth. 

The inner ſubſtance or pulpe ofthe ſeed preſied our in ſome kinde of liquor,is giuen tothoſe thir D: 


haue the yellowe iaunders, when the. diſcaſe firſt appeyees and oftentimes with goodfſuccelle it 
the diſcaſe come of obſtrution withour an agewe, for it openeth the paſſage of the gall, anddi- 
ſperſeth and concogeth the choler through the whole bodie, + | | 
 Mutbjolwsſaith, ons the ſced giuen to hens,cauſerh themtolaic egges more ptentifully, 4.1 8 
Of wilde Hempe. Chap.228. 1 
*'T he kinaes. | 
= Here be divers ſorts of wilde So iekal ,1t (hall ſutfice to giue you the figure of one, wk te 
deſcription of mo, | | | 
Cannabis Spuria. BED Pk | of 
> DAG: me * The deſcription. 


jy His wild Hempe called Cannabis Spur i, 
Pi; 2 F: ] Ge Py andalſo Cannabina Sparia, or baſtaidc 
Df d IN JI 6 Hempe, hath ſmall, nder,hoari, and 
*'( IT SF LL? Wome. REY hiirie ſtalks,a foote high,beletateuerie 
i NE? I. NY \aw7 | ivintwithewo leaues), ſmallie i ted abour the 
TEN | R901 : ; edges, ſomewhatlikeanertle, The lowers growe 
| in rundles abourthe ſtalkes ,ofa purple colour: the 
| rooteis little and threddie. 
| | Thereis likewiſe anotherkinde of wilde Hempe 
| which hath hairic ſtalkes and leaues like the for- 
; mzer,but the flowers ate greater, gaping wide open 
| like the flowers of Lamium,or dead dry where- 
| of this hath beene taken oa kinde: but hee that 
| knoweth any thing may caſily diſcerne the fanour 
| of hempefromehe nh Ede dead Nettle, The flo- 
; wers —_ cetera iagmacen colout,de- 
| cliningropurple. 
| | Thereisalſo another kinde of wilde hempe, like 
_ | vnto the laſt before mentioned; ſauing!thatir is 
| ſmallerineche reſpeRt &notſohairie : e leafe is 
| ſormewhatrounder, The roote {mall and thredcic. 
| * The place. 

Theſe kindes of wilde or baſtarde hempe, doe 
| ypon hilles and mountaines , and barcen 
| fy gromden) peciallyihcarable lande,as I haug 

Þ 6 ſeene in HIY corne fieldes of Kent, as about 
Graues ende,Southfleete, ae 7 all therra®t fromthenceto CROIK 6 | 
* Thetime. 
Theſe herbes do flower from lulie tothe end of Auguſt, 
*% The names. 
le (hall ſuffice what hath beene ſet downe in the title for the Larne name: m Engliſh wilde 
hempe,Nettle hempe, and baſtard hempe, - ._ 
* The hemperature and vertues. | 
The temperature and faculties are referred to the manured hempe , ; notwithſtanding they are” 
nct vice in phiſicke,where the other may be had, | of 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of I: ater - je Chap. 229. 


BY Euptorium #48 i AaT | | = 
w ater Hempe,or pre :Agioni |  » The A ſeriphics 


ED Acer Hempe, orwater Agtimonie, i; 
YVÞRh Z2 | . 7 0 iy V ſeldome founde in hot regigns , for 
NED NP SY ". which cauſe it is called Enpatorian 
0 Cannb imum famrma Septentyionalium, and oro. 
: wethin thecolde northerne countries in moiſt 
- places,and in the midſtof ponds, flowe runnin 
- © rivers,and ditches. The roote contiriuerh long, 
| © hauingmanylong and flender ſtrings, aftet the 
4 | naturcof water herbes, The ſtalkes growea cu. 
| © bireand a halfchigh, of a darke purplecolour, 
; '. with many braunches ſtanding by diftaunces 
| | one fromanother. Theleaucs are mere indenred 
' andlefſchairie than the niale kinde, the flowers 
'* grome at thetop,, ofabrowne yellowe colour, 
| ſpottedwith black ſpots like Atter attiex, which 
© confiſteth of ſuch a ſubſtaunce as is inthemid(t 
* oftheDaiſic,or the Tanſie flower, &is ferabour 
with ſmall and ſharpe leaues , ſuch as are abour 
the roſe, which cauſeth the whole flowertore- 
ſemble a ſtarre and ſauoureth like | anory, 6 
Reſine, or Cedar woode when it + an. 
ſeede islong like Pprethrwp , cloſely thruſt togi. 
ther,and lightly cleaueth to any wollen garment, 
that it = by reaſon of his roughnes, 
There is another wilde hempe growing in the 
water, whereof there be twolorts more 
ting to grow in the like ground, in ſhew differng 
veric lietle. This $ringet ny lon TE & ſtalkes, and ſomewhat reddiſh, about two cubits 
highs or ſomething higher , they are beſet with long greeneleaues indented ypon the edges, wher 
of youſhall ſee commonly fie or ſeauen of thoſe leaues hanging vpon one ſtem like the leanes of 
hempe,bur yer ſofter. The flowers are little, of pale reddiſh colour, , conliting of ſoft rounde tufts, 
and ſtand perting vpon the top of the ſprigs which ar length —_ Ws. 5 Gowhg the roote 1- 
derneath is full of threddic ſtrings ,of a meane bijgneſle, 
abourthe binkes + ofdnches doo d ſtanding pooles, and i 
owe 's $,rugnin waters, and ſtan ooles , and in watetic 
placeaklmo eueric where. : ngp 
4 The time. 


They flower and Aouriſh in Jul and Auguſt: the roote continuech, bur the ſtalkes andleaues 
wither away inwincet, | 


! 


| * The names. ; 

The baſtarde or wilde Hemjies, eſpecially thoſe of the water, arecalled commonly Hepaterius - 
Cannabirum of divers alſo Eupator 1wn, Leonhar. Fachſ nameth i it Enpatorium adulterinm, of tor 
Cannabinz , of the likenes it hath with the leayes of Cannabis, Hempe , and Eupatorium Auicenne. 
It is thought alſo to be thatwhich Bepriſis Sardia doth terme Terzola* bam Dutch ©, Kunt- 
gund kraut, that is to ſaie in Latine Sent#4 Canigunde Herbs, S. Cunigh tbe: inlow 
%Boelkens krutt : in Engliſh water Hempe, baſtard and water MT It is called Hepatoriw®, 
ofthe faculcie, wharpy t itis good for Hepar,the liver. 

*% T he temperature. 
Theleaues and roOtes of cheſe herbes are 6 Hae hot and dric in te cond degree,theyhate have 


/ 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
ſcoure and open, to attenuate ot makethinnerthicke 
ve dpethei foorrh by vrine ? they clenſe and purifie tHe blood 
 *%Thevwertaes. 
The decodion heeraf is profitablie giuen to thoſe that be ſcabbed and have oy $kins:and like- 'A 
| the ſtoppings of 


[fro fiich as hauc at meg har ſtop ped or ſwolng; for ir taketh away 
hthoſ intrailes3 and alfo of the gall: gherdore iris goodfor them that haucthe ji 


| ODS 
and grolle humours, and to expell 


cially ſorheivharafrer the beginhing. | E dk | 
The herbe boiled in wine or water,jis ſingular good againſt rertian feuers. | B 
- ThedecoRtion drunke, andthe leaues ourwatdly applied , doe heale all wounds both inwarde C 
and outward. a. , | ; 33 gp | 


- Of Egrimonie. ( hap.230. 


* The deſcription. 

Heleaues of Cdgrimenia, are long and hai- 

rie , greene aboue, and ſomewhat grayiſh vy- 

"= derneath, parted into divers other ſmall 

leaues, ſnipt rounde abour the edges, almolt like 

the leaugs ofhempe, The ſtalke is two foote and an 

halfe long,rough,and hairie; whereupon-grow :14- 

nie ſmall yellowe flowers one aboue arother yp- 

wards towarde the top : after the lowers come the 

ſeedes ſomewhat long and rough, liketo ſmall burs 

hanging downwards, which when they be ripe, do 

ch holde ypon peoples garments which paſle 
by ir. The raoteis great;long,and blacke, 

22 'Irprovethinbartenplaces by high waies,inclo- 

./ | ſures of medowes, andofcorne fieldes, and often- 

' times in woodes and copſes , and almoſt cueric 


where. | 
LE age hes ., * The time, 
"| Tr flowreth in Tune, and ſomewhat later, and 
| ſeederthafterthara grearpartof ſommer, - | 
© . %* Thenwnes. | 
The Grzciahs call it *vz:er: and the Latines 
alſo Expateriu%. Plinie Eupatoria, vetthiere is ato- 
ther Fupator junr in CHI: and thatis Marrubi- 
&n, Horchound : in like manner the Apothecaries 
| have another Hep:t2r;wm that is commonly. vicd, 
* which alfo is named Hepatoriuwn adulterinum-: the 
ſhops call it baſtarde Agrimonie,of diners it is named Ferrarcs, of others Concordia,or Marmorelis: 
In Or:baſaus his olde tranflation in the fourth booke of fimples, Agrimonie is named Lappe inuerſa: 
and it is named Lappa inuerſabicavle tlie ſeedes which are rough like burres,do hang downwardes; 
otlome Philarthropos,of the cleauing qualitie of the ſeedes hanging ro mens garmenrs:the Italians 
: and Spaniards call it tt Agramonia : in high Dutch Ddermeng, Buickwurts : in lowe Dutch, in 
French,and in Engliſh, Agrimonie : Eupatorium beareth his name of Euparer the finder of it out; 
and(fzith'P/n;e)ichath 4 toiall and priccely authoritie. mr ES wag 
i wa oath, % The temperature. _ | gb # 
 Tishor,anddoth moderately binde,and is of a temperate drineſſe: Ga/en teacheth,thar Agrimo. 
nie ts of fine and ſubtill parts,thar it curteth and ſcoureth, therefore ſaith he, it remooueth obſtruc- 
riohs Kopp ings our of the liver, and dorh likewiſe ſtrengrhen ir, by reaſon of the bindirig qualitie 


o 


tharis in it, | 
*% The 


576 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 7 


% Thewertues. L.1 


, A Tred&co&iomoftheleiues of Egrimonicis good for them thathaucnaughtie livers, and for 


ſuch as piſſe bloud vpon the diſeafes of the kidnels, be. 

B The Rode being drunke in wine(as P/zny affirmerh)doth helpe the bloudie flixe, 

C Dioſcorides addeth , that itis a temedictor thera that haue badliuers , and| for ſuch as are bien 
with ſerpents, . | 1 = l:} | a 

D Theleaues being ſtamped with oldfwines greaſe, and applied, cloſerh yp vicers that be ha dy * 
healed,as Dioſcorides faith; | | __ þ bl 


F 


0 Sawewoort. Chap.231. 


1 Serratuls purpures. || | of . 2 Serratuliflore albs. 
Purple Sawewoort. | E246 | White Sawewoorr, 


%o > #s & 
PI BIS 
_ 


gi: ht Th 0-H TOC Le ER I IN I Le 
") ; 


i \. \ . . QL \ 
; AF 
oy UN 


$ -M T- - K is {\ vt) 
YL 2409 os PU TN 
Vigo \\ 


7X, # 4 
Wy 


654g | wu Thedeferiptim, * || 
Z * He plant which the newe writers haue called Srrretuls , differeth from Betonica , al- 


? 


3 though of theauincients it hath beene raken for Betonie, hauing large leaues ſomewhat 
ſnipr abour the edges like aſawe (whereof it tooke his name) niſi immediately from the 
roote: among whichcome vp ſtalkes ofa cubire high, beſet withleaues very deepely cut or iagged 
cuento the middle of the rib,nqtmuch vnlike the male Scabious. The ſtalkes rowardes the top di- 
j uide themſelues into other ſmall branches; at the rop.whereof they beare Howers ſomewhat icalic, 
like the Knapweede-, butnor ſo/great nor harde : at the top of the knap commeth forth abuſhicor 
thrumnue flower, of a purple colour, The roote is threddie,and therby increaſeth and becommeth 
of a BP" quanrtitie. | þ | | [ 
2 Sawewoort with white flowers,diſfereth/nqt from theprecedent , but inthe colour of the flo- 
wers:foras the other bringerh fqorth a buth of purple flowers; inmanner this plant bringeth foorth 
flowers of the ſame faſhion,butpt a ſnowe white colour,wherein conſiſteth the difference. 


- 


3 Srl 
F 
| 4 j | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. - $77 
z Serratula fiore rubro, Red Sawewoort.. * The deſcription. 

Ro T-.- "7 | $3 Wehaue founde inour woods another fort 
of Sawewoort, differing from the others of his 
kinde,onely in the colour of his flowers, without 
any other difference at all,for this plant bringeth 
foorth red flowers,and the others not ſo. 
| | # The place . | 
' Sawewoort growethin woods and ſhadowie 
places, and ſometimes in medowes. They grow 
in Hamſtcede woode : likewiſe I haue ſeene ir 
growing in great abundance in the woode adioi- 
ping to Iflington, within halfe a mile from the 
farther ende of the towne , and in ſundrie places 
of Eflex and Suffolke, _ 1 

| *% The time, 

| They flower in Iuly and Auguſt, 

| *% The names, = 

\ Thelateragedoth callthem Sezratula : it dit- 
fercth as we hauecſaide from Betonie, which is al- 
ſo called Serratula : other names if it haue any we 
knowe not :itis called in Engliſh Sawewoort. | 

% The temper ature and vertues. 
| Serratulq is woonderfully commended to be A 
moſt ſingular for woundes, ruptures, burſtings, 
{ hernies and ſuch like : and is referred vnto the 
S | temperature of Sanicle, 


Of Betonie. | Chap.222. 
Betonica. | | 2 Betonica flore elbo. 
Betonic. | E5 Betonie with white flowers. 


- 


$ 
'v 
my 
a 
x < 
I. 


Ti wad > 


<7” 
b 


4 % 
© Ve 
a 
Oe 
% II'Y 


\ > > "A > 
CLOS, 
> ISS 
| y Aa 
L647 - 


49 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


% The dferipion. 
Eronic growerh vp MY leaues longand broad, ofadarke 
'B abour the edges like a ſawe. The ſtalke is lender, _ 
high mote or leſſe. It hearerh cared flowers,ofa purp 
the flowers,commerh in place long yomnerey I ſecede Ther contin many ſtrings, 
2 Betoniewith I is like the precedent in each reſpe&t, ſauing that the Aowers of thi 
plant are whice,and of greater beautic roche purple orred, as aforeſaid, 
RT 
Beronic loueth ſRadowie woods hedgerowes, av copſes,the borders of paſtures, and TE lhe 
laces. | 
: Betonie with white flowers is ſeldome ſcene. I foundi it inawood b ya village called 
' neer yntoa worſhipfull Gentlemans houſe, one of the Clarks of the Queenes counſell c 
ſer ade, from whence I brought plants fo my garden , where *Y flouriſh as in their one 
place of growing. | 
* The time. 
| They flower and flouriſh fr the moſt par in Iunc and luly, 
- * The names. 
| Betonieis called in Greekd zicerr: in Latine Beron/ce : of divers Y etonjes, but vnproperly, There 
is likewiſe another Betonica, which Paulus Argimets deſcriberh, and Galen in his firſt booke of the 
ntofhealth, ſheweth charit is called «er, that is to ſay, Berapice,Betonic and alſo Sar 
phagon: Diofeorides notwithſtanding doth deſcribe another Sarxiphagon. 
* The temperarure. 
Beronie is hot and dric in che ſecond degree : it hath force to cut,as Galen Gith, 
* The vertues. 

A Betonie is g20d for them os be ſubict © the falling ſickneſſe, and for thoſe alſo that haueill 
heads vpon acold cauſe. 

B ltclenſeth the lungs and cheſt, it caketh pray iobfinifiices or Roppings of the liver, milt, and 
gall:itis good againitthe yellow iaundies, | 

C Irmakethamanto haue a good, ſtomackeand appetite to his meate; ic prevaileh againſt ſower | 

| belchings: umaketh a man to piſle well : ir pope paine of the kidncies and bladger : itbrez- 

kethſtonesinthe kidneies,and driucth themfoorth. | 
D lrisalfo good for ruptures,crampes, and conuulfions: itisa meds againſt the bitings of mad 
dots gay ſerpents, being drunke and allo applied to the hurts , and is —_ 
againſt poiſon | 

E oy is commended againſt he paine ofthe Sciatica,or ache of the hugklcbone. 

F Thercisa conſerue made of the flowers and ſugar good for many things, and cſpecialyſorth 
headach, A dram weight of the roote of Beronie Tiednd and taken with meade or honicd water, pro- 
cureth vomit,and bringeth foorth got and rough humors as diucts of our age do report. 

G Thepo# Jerofthe Tried leaves drunke in wine, is good for them that ſpir or pifſe blood, andci- 
reth all inward wounds,efpecially the greene leaues boiled in wine and giuen, 

H Thepowder taken with mearte,looſcth the belly very gently, and _— them that haue thefal- 
ling ſicknes,with madnes and headache, | || 


I Itisfingularagainſt all paines of the headh killeth wormesin the bell wi helpeth the ague;jeclen- 


ſerch the mother,and hath great vertue to heale the bodie, being hurry by bruſing,orſuch like. 


Oo Water Buonie. (hap. 23; 


* The deſcription. 
AterBertonic hath great ſquare, hollow and browne Ralkes: whereon are ſet very broad 
leaues, notched abour the edpes like vnto thoſe of Nettles, of a ſwart greene colour: 
growing for the moſt part byrwo and two as itwere fromone joint, oppoſite or ſtan- 
ding one right againſt another. The flowers: growe at the top of the branches, of a darkepurple co- 
lour,irhape like tolittle helmets. The ſeede is ſmall, conteinedin round bullers or buttons. The 


roote is compa of many ud infinite rat. 
Brtenics 


""HISTORTE OF. PER | $79 
etonicg Agit1tica NN arer Beronie, * sf | * The | 
W I _ 221 OA "1 [egrowerhby oe The pl eomning waters, by 

EARRSSS) | dirchtides, and by the brinks of riuers, andisſet- 
| 4oie found indriephces. [n_9} +5 


Ic flowredin CA Th, to 
' It flowrech ww! wt Jt 
#5 FN 2 A : time the ſeede waxethripe. | 
£62 Me SAACIPSN % Themunee: 
. - 1/44 — F - E | | WarerBetonic isGalled inLatine. Betonienaiiia 
SLED | tice ; of Droſeorides Clymenum, Galeopſis, and Scye- 
| phiukerid altera of Dodonemus: of Turner Clymency: : 
of ſome Seſamordes minus, bur-not properly: of 
" others Serpentariz: i Durch S.Intemeg'ciwd: 
| inEnglth Browne woorts, and Water Beronip: 
n Yorkſhire Biſhop leaucs. | Þ: 19:04 | 
009724 5 hurt T he remperature. berg, 1 
| WarerBetyniz: is hor and drie. | 5.14 
*+ The vertues. "! | 
| | Theleauesof Water Beronie are of a fromnine A 
'# orclenſingqualitie;andis very good forfoule 1d 
finking vicers , eſpecially the tnice boiled with 
. honie | 
lcis reported, if the face be waſhed with the B 
iuicetherof, it takethaway the redneſle and defor- 
mitic oft it, | 


: 
. Js, 
- Gs. 


 Of's oreat Fivnewoort,or OY Kemell woort. Chap 234. 


\. Seroph OL ruaer. GieaeP | Injury * | *% T he deſeription.. 
He great Figge woorrt fpringeth vp with 
ſtalkes fowerſquare two cubiteshigh, of a 
darke purple colour, and hollowe within: 
the leaues growe alwaics by couples, as it were 
from one ioint ,.oppoſire or ſtanding one right 
| againſt another, broad, ſharpe pointed, ſhipped 
rounde about the edges like the leaves of the 
| greater Nertle,but bigger, blacker, and nothing 
at all ſtinging when Gene rouched:the flowers 
 inthetopsot the branches are ofadarke purple 
DES colour, very like ; informe. to little helmets: then 
| RPE | commeth vp lirtle ſmall /ſeede in pretic rounde 
- EZ » | buttons, but ſharpe at theend:theroote is whi- 
/ | tiſh, beſet with lirtle knobs and bunches as it 
. were : knorsand kirnels. 
© There is another Fig woort, called Scrophu- 
| larnia Indicathat hath many and greatbraunches, 
trailing heere and there _ the ground, full of 
leaues,in faſhion like the wilde or common Thi- 
 ſle, bur altogither without prickes : among the 
leaues appeere the flowers in#aſhion like an 
hoode, on the outſide of a faint colour,and with- 
in intermixt with purple, which being fallen and 
withered, there come in place ſmall knops veric 
bardeto breake,and ſharpe at the point,as aþod- 
Oo 2 kin; 


530 E SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


kin: which containeth a finall ſecede like yacoTime. The whole plant periſheth. at rhe firſt 16, 
proch of winter,and muſtbeſowen againe in Þ or ar) good and fercill ground, ' Pr 


The -2t at Serephulerz groweth plen cifullyin (had adowie woods and ſomtimes in moiſt medowes, 
eſpecially reſt abundancein 2 woode as you manera! i acenl and alſo in Stowe 
w = necte ng way WY : injby's 2 " 

The tran Indian Figgewoort, was ſent mefrom Paris by Z is, the Kin Hetbari 
now/growerh inn garden. | The time. pr: 


"Bop Gowerin' une and Tube, 
076; comes 


Sggewocer or Kernell» woorr , is calledin Latine Serophularia major , thatir t differ from 
the Celandine,which is likewiſe calledSc we ren this addition minor, the leſſer. it is 
called of forme Aillemorbza, and Caſtrangals: in Engliſh great Figge woort,or Kernell oort, 

* Thevertues. 

A Figgewoortis _ againſt the hard kernels which the Grecians call zve6%: the Latines Stry- 
m4,and commonly Scrophwlas, andit is reported to be a remedie againſt thoſe diſeaſes whereof it 
rooke his name,as KA the painfull piles and ſwelling of the hemorrhcides. 

B Divers doraſhly reach.thar ifir be hanged about the necke,or elſe caried about one, it keeperh a 

 maninhealth, 

C Somedoſtampethe roote with butter, and ſet it in a moiſt ſhadowie prce hifteene daies 
ther,then do they boile it,ſtraine it,and keepe i it, wherewith they annojnt the harde kernels, andt 


hemorrhoide veines, or the ples which are in = fundament,and that with good ſucceſle, 


Of Ve) eruaine. Chap.235. 
+ Thekindes. 
T Here be two kindes ofVervane as _ ſaith, he male,and the female; or as others affirme, 
vpright,and creeping, | 
1 Verbens communts. | = 2 Verbena _ 
Common Veruaihe. = 


Holie Veruaine, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 581 


* Thedeſeription. 
- T He ſtalke of vpright Veruaine riſexb from the roore ſingle,cornered, afoothigh, ſeldowe 


aboue a cubire,and afterwards divided into niany braunches: theleaucs are long, greater 

then thoſe of the oke,but with bigger cuts and deeper: the flowers along the ſprigs are lir- 
tle, blewe, or white,orderly placed : the roote is lon g,with ſtrings growing ont, 
> Creeping Veruaine ſendeth foorth italkes like the tormer,now and then a cubite long,cornered, | 
more flender,for the moſt part lying vpon the grounde : the leaues alſo are as the former , but with 
deeper cuts, andmo in number : the flowers in the tops of the ſprigs are blewe, and purple withall, 
veric {mall as thoſe. of the other , and placed after the ſame manner and order: the roote groweth 
ſtraight downe being {lender andlong as is the roote of the former. . 

%Thepace. 

Both of them grow in vntilled places neere vnto hedges, high waies, and commonly by ditches 
almoſteucry where, bets | 
% Thetime, 

The Veruaines flowerin Iuly and Auguſt. 
| '% Thenames. 

Veruainis called in Greek mem ptor:in Latin Yerbena,8& Yerbenaca, Herenlania, Ferravia.& Exupera, 
of ſome Matricalis, & Hierabotane, of others Feruena , & Sacra herba. Yerbene arc herbs that were 
raken from the altar,or from ſome holie place,which bicauſe rhe Conſul or Prztor did cur vp,they 
were likewiſe called Sagmina, which oftentimes are mentioned in Zzure to be graflic herbs cut vp in 
the capitol. lie alſo witneſleth in his 22.book,t1.chap.that Yerbene& Sagminabe all one,&this 
is manifeſt by that which we read in Andriain Terence : Ex ara verbenas hinc ſwwne; Take herbs here 
from the altar z in which place Teyexce did not meanc Veruaine to be taken from the altar, but ſome 
certaine herbe : for in Menander,outof whom this Comedie was tranflated,js read wweoivn, or Myr- 
tle, as Donatwsſaith, In Spaniſhit is called Yrgebaom : in Italian Yerminacula:in Dutch Jſer crutit: 
in French Yernazne: in Engliſh Iunos teares , Mercurics moiſt bloude , Holic herbe, and of ſome 
Pigeons grafſe,or Columbine, bicauſc Pigeons are delighted to be amongſt it, as alſo tocate there- 
of.as Apwlezws writeth, FE] | 
% Thetemperature. | | 

Both the Veruaines are of temperature very dric,and do meanely binde and coole, 

HK ; %\ The vertues. E381 0 | 

Thelcaues of Veruaine pounde with oile of roſes,or Axungia,thatis,hogs greaſe,doth mitigats A 
; andappeaſe the paines of the mother,being applied thereto. | 7 

The leaues of Veruaine and roſes ſtamped with a little newe hogs greaſe, and emplaiſtered after p 
the manner of a pultis , doth ceaſe the inflammation and greeuous paines of woundes, and ſuffe- 
reth themnot to come to corruption : and the greene leaues ſtamped with hogges greaſe, taketh 
x2 the ſivelling ad paine of hotimpoſtumes and tumours , and clenſerh corrupt and rotten 
vicers, | | | 

Itis reported to be of ſingular force againſt the tertian and quartaine feuers : but you muſt ob- C 
ſerue mother 3ambjes rules to take inft fo manyKknots or ſprigs, and no more, leaſt ir fall out fo that 
itdo you no good,if you catch no harme by; ir. Many odde olde wiues fables are written of Ver- 
uainetending to witchcraft and ſorcerie, which you may reade elſe where, for am not willing to 
trouble your cares with reporting ſuch rrifles,as honeſt cares abhorreto heare. | 

Mes ay maketh a garlande of Veryaine for the headach, when the cauſe of the infirmitic C 
proccedeth of heate. | | BIR # 

The hetbe ſtamped with oile of roſes and vineger, or the decoction of it made in oile of xoſes, D 
keeperh the haires from fallin being bathedor annointed therewith” 

Itisa remedic againſt purrified vicers,it healech vp wounds, and perfe&tly cureth fiſtulaes, irwa- E 
ſterh awaic olde ſwellings, and taketh away the heate of inflammations. | 

ThedecoGtion ofthe rootes and leaves,ſwageth the toothach, and faſtneth them, and healerh F 
the vicers of the mouth. eas + 
| Theyreport faith Plinje, that if the dining roome be ſprinckled withwater in which the herbe G 

ath beene ſteeped;the gueſts will be the merrier,which alſo D/9/corides mentioneth, 4 

| = Oo 3 Mo 


: % 
»” 
. 


83m THE SECOND BOOKE OP THE 
14 Moſtofthelater Phiſicions do give the iuice or decoQion heerof to them that haue the Plague; 
but theſe men are deceiued,nor onely in that they looke for ſome truth from the father of falſhoog 
andleaſings,but alſo bicauſe in ſteede ofa ggod and ſure remedic they miniſter no temedie ar all;for 
 itisreported, that the diucll did reucale it ava ſecret and diuine medicine. | by 


| | Of Scabiaw. Chap.236. 
a * The kindes. 


5 þ Here be many kinds or ſorts of Scabious , cuery onefor the moſt part taking his denomination 
from his ſoile or countrie, : 


I Scabioſamator wulgarts. ; 2 Scabioſa minor, ſive Columbaria. 
 Commonſcabious. C The fmall common Scabiou:, 


” 4 i F 1s: 
4 32 
ie 


tl 


> (CA Z 
ASNMREES; 
CR $ INF 
*YNTY CE. 
Wh; \E ty 
Ae 


_— 


% ” =y 


|  w*%*Thedeſeription. [; | 
1 M75 He firſt kinde of Scabious beingthe moſt common & beſt knowen, hath leaues longand 
broad,of prayith ,hoarie, and hairiecolour, ſpred abroad vpon the ground, among which 
riſe vp round and rough ſtems, beſet with hairic japged leaues, in faſhion like greatVale- 


rian,which wecall Setwall. Ac the top of the ſtalkes growe blew flowets in thicke tufts or buttons. 
Theroote is white and ſingle, | | 


2 Theſecondis like vnto the former,ſauing that his leaues are not ſomuch cut ox iagged,and the 
whole plant is altogither leſſer, ſcarſely growing to the height of a foote. | 

3 Thethirdkinde of Scabiqus is in all ings like vntothe firſt, ſaving that the knap or head doth 
dilare it {elfe further abroad, and is not ſo thicke or cloſely thruſt rogither, and the loweſt leaues ate 
not fo diopely cut or iagged. | HS HE Y | 
4  Thefourth groweth withone lender and weake ſtem , hauing two leaves one ſetright againſt 
another,very much iagged, almoſt like vnto. common Ferne, or rather Aſh: andar the top of th 
ſtalkes there groweth one Rower and no mage, like vnto the former bur greaterz and theroote 


LY 


ſmall and ſingle. _-” 
gut ; Seabih 


HISTORTE) OF PLANTS. © 
Scabioſa medi. | | 4 Sca biols canipetrn, ne ener; 
, Middle Scabious, Pas | | Ls Corte Scabious Jarſis 


k : . 
na » ! wt v 3 f ; ce : iT £ < 
e . ; 2 <4 Tat J * Y . 

FW ' £% # A a " k 5 Y 

8 ' 1TH 3 SER © CS 
| ry (3 

; | hb 3+ 4 

þ , 


\ 
\) 
\ 


5 Scabioſa flore pur pureo. | 6 Scabiofa rubra _Au#triaca. 
Purple flowred Scabious. | Red Scabious of Aultrich, 


p \ LY Jg "" T7 's 


334 THE SECOND/BOOKE OFTHE 


EET nbd + The deſeription. Ruotxaze 5:0 
5 Purple flowred Scabions hath a rough hairic ſtalke , whereon do growe broad leaues deepely 
cut in theedges, in forme like thoſe of Sowthiltle, rough likewiſe and hairie. The flowers growe at 
the top of the ſtalkes, compoſed of an innumerable ſort of purple chruths 3 after which come ſcalie 
knaps,lke thoſe of Jacea,ot Knapweed,wherein is the ſeede. The roote is ſmall and theddie, 
6 Theſixt forrof the ſtocke or kinred of Scabious, hath yo leauesſpred vpon thegroung, 
cu: and iagged euen to the middlerib, rough and hairie, in ſhape like the leaues of Buckes horge: 


wn 
a 


4 
% 


-- 


among whichriſe vp rough ſtalkes , onthe top whereof doe growe faite red flowers , conliſting of 
a btindle of thrums, The roote;is long,tough and ſingle. FM 


7 Scabioſa montana. |: > 10 $ Scabio/a mont ens latifolia. 
Mountaine Scabious. 4 it 1 leafed mountaine Scabious, 


_ :  *%* The deſcription. : : ip 
75 Theſeuenth kind of Scabijous hath ſundric great, rough,and round ſtems,as high as atallman, 
beſet with leaues like the firſt $cabious, but far greater, The flowers grow atthe top of the ſtalkes 
like vnto the others , butof a faint yellow colour , which fall as ſoone as ir is touched with the 
hande , whereby it mighrilie increaſerh , notwithſtanding the roote endureth many yecres ,and 
| pn to be woonderfull great : and in my garden it did growe tothe bigneſle of a mans bodie. 
| The broad leafed mountaine Scabious hath broad leaues pred vpon = ground, like thoſe of 
the field Primeroſe,but greater. Among which riſeth yp a great ſtiffe ſtalke ſmooth and piaine gar 
niſhed with the like leaues of thoſe next the ground, bur leſſer. 'The lowers growe at the cop ofthe 
ſtalkes,of a watcher or light blew colour. The roote is thicke and tough, oh 
[EPI <a | adn. 


z 


HISTORIE. OFPPLANTS,* 1” 595 
g Scabioſamaior Hiſpanics. | \. 10 Scabwſateregrinas 
Spanith Scabious. | | ; | Stran oe Scabious, 


f 4 F ard 
> / ; : MS 30 
Wes | Joy 


W-- 


ail 4 KM | 1 J 
It Scabioſiommium minim, x 12 Scabioſa minims Hir ſuta. 
Sheepes Scabious, [pct Hairie ſheepes Scabious, 


\ | '» 


ed 


z86 THEASECOND| BOOKE OF|THE 


| | X2 % Thedeſeription. k 
9 Thenintn kindof Scabious js like vnto themountaine Scabious,butlower and ſmaller, hair 
tuncriclarge & broadleauecs next the ground, inipr confuſedly & out of orderatthe edpes like the 
Oken leafc 3 among which riſech vp a ſtem two cubits high,diuiding it ſelfe into ſunery otherbran 
ches, The flowers are ſetatthe topof the naked ſtalkes, of a whitiſh colour; which being paſt the 
ſeede appeereth likea tuft of ſmall bucklers, raund, and ſomewhat hollow within, and made it 
were of parchment , very ſtrange to beholde ; and within the bucklers there are funcry ſmall 
' crofles of blacke faſtened to the bottome, as it were the needle in adiall, running ypon the point 
of ancedle, Theplant dieth at'the beginning bf winter, and muſt be fowen in Apri!l, in goodand 
ferrill ground. | LEI 2-5 (5M | I; | 
10 The tenth is like vnto the laſt before mentioned, in ſtalkes, roote, aid flowers, and differeth 
in that, that this plant hath leaues altogither withour any cuts or iagges aboutthe edges, butis 
ſmooth and plainelike the leaues of Marigolds, or Diuelsbit. © : 
1x Shcepes Scabious hath {mall and tenderbranches trailing vpon the grounde, whereupon do 
growe ſmall leaues very finely iaggedor minced euen tothe middle ribbe,of an ouerworne colour. 
I he flowers growe atthe top of a blewiſhcolour,conſiſting of much thrummic matrer, hardthruſt 
togither like a button: the roote is ſmall and creepeth in the grounde, | | 
12 Theother Sheepes Scabious differeth or but in the hairieneſle of leaues,otherwiſe alike, 
| A | -20 __ % Theplace. 1 | | 
Theſe kindes of Scabious doe growcin paſtures, medowes , corneficldes, and barten ſfandie 
grounds almoſt cuery where. | ot i 
The ſtrange forts do growe in my garden, yer are they ſtrangers in England, | 
| *% The time. | } 
They flower and flouriſhin the fomtmermoneths. | 
(<1 *% The names. if 
Scabious,is commonly called Scabioſe,diuers rhinke it is named 4,9» which ſignifieth a ſcabbe 
and a certaine herbe fo called by _Letixs : I donor knowe, faith Hermolats Barbarws, whether it be 
Scabions which Aeris dothcall Pſera, rhe ſmacke of which being burngdoth killcankers or little 
wormes. The author of the PangeQs doth interpret Scabiofa tobe. Dioſeprides his Stebe : Disſeori- 
des delcribeth Srebeby no markes ar all,beingcommontly knowne in his time; and Gates in his firſt 
booke of Cantideteslaith thus :'I here is founde amongſt vs acertaine ſhrubby herbe, hor, veric 
ſharpe and biting, hauingalittlekinde of aromacicall or ſpicie (imell, which the inhabitants do call 
Colynbade,and qn'® 15 nur g00d to keepe and preſeric wine: but it izemeth that this Szebedoth 
diftcr from that, of which he hath made mention in his booke of the faculties of medicines, which 
_ agreeth with that of Dioſcorides: for hewriteth that this is of a binding qualitic withour biting: fo 
that it cannot be very ſharpe, | I\t | 


7 


| 3% Thepemperature.. 


Scabious is hot and driein the latter end of the ſecond degree, orneere handeinthethirde, and 

of thinne andfubrile parts: ircutreth, attenyaterh, ormakerh ehinne, and thorowly concodterh 

- tough and grofle humours, - | 4 14 | 

| |  __ w% Thevertues. | 

A \ Scabjousſcoureth the cheſt and lungs,itis good againſt an old coughſhortnes of breath, paine 
in the fides,and ſuch like infirmities of the chell. | 1 


# 
: 


B Theſameprouoketh vrige and purgeth now and thenrotten matter bythe bladder , which hap- 
 neth when an impoſtemehath ſome where lien within the bodice. [ 
C Irisreported thatit curerh ſeabs,if the decoCtion thereof be dcunkecertaine daics, andrhe ivice 
vicdin ointments. \ | ons F 


oF 


D Thelater Herbariſts doalſoaffirme that it is aremedic againſt the bitings of Serpents and ſun- 


> 


gings of venemous beaſts, being outwardly applicd or inwardly taken, * Es | 
E Tlheiuicebeing drunke procureth ſivcate ppecially with Treacle; on it ſpeedily conſumeth 
a 1 


plague ſores,if it be giuen mtime,and foorthwith at the beginning: butttmuſt be vſcdoften. 
FE Iris thoughttobe forceablezand that againſt all peſtilent feuers, + 


: 
gs: V 


"8 | > : 
= 1 : $ - 

. 2 > 1 

; | « ; 

% gf : , 
« ond > 

"S.. ; : 

ol 
> - 


— 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. « 


Of Dinels bit.) Chap.237- 


* The deſeription. 


Luels bit hath ſmall vpright rounde ſtalkes 
D of a cubite high , beſet with long leaues 
ſomewhat broade,, very little or nothing 
ſniprt about the oy: ſomewhat hairie and euen. 
The flowers are of a darke purple colour, faſhio- 
ned like the lowers of Scabious,which being ripe 
are caried away with the winde. The root is black, 
thicke,harde,$ ſhort, with many threddie ſtrings 
faſtned thereto. The great part of the roote ſece- 
meth tobe bitten away ol fantaſticke charmers 
report, that the divell did bite it for enuic, bicauſe 
itis an herbe that hath ſo many goodvertues, and 
is ſo beneficiall to mankinde. 
. %Theplace. _ 

Diuels bit growethin dric medowes & woods, 
and about waies ſides. I haue founde great ſtore 
of it growing in Hampſteede woode neere Lon- 
don, at Lee in Eſſex, and atRalcigh in Eſſex, in a 
| woodecalled Hammerell, and ſuncric other p!a- 
ces, 

__ *+Thetome.. 

It lowrethin Auguſt,and is harde tobe known 

from Scabious,ſauing when it fowreth. 
| * The names. 

Itis commonly called Aforſus Diabel;, or Diuels 
| | bit, of the root(as it ſeemerh)thar is bitten off, For 
the ſuperſtitious people hold opinion, that the diuell for the cnuic that he beareth to mankind bir ic 
off, bicauſe it woulde be otherwiſe. good for many ves: it is, called of, Fach{aw Sxcerſe; in high 
Teuffels abbiſs ; in lowe Dutch Dupuelles beet; in French Ars du Deable : in Engliſh Diuels 
bit, andFore bit. | [1 4 Sol bor he” 


p: % The jos chown FORCE TA p48, 
Diuelsbit is ſomething bitter,and of a hot and dric temperature,and that inthe latter end of the 
ſeconddepree. [| ha. | | 


' 


| | .- %\ The vertwes. | bans | 

There isno berter thing againſt old Grellin gs of thealmonds,and vpper parts ofthe throte that A 

be hardly ripened. | A EU gners 57-2 aa Hors | 
Itclenſerh away ſlimic legme that ſticketh inthe iawes, it bem 2-6 andconſumethit : and ir g 

quicklic taketh away the {wellings in thoſe partes, ifthe decoction thereof be often helde in the 

gee and garparized, eſpecially if a little quantitic of Adel Reſarwm, or honicof Roſes be purinco 


airy 


It is reported to be good for all the infirmities that Scabious ſerueth for , and robe of noleſie © - 
force againſt the ſtingings of venemous beaſts,poiſons,and peſtilent diſeaſes, and co conſume and 
waſte away plague ſores,being ſtamped and laide vpon them, =_ | RE ve | 

| Andalſoto mitigate the paines of the matrix or mother, and to driue foorth winde ifrhe decoc-D 
yon thereof be drunke, [*] a OE: | 


, 


88 ' THH SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of «M atfellon,or Knapweede. Chap.238. 


I Jace Nerd. | : | 2 Iacteamaior. : 
Blacke Matfellon. | Great Martfellon, 


MARS 


* 
, " a - 
BS 
\ 
. 
i 


Ir 


Y 
« 
| o s 
þ 4 , 
' F - 
WY , ft \ 
4 j Th? * / F'4 
— ; i X , » - 
- - 4 d : þ *, 
e " Vs | A & FP, vAY 
p o . \ A : 
W,-AAIK \ IS 
4 » 4 Wo 
# 
f je AL, X Y 3 
3 
"0h 3 % 
13% 7 # \ i 
5 þ 


* Thed-ſeription. 


1 A. F Atfellonorblacke Knapweede, is doubtleſſe a kinde of Scabious, asall the others are,in- 


! 
: 


| ichled with the name of 7acea; yerfor diſtin&ion,Thaue thought good roſet them down 

_*  **inaſeuerall chapter,beginning with thatkinde which is called in Engliſh Knapweede, | 
and Matfellon,or Materfilap. It hath long and narrowe leaues,of a blackiſh greene colourin ſhape 
like Dinelsbir, burlonger, fer vponſtalkes two cubits high, ſomewhat bluntly cur or ſnipt about 
the edges : the flowers do grow at the top of the ſtalks,being firſt ſmall ſcaly knops,like to the knops 
of Corne flower,orblew bottles, bur greater, out of the midſt thereof growerth a purple thrummic 
or threddie lower. The roote is thicke and ſhort, l 434 | 
2 Thegreat Knapweede is very like vnto the. former, butthar the whole plant is much greater, 
theleaues bigger and more deepely cut,cuentothe middle rib: the lowers come foorth of tuch like 
ſcaly heads, of an excellent faire purple'colqur,and much greater, - T9; 
3 Thethirdekinde of Matfellon,or Knapweede, is very like vnto the former great Knapweed laſt | 
before mentioned, ſauing thatthe flowers of this plant are of an excellent faire yellowe colour pro- 
ceeding foorrh of aſcalyhead or mop , beſet with moſt ſharpe prickes, nor to berouched without | 
hurt3the floweris of a pleaſing ſmell and very fweete ; the roote is long and laſting , and creepeth 


farre abroad,by meanes whereof it greatly increaſeth. : OE 
4 The mounraine Knapweede of Narbone in Fraunce,hath a ſtrong ſtemme, ofewo cubits high, 


and is verie plentifull about Couentrie among the hedges and buſhes: the leaues are very much 
iagged , in forme of Loxchyris, or Spleenc woort; the flowers arclikethe reſt of the Knapwee®s, 
ofa purple colour, SY | KS | 
; [7-3 3 Jucts 
= | 


' HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
Jacea maior tntea, | ; | | 4 [aces montana. 
Yellowe Knaps, ced, | 1 | | Mountaine Knapweed, 


AOACUTENS 


—=——-/ 


. 
R 
\\ - 


= 


P, 


ET 
#2 
Pl 


NA 


| 6 T[aceatuber:fa.. 
ced, [- Knobbed Kna: weed, 


Mabe *# 
3 


#711P 
(VS 


z 4 
: 
1 


4 


590 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| WM - Thede eription. 
5 The white Gowred Knapweed is like vnto the great aces in Es ken rootes : FY fo 
vers of this plant are of awhite colour which ſerteth foorth the ditferehce. 
6 Thetubg&ousorknobbie K weed being ſer foorth by Taber Montanm ,andis a firanghe in 
theſeparts, hath many leaues| preadvpontheg rounde, rough, deepel gaſhror hackr about the 
edges,like thoſe of Sowthiſtles: among which Seth paſtrugh , dividing it ſelfe into other 
 braunches,whereon do growethe like leaves,bur ſmaller; the knappie flowers ſtande on the top of 
thebranches,of a brighr red cglour,in ſhape like the other Kna appeode The rootcis great, thicke, 
| "_ cuberous, conſiſting of many cloggic parefiolike TAO of t Apa. 
* The place. 
' The ewo firſt growe commaly in cuerie ferri]l paſture;rhe reſt grovein my garden, 
* 7 he time. | 
They "ILEY in Lune angle PS [ | Col 
* The names, | 
The later agedoth callir ates nigra,putting nigrs fora difference V WAP itandrhe Harts eaſe, 
or Pauncie, which is likewiſe called zacea: it is alſo called 2:ter fin, and Warrefilew, of a cor- 
rupted wordas it ſeemerh : in Engliſh Marfellon, Bulweede,and Knapweed. 
| t% Thetemerature and Vertues. | 4 
Theſe plants are of the nature of Scabious, whereof they bekindes, > Lhcrefore their faculties are 
like althouFh not ſo proper to phiſi ickes vic. 
A _. They be commended againſt the fwellingof the Vuula , as is Diuels bit, bur of leſſe force and 
vertue: many fantaſticall and fooliſh old wiucs p cates hauc beene reported by ſoine of the ancients, 
which we commit to obliuion, 


Off uuer Kpmed Chap. 239) 


1 Stole argenteamaior. d 2 Stabe argentea minor. 
Great ſiluer v7 Þ Fo Lictle liluer Knapweed, 


. 
- 
k 
L . 
F 
n + 
Fs 
# 
ns 
4 


W=- 
FA,YS 
Z,>Y 
| IS | 

\&< 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. $91 
%* The deſcription. TE | 


F He great filuer Knapweed hath ar his firſt commipg vp diners leaues fpred ypon the 

grounde, of adecpe e colour, curtand das are the other Knapweeds, ftraked 

keere and there with ſome filnerlines downe the fame, whereof ir rooke his farname,:_2r- 

entes :among which leanes riſeth vp aſtraighr ſtalke , ofthe height of acubite, ſomewhat rovgh 

&"4bricle,dinidin it ſelfe rowarde the top into other Fe mg onrthertops whereof doe 

fgowers ſetin ſcaly heades orknaps like the other Mat $s,of a gallanr purple colour, con- 

fing of anumber of x fa or thruns thicke thruſt rogirhe: z after which che ſeedes appeere, {lip- 

that one end, and bearded with blacke haires at the orher end, which maketh it roleape 

and skip away wken aman doth burlightly touch ir. The roore is ſmall, fingle, andperiſhcrh when 
is ripe. k 45 i 

"A may kl agreeth with the firſt in eche reſpeR, ſauingrhat the leaucs heereof are more iag- 

ed, and thefiluer lines or ſtrakes are greater and moe in number , whercinconliſtech the difle- 


| AE SJ Theplace. | ke 
Theſe do growe of themſelues in ficldes neere common high wates, andin vntilled places , but 
they are ſtrangers in England,neuertheleſſe I haue them in my garden, | | 
| | wh eg 


: 


' | *% The tne, 
They ſpring vp in Aprill,chey flower in Auguſt,and the ſeede is ripein Sepretnber. 
+ Thenames. | | 


; Siluer Knapweed is called of LObeling Steabe jalamantica , of Dodomews <Aphylanthes, that is, 
withour leaues , for the flowers confiſt onely of a number of threddes withour any leaues at all: 
inEngliſh filuer Knapweed,or filuer Scabious,whereof doubtles they be kindes. 


 Thetemperature andvertues. | 
medicine. 


Of blewe Bottle, or Corne flower. (hap. 24.0. 
| *The kindes. | 


T Here be diuers ſorts of blew Bottles, diffcringonely in the colour of the flowers, as ſhall be_ 


% The deſcription. 


He great blewe Bottle hath long leaues, ſmooth foft, downie, and ſharpe pointed : amon 
he le riſe vp crooked, weake, and feeble braunches, chamfered, adand 1k 
. ſhed with ſuch leaves as are next the ground: on the tops wheteof ſtande faire blewe flo- 
wers tending to purple,confiſting of diuers little flowers, ſer in a ſcaley huske or knap like thoſe of 
the Knapweeds the ſeedis rongh or bearded at one end,ſmooth atthe other and ſhining,The coor 
Is tough, and long laſting ( comraric to the reſt of the Cothe lowers) andincreaſeth yeerely into 
newe thootes and ſprings,whereby it greatly increaſerh. | | 
2 Thecommon flower hath leaues ſpred vpon the ground, of a whitiſh grene colour ſom- 


whathackt orcutjnthe edges like thoſe of Corne Scabious :among which riſeth vp a ſtalk divided 


mto divers ſmall braunches, whereon do growe long leaues, of an ouerwornegreene colour, with 
fewe cuts or none atall. The flowers growe at the top of the ſtalks,of a blewe colour;tonſiſting of 
manyimall flowers ſet ina ſcalcy or chaſe head, like thoſe of the Knapweeds : the ſeede is ſmooth, 
bright ſhining,and wrappedin a wooley or flockie matter.The roote is ſmall and {ingle,and periſh- 
ethwhen ic hath perfected his ſeed, HS | | 

| | 1 Cyan 


The faculties of theſeMatfellons are notas yer founde our, neither are they vied for meate or A 


—C— Cs ay es a 


THE SEC 


L Cyan maicr, qc 


OND. BOOKE OF THE 


2 Cyanus vlearis. 


Greatblewe Bottle. | þ | Common blewe Bottle. 


3 Cyanms PUY PHT Cs. | 
Purple Corne flower. | 


 \HISTORTE OF PLANTS. | 593 
ov (i % Thedeſeription Ed * 
This Bottles like the laſt deſcribedin eche teſpet,fauingin the colour ofthe flowers which are 


* a purple colour,wherein conſiſteth the difference. | Fe. | 
4 The fourth bortle is alſo like the precedent,nort differing in any Seen the flowers, for as 


which ſerterh foorrh the difference, | FR" wh 
Cyanms Violecews. = 6 Cale Vokews 
5 Violet colourde Bottle. Varicble Choe flower. 
y N OI $4 | ” += 


: \s/ ” G0 
. of / oY 1 2 1.07 JD _ 
6&7 p \W JJ I 
A a RH A Dn. 
* J ; y NM fd E 


5 Thevioletcoloured Bortleor Come flower, is like theprecedent, in ſtalkes, leaues, ſeedes,and 
Yorh Thnopely difference is, thatthis bringeth foorth flowers of avioletcolour, andthe others 
notlo, _ | OE nn xo 4 | | 


6 Variable Corne flo 


Pp 2 | | 7 Cyanm 


594 THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 
7 Cyanm florus. ; 8c R 


i | Q 1 2 ®. 
, —V 
\Y/o<A » 
4 


| 
< {JS a 
2 \\ 
-DD: \ 
A \\'Y WA 
= ' y YO 
XX >S>£\) [254 
— > = A | « Y/ 
S IQ | Ke 
— | > 
K ” 


8 © © | *% The plete. I | | 
The firſt groweth in my garden,and in the gardens of Herbariſts, burnor wilde that Iknoweof. 
| The others growe in Corne fieldes among Wheate, Rie, Barley, and othergraine: & is ſowen in 
ardens, which by cunning looking to, doth oftentimes become of other colours , and ſomealſo 
E uble hich hath beene touched in their ſeuerall ritles, & | 
og | bf % The time. | n, 
They bring foorth their lowers from the beginning of Maie vnto the end of harueſt. | 
| | % Thenames. | 
The olde Herbariſts called it Cyayw flos, of the blewe colour which it naturally hath: moſtof 
the later fort folowing the common Germaine name, call it Flos Frumentoram; for the Germains 
name it Copnblumen: in lowe Dutch Combloemen ; in French F/acole, and Bluer; in Italian 
Fior Campeſe,and Bladyſeris, ideft Seris Bladj, Barbara woce,and Battiſecula, or Baptiſecula,as though 
it ſhould be called Blipriſecu/a bicaule it hindereth and annoierh the reapers by dulling and turning 
the edges of their fickles in reaping of corne: mEngliſhitis called blewe Bottle, blewe blow,Come 
flower, and hurt ſickle, 'W : 4 | ke” | 


1 % The temperature andverines. > þ 

A Thefacultics of theſe flowers are not yer ſufficientlyknoweti. Sith there isno vic of theminPhi- 
'  ficke, wewillleauethe reſt that mightbe faid toa further conſideration: Neemieabangns ſome 
haue thought the common Blew bortle robe gf temperature ſomething <d{de ,andr c good 


againſt the inflammations of the cies,as diuers do thinke, - 


Of Goates beard, or Go to bed at noone. (ſhap.241. 
I Oates beard or Go tabeddeat noone; hath hollow ſtalkes, ſmopth,, and of a whitiſh 
greene colour, whereupon do grow long leaues creſted downethe middle with a fwelling 
" Ubbe,ſharpe pointed yeelding a milkie uice when itis broke, in ſhapelike thoſe of Gat 


licks : 


HISTORIE .OF PLANTS. 595 
icke: fromthe boſome of which leaues, thruſt foortl ſmall tender ſtalkes ſer with the like leaues, 
bucleſſer. The lowers growar the top ofthe/ftalkes conliſting ofa number of purple leaues,daſhr 
ouer as it WCTC with a little yellowe duſt, fer abour wich nine or ten iſharpe pointed greene leaues; 
thewhole flower reſembleth aſtarre when it| is pred abroade: for it ſhurreth it ſelte at twelue of 
theclocke,and ſheweth not his face open vntiil the next daies ſunne do make it lower anew, wher- 
upon it was called Gotobed at noone, when'theſe lowers become tg their full maturitic and ripe- 
neſſe,it groweth into a downie blowe ball like thoſe of Dandelion, that is caried awaie with the 
winde:The ſcede is long, havingatthcende one peece of that downie matrer hanging atit. The 
rooteis long and fingle,with ſome fewe threds thereto annexed, which periſheth when it hath per- 
{ected his ſeede,yeelding much quantitie of a milkic iuice when it is cut or broken , as doth all the 
reſt ofthe plant, and periſheth when the ſecede is ripe, | | 
2 Theycllowe Goares beard hath the like leaues,ſtalkes,roote, ſecede and downie blow bals,thar 
the other hath, and alſo yeeldeth like quantitie of milke , inſomuch that if the iHling white ic 
is greene be pulled from the ſtalkes,the milkie iuice followerh ; but when it hath # ares remained a 
eobile.j waxeth yellowe. The flowers heereof are of a golde yellow colour, and hath no ſuch 
grcene leaues to garniſh it withall, wherein conſiſteth the ditference. | 


1 Tragoprem purpurewn, > iv # Yagopogon letewm. 
Purple Goares beard. | Yellow Goatecs beard. 


/ 


* 7 be deſcrittion. 


| OBrog arg of Goates bearde,or Go to bed at noone; hath a thicke roote full of a wilkie fap, 
r pa - c "p many leaues ſpread vpon the grounde,very long,narrowe, thinne, and like vnto 
- «op 672 _ __ thicker and grofler : among which riſe vp ſlender ſtalks,on the tops whereof do 
C went e double yellowe flowers like theprecedent, bur leſl; cr. The whole plant yeeldeth a milkie 

| cc as the others do : it periſherth like as the other ,whe n it hathperfeQed his ſeede, | 


P 2 | Tr7ago» 


THE SECOND! BOOKE OF THE 
3 Trazopronminu. "| — 
Lied Goares beard, | | | 4 The place. 


The firſt groweth notwilde in England that] 
coulde cuer ſee or heare of, excepr in Lancaſhize 
vpon the bankes of the river Chalder, neerevnt, 
my Ladie Hesketh hir houſe , two miles fron, 
Whawley : itis ſowen in gardens forthe beau 
ofthe flowers, almoſt euery where, The others 
growe in medowes and fertill paſtures in mot 
places of England. Itgroweth plentifully in moſt - 

; ofthe fieldes abour London, as ar Iſlington, the 
| medowes by Redreffe, Detforde, andin the me. 
;  dowesneerevnto Putney and duuers other places, 
| 4 Thetime, | 

They flower and flouriſh from the be 
of Iune to the ende of Augult. 

*% Thenames. | 

Goates beardeis called in Greeke yz-mian ji 
Latinc Barbs Hirct, &allo Coma : in high Dutch 
Boccbaertz inlow Dutch Joſephes bloewen: in 
French Barbe de bone, and Saſdfy :in Italian Safe. 
frca:in Spaniſh Barba Cabrwni:in Engliſh Goats 
beard,lolephs flower, Stat of Ierufalem, Noone. 
tide, and Goto bed at noone. Zn | 

| t*% The temperature. 
Theſe herbes arctemperate between heatand 

| ' moiſture, + 
| ; | | * The vertues. & » 
A Therootes of Goates bearde botledin wine anddrunke , af[wageth the paine and pricking ſtit- 
ches of thef1des, bs 7 | '} | 
B Theſame boiled in water vntil! they be tender, and buttered as Parſneps and Carrots are a 
moſtpleaſant meate and wholſome , in delicate raſte farre ſurpaſſing either Parſnep or Carrot, 
which meare procuteth appetite , warmeth: the ſtomacke , preuailerh greatly in conſumprions, 


E 


and ftrengthneth thole that haue becne ſicke of a long lingring diſcale, 


ginning 


. 


Of Vipers graſſe. Chap.242. | 
| * The kindes. © ONE: | 
Here bediuers forts of plants conteined'vnder the title of Fiperaria , Scorzonera, of Vipers 
graſſe,as ſhall be ſbewed. Bk Poe; = 


1 | | ;  * The deſcription F | 

I He firſt of the Viper grafles, hith long broade leaues, fat, orfellbodied, vnecuen about 

; the edges,ſharpe poingedwith a high ſivolne rib downe the midgje, and of an oucrworne 

L colour,tending to theETolour of Woade : among which riſeth vp a ſtiffe ſtalke , ſmooth 

andplaine, of two cubits high, wheron do grow ſuch leaues as thoſe next the ground. The flowets 

ſtande on thetop of the ſtalkes, conſiſting of many ſipall yellow leaues thicke thruſt rogither, veric 

double, as are thoſe of Goates beard, whereofit is abinde, as are allthe teſt rhat doe follow in this 

preſentchaprer: the roote is long, thicke, verie brittle, continueth many yeeres yeelding great Nt 

creaſe of roots , blacke without, white within and yeeldeth a milkie juice; as do the leaucs alſo, like 

' wntothe Goates beardes., | { | | [4 | 

2 Thedwartfc 4 9 aw differeth not fram the precedent » ſauing that it is altogither leſſer, | 


wherein eſpecially conſilterh the difference. : 


0 "7; 4 
p 1}h perar i | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1 Viperarie ſine Scorzonera. | 2 Viperaria humiliz. 
Common Vipers grafle. | Dwarfte Vipers graſſe, 


#T 
% \\ i 
7 > | 
5 —X" ' ;: - 
">" » =” % \ ", ” 
"=z # 
- | , #, - 
. - 
, ; - 
- - a - 
1Y 
of - - 
ET ». —_— 
% 
s 
»., 
: j 
GO — n 
—_ 
7 


. 


; Viperaria Hiſpavied, 5 4 Viperaria Hiſpanics humilis. 
Spaniſh Vipers grafle. = Dwatrffe Spaniſh Vipers graſle. 


LF WE 
<o8 THE. SECOND BOOKE OF 'THE 


+ The deſeription. i 


3 The Spaniſh Vipersgraſſe hath broade keaucs ſharpe pointed, vneuen aboug the edevs. of) 


blewiſh greenecolour:the ſtalke riſerh vp to the height of two cubits;z on the top whereof doe 
yelloweflowers, ery double,greatcr and oader then anyofthereſt, of a reaſonable 
The ſecede follows Goares bearde. The root: is 


4 


. 
—- % "oh 4 4 A 
= * + DV \ \f, 4 
- w_ £2 =: s PS 
4 > \_ J wa” \ — 
Pg * v7 % \ / f 
if | 


%* The deſcription. 


5 Thebroadeleafed Vipers grafſe of Hungarie, hath a thicke fat roote like vnto the other ofhis 
kindezthe ſtalkes and flowers are alſo like ;the leaues art long,ſmooth,and ſhining, crumpled, and 
verie vneuenin the edges, wherein eſpecially confiſterh the difference. | 
6 Thenarroweleafed Hungaric Vipers grafſe, hath long leaues like vato thoſe of Goates beard, 
but longer and narrower,among which riſcth vp a ſlender hollowe ſtalke,ſtiffe and ſmooth, onthe 
top whereof doe ſtandefaire double flowery of a faireblewe colour tending to purple, in ſhape 
like the other of his kinde, of a pleaſant ſweete ſinell, like the ſmell of ſweere balles made of Bev- 
£911, The ſeede is conteined in ſmall cups like thoſe of Goates beard, wrapped in a downie matter 
that is caried away with the winde, The rote is not ſo thicke nor long as the others, very lingF, 
bearded at the top,with certaine hairic thrums yeelding a milkie ivice of a refinous taſte,and ſome- 
what ſharpe withall, It indureth the winter cyen as the others do, mn 
| LF | | $77 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. + 599 
 Moſtof theſe are ſtrangers in ſhewwo > growe in my gar e 
\vorchediin their euerallritls, Bag | [nets - 

| *% The time. 


| They flowerand flouriſh from Mayto the endoflulie. RNk<>-.1 
| | *% The ——_—_— : bi Bs oof WE. 
+905 fle is called of the Spaniards Scorzoncra, which ſounderth in Latine Viperariz,orYi 
OE mms ſo called bicauſe itis accounted tobe of force andefficacie. againſt the ain 
of Vipers and ſerpents , for Yiper# ora viper is calledin Spaniſh Secure»: ithath no nameeitherin 
the highor lowe Nor in any other more then hath beene aide that Ican read: in Engliſh we 
may callit Scorzoner after the Spaniſh name,or Vipers grafle. x Lot 
Fo % T he temperature. 
They are hotand moiſt as are the Goares beards. | | Pp 
| Fe The monens ; hs ; FE i 
tis reported by thoſe of greatiudgement, that cad (re oſt exce inſtthe A 
FS udp chep! 4 and alpoiſons 48 ec beaſts eſpecially to cure the bing of vi- 
rs,(of whichthere be very many in Spaine and other hot countries, yet haueT hcarde that they - 
ue beeneſeene in England)if the iuice of the roote orherbe be drunke. —& 
It helpeth the infirmities of the hart, and ſuch as vſe toſwoune much, it cureth alſo them that B 
have the falling ſickneſſe,and ſuch as are troubled with giddineſle of the head. | | 
The roote being eaten,cither roſted in embers,{oddenorrawe,doth make a man merric, and re- C 
"The rootes condired with ſugar,as are the rootes of Eringos and ſuch like,worke the like effeftes: D 
but more familiarly being thus dreſſed. a4 | | : 


Of eMarigoldes. Chap.243. 


+ The kinds. 


T Here be diuers forts of Marigolds, differing in many natable points, ſome are grear and yeric 

doublezſome ſmaller,and yerdoublezſome of the garden likewiſe and fingle, although ir was 
ſowen of double ſeede,fo liſt nature toplaie with hir lirtle ones ; others wilde , or of the ficlde, and 
lome of the water, which ſhall be diſtinguiſhedin ſeucrall chapters. | 


* The deſcription. 


I He greateſt double Marigold hath many large,fat,broadeleaucs, ſpringing immediately 
from a fibrous or threddie roote ; the vpper ſides of the leaues arc of a & 9 greene,and 
the lowerſide of a more light or ſhining greene: among whichriſe vppe ſtalkes ſomewhat 

hairic,and alſo ſomewhar jointed, and full of aſpungjous pith. The flowers in the top are beaurifull, 

rounde, verie large and double, ſomething fieere, with a certaine ſtrong ſmell, of a light ſaffron 
colour,orlike pure golde: fromthe which followe a number of lo ed ſcedes, eſpecially rhe 
 outmoſt, or thoſe that ſtande about the edges of the flower, which being ſowen commonly bring 
foorth ſingle lowers , whereas contrariwiſe thoſe ſeedes inthe middle are lefler, and for the moſt 
partbring foorth ſuch lowers as thatwas from whence it was taken. _ 

2 . Thecommon double Mari hath manie far, thicke, crumpled leaues ſet ypon a groſlſe and 

Tpungious ſtalke; where; do growe faire double yellowe flowers , hauing for the moſt parc 

n the middlea bunch of threddes thicke thruſt rogither , which being paſt there ſucceede ſuch 

Crooked ſeedes as the firſt deſcribed, The roote is thicke and harde , with ſome threds annexed 


Pp4 2 Calenduls 


600 THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 
1 Calendulamultifloramaxoma. 'þ 


| . 2 Calenduiamaior polyanthes: 
Marigold, The greater double Marigold, 
| | > 


WT, F +, ®, — -_ 


' ESSS 
IS 
% Id 


—_ 


£5 2M Calendula minor polyanthos. | | Calen WWE ; 
| Theſmallerdouble Matigold, : 4 dula mult iflora or biculata, 


” 
_— - Sw 
— 


: I, 
\ 


$4.4 a5 
S044» 

tt nee # 
- ITS 


Double Globe Marigolde, 


4; 
z 


SLLSKS 
KO 
. (AR 


( 
\ 
\( 
J 


HISTO 


Ly 


RUE OF PLANTS. 


* The deſcription, 


2 The ſmaller or finer leafed double Mar igolde growerh vpright, auing for the moſt part one 

ſtem or far ſpungious ſtalke,garniſhed with tmoorh andfartleaues conf . The flowers grow at 

the top of the ſimall branches, veric double bur lc{ler then the other, conſiſting of a more finer iag- 

gedneſie,and of a faire yellowe gold colour; the roote is like the precedent,” 

The Globe flowring Marigold hath many large broadeleaues , riſing immediately foorth of 

the grounde: among which rifeth vpa ſtalke of the height of a cubire, dividing it ſelfe towarde the 
top into other ſmaller branches, ſector garniſhed with the like leaues, bur confuſedly or withour 

order. The flowers growe atthe top of the ſtalks veric double; the ſmall leaues whereof are ſet in 

 comely order by certaine rankes or rowes, as ſundric lines areina globe,trauerſing the whole com- 

paſloof the ſame,whereupon it tooke the name Orbicu/ate. T1 


F 5 Calenduls prhanthosmelins. | 6 Calendula ſamplici fore. 
Straw coloured double Marigold, = Single Marigold. 4] 


"WM 
hs | 


5. Thefiftforrof double Marigold differeth not from the laſt deſcribed fauing inthe colour of the 
| Yowers,, forthis plant bringeth foorth flowers of a ſtrawe or light yellow colour , and the others 
notſo,wherein conſiſteth the difference. [hs | 
6 The LI with Single flowers differeth not from thoſe with double flowers , butin thatii 
conliſteth of fewer leaues which we terme Single,thatmaketh the difference, HD Sg 
| | 1 RTE | | ES 7 Caienania 


r 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF) THE 


$ Calenduls mutor olifere. 
Iacke an apesa horie backe, 


TY 


lus 


| | cript ion. & So | 
7 This fruitfull or much bearing Marigolde, is eviſe called of the vulgar ſort of women lacke 
\© an apesa horſe backegit hath leaues;ſtalkes and rootes like the common ſort of Marigolde,differing 

in the ſhape of his lowers, forthis plant doth bring foorth atthetopof the ſtalke one flower like 
the other Marigoldes, fromthewhich ſtart foorth ſundrie other ſmall flowers, yellowe likewik, 
and of the ſamefaſhion, as the firſt, which if I benot deceiued commerh to paſle per accidens, ot 
by chaunce , as nature oftentimes liketh roplaie with other flowers,or as children are borne with 
two thumbes on one hand, and ſuch like, which living robe men do ger children like vnto others; 
enen ſo of the ſeede of this Marigold, which ific be ſowen it bringeth foorth not one flowermn 2 
thouſand, like the plant from whence it was taken, | . | 
$ Theotherfruitfull Marigold,is doubtleſſe a degenerate kinde , comming by chance fromthe 
ſeede of the double Marigolde,whereas for the moſt part the other commeth of the ſeede of ſingle 
flowers,wherein conſiſteth the ditference. | ; | 
9 The Alpiſhor mountaine Matigolde , which Z:Obelizs ſerterh downe for Nardus Ceitica, Of 
Plantago Atpina,is allo calledby Taber Montan Calths, or Calendula Alpina; and bicaule I lee, it 
rather reſembleth a Marigolde then any other plant,] haucnot thought ir amiſle to inſert itin this 
place , leauing the conſideration thereof ynto the friendly Reader, or toa further confideration, 
bicaule itis aplant that I amznot well acquainted withall; yet Ido reade that it hath a thicke roote, 
Srognga {lope vnder the vpper cruſt of the earth, of an aromaticall or ſpicie raſte, 8& ſomwhar bt- 

_ . ting,with many threddie ſtrings annexed thereto: from whichriſe vp broade, thicke, and rougN 
leaues,of an ouerworne greene colour , notvnlike vnto thoſe of Plantaine: among whichtherer- 
ſeth do rough and render ſtalke,ſet with the like leaues ;on the top whereof commeth foorth a fin- 
gleyellow flower paled about the edges with ſmall leaues of alight yellow,tending to a ſtrawec0- 
lour;the middle of the flower is compaſedof. a bundle of threds, thicke thruſt togi er,ſuch as 58 


themiddle of the fielde Daific, of a deepe yellowe colour. \"s 
| _ i | 80. } 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ' 603 
| The wilde Marigoldis like vnto theſingle gar den Marigold,butaltogither lefſer,8& thewhole 
[4 =_—_ atthe approch of _ = recoucrethirlſclte againe by falling of the ſecede. 


I9 Calendils arvenfa. 
Wilde Marigold. 


$$ Thephace, 
| TheſeMarigolds with double donateal] y, are ſerand con ghntee the others,heir 
ces do ſet foorth their naturall being. 
* The tame. 
| The Marigold flowreth from Aprill or Maie, _ vntill winter andi inwinrer alſo if it be warme, 
* T he names. 
| The Marigolde is called Calendula: it is to be ſeene to flowerinthe Calends almoſt of encrie 
we itis alſo called Chryſanthemum,of his poten colour,of ſome Calthe, and Caiths Poetarwn, 
whereof Colwmells and Yirg;Þdo write,faying : that Calthaisa flower of yellow colour, whereof Y 7+ 
g#l in his Bucolicks,the ſecond Egloge,writeth thus : 
| Mollia Luteola pingit vacinia Caiths. 
The wench trms vp her Fed with yellow Marigold, 
And purple Violets moſk deli ohrfullto to behold. | 
| Gn alſo in his 10.booke of ———_— hath theſe words : 
Candida Leucoia & flinemtia Luming Calthe. | 
| Stockgjlliflowers exceeding white, Sf 
And Marigolds moſt yellow bright. : 
ej is thought to be Gromphena Pling : in Dutch Goudt blacmen; in high Durch 
E 0 French Souſit &- Goude :in Italian Fior Zognimeſe : in Engliſh Marigolds and Ruddes, 
* Thetemperature andvertues. | 
Theflower of the Marigoldeis of remperature hot,almoſt in the ſecond degree,eſpecially when A 
aric:itis thoughrto ſtrengthen & comfort the hart, 8ro withſtand poiſon, as alforo be good 
Ak mg agues , being raken any waie : Fuchſia bath wiitten , that being drunke with 
TIRE geth downe the rermes, &that che fume thereof expelleth the ſecondine or ary 
£ 


Fg 


604 THE-SECOND BOOKE'OF THE | 
B Buttheleaues ofthe herbe are hotter, for there js in them a certaine biting : but by reaſon of the 
moiſture ioined with it, it doth not by and byſhewe itfelte,by meanes of which moiſture they mel- 
lifie the bellie,and procure ſolubleneſle if it be vied as ajpotherbe, | | 
C. Fuchſims writeth,that if the mouth be waſhed with the iuice,ir helpeth the roothach, 
D The flowers and leaues of Marigolds being diſtilled and the water dropped into red and waterie 
cies, ccaſeth the inflammation, and taketh away the paine. | | 
Conſerue made of the flowers and ſugar taken in the morning faſting , cureth the tremblins gf 
the hartzandis alſogiuen in time of plague otpeſtilence,or corruprion of the aire. o 
F Theyellowleaues of the lowers are dried and kept throughout Dureblandagainſt winter, copur 
into brothes,in Phiſicall porions,and for diners other purpoles,in ſuch quantinie thar in ſome Gro. 
cersr Sellers of ſpices houſes, are to be found barrels filled with ther, and retailed by thepennie 


- 


more or lefle,jnſo much that no brothes are well made without dried Marigolds. | 


Of Germaine arigolds. Chap.243- 


1 Chryſamthemun latifoliuws. Z 208 2 Chryſanthemum latifolrum min, 
*  _- GoldenMatigoldwiththebroadleafe, The ſmaller Durch Marigold. 


* The deſcription. 
I Olden Marigold with the broad To doth foorthwith bring from the roote long leaues 
| ſpred vpon the grounde, broad, greene, — rough phe vpper part , vnderneath 
| Imooth,andof a ught greene colour : among which ſpring vp ſlender ſtalks acubitchigh, 
ſomething hoarie, pouinge? or fower joints, out of euery one where grow two leaues, ſerone 
right againſt another,and oftentimes little ſlender ſtems, on the tops whereof ſtande broad round 
flowers like thoſe of Oxeie, or the corne Marigolde, hauing arounde ball inthe middle (fuchasis 
in the middle of thoſe of Camomill)bordered about witha pale of bright yellow leaues. The wh: 


$55 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. Coz 
wer turneth ito downerthat is caried away withthe winde, among which downe is founde long 
Mackiſh ſeede. The roote confiſterh of threddie ſtrings. ; | 
| Thelefierfortharh fower orfine leaves (pred vpon the groundelike vnto thoſe laſt deſcribed; 
or altogither leſſer and ſhorter:among which riſeth vp aſlender ſtalke rwo hands high, on thetop 
\hercof ſtand ſuch lowers as the precedetit,bur fairer and greater. | 
| Tu %* Theplace. Fes | 
| They befounde cuery whiere in vntilled places of Germanie, and in woodes, but are ſtrangers in 
| England. BY ; | | 


| C The time. MH : 
| They areto be ſeenc with their lowers in Tune,jn the gardens of the low countries, 
Ts The names. | | 


| Golden Marigolde is called in high Dutch UWaidiblume, There are that woulde haue ir to be 
dliſma Droſeoridis, which is allo called Damaſenium, bur vnproperly; therefore we muſt rather cail 
 itChryanthemwn latifolium, then caſhly attribute vnto it the name of Alijma, | 
Tz *% Thetemperature and vertues, © | 
[Touching the faculties heereof,there isnothing certaine, 


Of corne «Marigold. Chap.2.4.4- | 


1 Chryſanthemun mp jp ET 2 Chryſanthemum V alentinum, 
Corne Marigold. Fe: Corne Marigold of Valencia, 
| | Me: oe 


- 
bw ” 
2645 
—- 
"-2r" 
. 


# 
- 
TY zZ” _ oo MAES - [RS Sas 
—2 ———-——— = -- 
/ _— \ 
- \ F 
4 » 
a0 ' 


SYZ 


/ 


|  ** Thedeſeription. 3 x4 BEINY 
Orne Marigolde or golden Comeflower,hath a foft ſtalke,hollow,and of a greene colour, 
whereupon doe growe great leaues, very much hackt and cur into divers ſeftions, like an 
hacks Oſtrich feather confuſedly or our of order placed:vpon the top of the branches do ſtande 
fare Ntalike flowers,yellowe inthe middle;and likewiſe the pale or border of leaues that compaſſe 
| Sal 0s ; *- 


SO SE One” OO On ne 


606 Thr SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 


the ſoftball in the middle like that in the middle of Camomill flowers, ofa reaſonable pleane 
ſme!], The rootes arefull of ſtrings. af 
2+ The «rw flowerof Valentia hath a thicke far ſtalke,rough,vneuen, and ſomewhar crooked 
whereupon do 4 ig long leaues,conliſting 0 af along middle nb, with divers little fetherlike leaues + 
ſer thereon without order. The flowers growe at the top ofthe ſtalks,compoſed of a yellow thrum. 
mie matrer,ſuch as is in the middle of the Camomill flowers, and is altogither like the corne Mari 
golde laſt deſcribed, fauing it doth want that border or pale of little leaues that do compaſle the 
ball or head,the roote is thicke tough, and diſperſerh i icſelfe farre abrqade. 
+ The place. 

- Thefirſt groweth among corne,and where corne hath beene growing: it is found in ſome Places 
with leaues more iagged,andin others leſle.: 

Theſecondis a ſtranger in England. / 


'® T hetime. 
They flower i in Iulic and Avguſt, ; 
*% Thenames. * 
$ Theſe plants are called by 0nenamecin Greck,of the golcen lie colour,ypv4-44wr: in high 
Dutch Sant Johans blum : in lowe DurchUokelaer: 1 in Engliſh Corne Marigold, yellow Come 
flower,and golden Corne flower. 
There be diuers other flowers called Chryſenthemun alſo,as Batrachion. kinde of yellow Crow. 
foote, Aeltcbryſos,and Heljochryſon, but thele golden flowers differ from them. 
* The e temperature. 
They are thought to be of a meane temperature berweene heat and moiſture. 
% The wvertues. 
A Theſtalks andleaues of Corne Marigolde as Dioſcoridesſaith,areeaten as other potherbes are, 
The flowers mixed with waxe, oile , roſin , and frankencenſe , and made vP into aſearecloth, 
waſteth away colde and hard ſvellings. 2 
The herbe it ſelfe drunke, after the comming foorth of the bath ot chem that have the oy 
iaundiſe, doth in ſhort time mgke them well pron | | | 


of One! cle. Chap.245. 


Es * hed cription, 


Heplant which we te called Buphthalmum,or Oxe cieyharh fender ſtalks growin Ob 
"TF the rootes , three, fower, ormore, a foote high or higher, abour which be greene leanes 
finely iagged like tothe leaues of Fenell, bur a hes : the flowers in the toppes of the 
ſtalkes are great,much like to Marigolds, ofa light yellowecolour, with yellowe threds in the mid- 
dle,after which commeth vpa little head orknap like torhat of red mathes before deſcribed,called 
CAdonisconfiſting of many ſeedes ſer togither. The rootes areflender,and nothing bur firings He 
to the rootes of blacke Ellebor, whereof it hath beene taken to be a kitide, 
2 TheOxeeie,whichis generally holden xo berhe true Buphthabmury hath many leaues ſpred p- 
, on the grounde,, of a ght greene colour laide farre abroade like wings , conſiſting of verie many 
fine iags,ſct vpon atender middle rib:among which ſpring vp divers ſtalks, ſtiffe and brittle,on the 
rop whereof doe growe faire yellowe leaucs, ſet about a head or ball of chrummie marter , ſuch as 
is1n the middle of Cammomill,like a border or pale. The roore is rough and thicke , with cetraine 
ſtrings faſtned thereto. . 
3 e white Oxe cic,hath ſmall vpright ſtalkes of a foote high , whiteon do growelong leaues, 
compoſed of diuers ſmall leaues, and thoſeſnipr about the edges like: the teeth of a ſawe. The flo- 
wers _ on the top of the ſtalks,in ſhape like thoſe of the other Oxeeie ;the middle part whete- 
of is likewiſe made of a yellowe ſubſtance, but the pale or border of lirrle leaues, arc exc | 
white, like thoſe of great Daiſic , called Cayſolidamedia vulnereriorme, The roote is long,creeping 
alongſt rnder the vpper cruſt of the cub reby it greatly increaſeth. 
_ puobrhalme» 


- 


HISTORIE OF 
1 Buphthabmum fine Hellebor us wiger fernlacews. 


& , >" ' - 
SN) 1 
CNNEN j\ \.þ - . 


" T2, 


q; Ly F - . T2 = 

\ : , l þ f, Fs MW 4 q 'S "£ 

a \ —_— : 17 \Ys 4 - » F; ” T, 4 #7 Pd 
/ HW RES 4 


VE57 
"A Ed ——_— ' 
Ft I MES " 


| White Oxe cie. | 


« * 


A, 


TY 
- 


| Bohemia,and inthe gardens of the low countries; 
. of the firſt I haveaplantin wy garden. The laſt 
| groweth in barren! paſtures andfieldes almoſt eue- 
- rywhere, ; ——_ | 
| * Thetime. ann 

They flower in Maie and line. Thelaſt in Au- 


*% The names, on ; 
| 1 "Touching the naming of this plant the larewri- 
| rersare of diuers opinions': ſome would haue it to 
; be a kinde of Yeratrum nigrimg, blacke Hellebor : 
; other ſome Con/il;go,or Bearefgote; and againe, 
| others Seſamoides , and ſome Elkboraſtrum. Bur 
| there be found rwokinds of blacke Ellebor one* 
| theoldwriters, one with a leafe like vnto Laurell, 
_ | withthefruiteof Seſamam; the other with a leafe, 
; |likethar ofthe Plane tree, with the ſeed of baſtard 


| Saffron. Butitis moſt cuident, that this Buphthat- 
mwn,inEngliſh Oxecic, which in this chapter we 
- | have bed, doth agree with neitherof theſe: 


whatforme Config or Bearefoote is of, we finde 
w 


PISS. - {notamong theold writers.) P/znje in his 26.booke, 
FAUARINES __ (chapter. ſaith, that in his time it was founde in 

J SIO | |- Math, andwasa preſent remedie for the infirmitie 
LSE * Fo of 


658 THE SECOND 'BOOKE OF THE 
ot the lungs of ſwine, and of alfkinde of cattel] , though ir were bur drawne thorowe the eqre, Coly. 
lain his 6. booke,chap.5.doth alſo faic, that in the mountaines called Marſi, there is veric great 
helpe forall kinde of cattell,and he telleth how and in whar maner it muſt be pur into the care; the 
Tootes alſo of our Oxe ie are ſaide tocure certaine infirmities of cattell, if they beputinto the ſlit 
ot boredeare :butir followeth nor, that for the ſame reaſon it ſhould be Corſigo; & it is an orging. 
rie thing to finde out plants that are of alike force andqualitie: for >{je doth teſtific in his 25. 
booke, 5. chaprer , that the rootes alſo of;blackeEllebor can do the ſame; it curerh (faith h the 
_ coughincartell, ifirbe drawne thorowe theeare, andtaken our againe the next daic at the (ame 
houre : which is likewiſe moſt certaine byexperiments of rhe — ofour age;whodoe 
eurethe diſcaſes of their catrell withthe rootes of common blacke Elledor. The roots of white El. 
lebor alſodoethe like, as Abfyrtus, andaftter him Hrerocles, dorh write: who notwithſtanding dg 
not thruſt the rootes of white Ellcbor into the care, bur vnder the skin of the breſt called the dew. 
lap after which maner alſo Yegerize Renerus goth vic Conflige,or Bearefoot, in his firſt book of the 
curingof cartell, chapter 12.intituled,Of the cure of the infirmiries vnder the skin: although in his 
thirde booke and ſecond chapter, De Malo, he writeth that they alſo muſt be faſtned thorowe 
the care, Which things do ciend declare,that ſuncrie plants haue oftentime; like faculties:ang 
that it dothnotat all tollowe by the ſame reaſon, that our Oxe eie is Bearefoote , bicauſe it doth 
cure diſeaſes in cartel] as well as Bearefoote doth. But if we muſt conieRuure by the faculties Beare- 
foote ſhall be white Ellebor : for Yeger;s vieth Bearctoore in the very ſame manner that brew 
and Hyerocles do vie white Ellebor. This ſuſpition is madethe greater , bicauſe iris thought that pe. 
get/us hath rakenthis maner of curing from the Grzcians, for which cauſe alſo moſt do take Beare. 
footero be nothingelſcbut whire Ellebor : the which ifir be ſo,then ſhall this preſent Oxe eie much 
' differ from Bearefoote: for itis nothing at all like to white Ellebor. || Hp | 
And that the ſame is not Seſamozdes,cithetthe firſt or the ſecond, itis berrer knowne then need- 
full robe confuted. j : LD [1 | b--: 
This ſame alſo is vnpropetly called Heltboraftrwm , for that may aptly be called Heleborafrum, 
which hath the forme and likenefſe of Hellebor: and this Oxecic is nothing at all like to Ellcbor. 
For all which cauſes it ſeemerh that none of theſe names agree with this plant, bur onely the name 
Buphthalmum : with whoſe deſcription which is extant in D/eſcorides, this plant doth moſt aptlic 
agree. Ve take it tobethe right Oxe eie; for Oxe cie bringeth foorth lender foft ſtalkes, and hath 


leaues.ofthe likeneſle or {imilitude of Fennel] leaucs: the fiower is yellow,bigger then tharof Cam- | 
momill,cuen fuch.an one is this prefent vlant,which dorhſo CO thatformeorlile- 


nefſc of Fennell leaues, bothtin flendernefle and manifolde iaggednefle of theleaues, asno other 
lict!Eleafed herbe can do better ; ſothat withque all doubt thisplanc ſcemeth tobe the true & right 
Oxceic. Oxecie is called Cach/a,or rather Calths; but Calthais Calendyls, or Marigolde, whichwe 
ſaid that our Ox eic in flower did necreſt repreſent. There are, ſome who would haue Buphthalmun 
or Oxe eicto be Chryſanthemwn , yellowe Cammomill,and fay that Doſeorrdes hath. in ſundry pla- 
ces, and by diuers names intreated of this herbe; but if thoſe men had Coker more diligently 
waicd Drofcorides his words they would haue becne of another minde ; for although deſcriptionsof 
either of themdo in many things agree,yer there is no propertic wanting that may ſhew the plagts 

to differ, The leaues of Chryſanthemum arc faide to be diuided andcut into many fine iagges: and 
the Jeaues of Buphthahmumto be like the leaues of Fennell: forall things that are finely iagged and 
cut into many partes;haue the likenefle of thelcaues of Fennell, Moreouer, Dioſcoridesfaith , that 
Chryſanthemun doth bring foorth a flower much glittering , but hee telleth nor thatthe flowet of 
Buphtha.imum, or Oxe cic is much glittering, neither doth the flower of that which we haue ſer 
down glitter,{o thatir can or ought to be ſaide to glitter much,Do nat theſe things declarea mani- 
feſt wth rence betiyeene Buphthalmwunand Chryſanthemum, and confirme that which we hauc ſet 
down to be thetrue & right Oxe cic > We are of that minde, lerothers thinke as they will: andrhey 
that would haue © hry ſanthemwmn,to be Puphthelmn,et them ſecke out another it they denie chis to 
be Oxecie: for that which we and others haue deſcribed for Chryſanthemuns , cannot be the true 
Buphrhatmwn or Oxe cic; for the leaucs of itare not like Fenell, ſuch as thoſe of the truc Buphrba 
ranoughtto be. * Thetemper ature. ; 


5 
: 
p 4 


Bur concerning the faculties Mathiolw ſairh, that all the Phiſitions and Avothecaries in Bohe- 


mia, vie the roots of this Oxe eicin ſteed ofithoſe of blacke Ellebor, namely for diſeaſes in cartell: 
but he doth not aftirme that the rootes heexcof'in medicines are ſubſtitutes , or guid pro ag 


A "HIST ORIE! © Þ: PANT :-- 699 


EGS A. "i 
cath he, Idoe remember that I once ſawe the rootes heercof ina ſufficient bigae quantitie put 
% certaine phifirions into decoctions , which were made to putge by fiepe , bur they pur- 
+4 no wore then if rh{y had not beene putjirat. all ; which ching maketh it molt pjaine, 
thatircannot be any of the Ellebors , although it hach beene vſed ro. be taſtned through the cares 
ofcarie!! for certaine diſcales,8c doth cure them as Ellebor doth. Therootes'of Gextzaxdo mighti- 


men the orifices of fiſtulaes which beroo narrow, ſo do the roots of Arifkebocbza;or Birchwoort, 
orBripnie, and peeces of ſpunges , which notwithſtanding do much differ one {rom another i: 
ocher þpcrations : wherefore though rhe roots of Oxec £te can doe ſomething like vnto blacke 
Ellebor , yet for all that,they cannor performe all thoſe things that the ſame can. Wekiowe that 
thornes,ftinges,ſplinters of woode, and ſuch like bring paine, cauſe inflammatiens , drawe vnto 
them humours from the parts neere adioining,ifthey be faſtnedin anypart of the bodie3no part of 
the bodice is hurt without paine; the which 1s increaſedif any thing be thraſt! thiongh , Or ay into 
- the wounde: peraduenture alfoif any other thing beſide be pur into theflirorbored care,the ſame 
#e& would followe,which hapned by the roote of this plant thruſt in; notwithſtanding we heere 
ot nothing, we onely make way tor curious men to make more ciligent ſearch rouchin g the 
operations heereof, | BY | | | 


Pd *% The verturs. © | | | 

| Diaſeoridesſaith,thatthe flowers of Oxe eic made vpin a ſearecloth, doth-aflwage and waſte 
wwaiecolde hard lwellings : and it is reported that if they be drunke by andby after bathing, it wa- 
keth them in ſhort time well colouted that haue beene troubled with the yellowe jaundiſe, 


Of French Marigold,or «African Marigold. Chap.246 


| | | + Thekindes. | 
T lercbe extantat this day fiue ſorts of Tutkic Gilloflowersor African Marigolds; ſome wit't 


anc 


| Thelinaller Couble Afric 


CY 
» F & % 4 
»  A# FED 1 ID 4 
17 INE \ . I? x | oe a, 
i . _— 


Mata 


” 


— 


't 
- 
R 


- 
Fd 
- 
La 
he, **« 


F MA. 

; —— 
VS 
4-2 
PalESS.., 


A 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


*+The deſeriptien. 


£9! wne reddiſh ſtalke creſted fix. 
F _rowed,and ſomewhat knobbie, dipiding it ſelfe toward the rop intoother branches;wher. 
upon do grow leaues compoſed of many ſmall leaues ſet ypon a middle ribbe þ couples 
much like vnto the leaues of wilde Valerian, bearing at the top vente faire &beaurifull Snble yel. 
low flowers, greater and more double than the greateſt Damaske Roſe, ofa ſtrong ſmell, b 
vupleafant. The flower being paſt , there 
ſheth at the fiſt approch of winter. |. | Kd | 
2 Theſecond diftererhnor from the ficſt, ſauing that this plantis altogither leſſer, wherein can, 
ſiſteth the dificrence, | 1 | '* | 


X - He great double Africane Mariggld hath a great, 


ut 
1cce<derh long blacke far ſeede : the whole plantperi | 


5 


| 2 Flos A 'phricanus mwynor multifloruw. 


K The deſcription. 


2 Thereislittledifference between this andthe 
_ precedent,or laſt deſeribed,ſauingthar this plane 
15 much leſſer, and bringeth foorth more ſtore of 

| flowers, which mallech he difference. | 
4 Theſingle great Africane Marigolde, hath a 
thicke roote, with ſome fibres annexed thereto; 
from which riſethvppe a ſtiffe ſtalke chamfered 
and furrowed, of the height of two cubits, diui- 
ded into other ſmall braunches ; whereuponare 
ſer long leaues , compaCt or compoled of many 
little leaues like thoſe of the Athe tree, of a 
ſtrong ſmell, yer not verie vnpleaſaunt; on the 
top of the braunches doe growe yellowe ſingle 
flowers , compoſed in the middle of a bundle of 
yellowe thrummes harde thruſt togither, paled 
about theedges with a border of yellowe leaves; 
afrer which commeth Jong blacke ſecede. The 
whole plant periſheth with the firit froſt, and 
mult be ſowen yeerely as the other forts multbe, 
5 'Thecommon French Marigolde hath ſmall, 
weake and tender braunches trailing yppon the 
grounde, reeling and leaning this waie and that 
rwaic, beſet with leaucs conſiſting of many parti- 
- _ cularleaues, indented aboutthe edges, whichbe- 
' © | ing held vp againſt the ſunne, or tothelight,are 
| | A '  ſeenetobefullof holes like a fieue , cuenasthole 
yS, NT + _of Saint Iohnswoort: the flowers ſtand at the top 
of. the ſpriggie brannches foorth of long cuppes or huskes, conliſting of cight or ten final 
leaues, yellowe vnderneath,, on the vpper fide of a deeper yellowe tending to the colour of 2 
darke crimſon veluct, as alfo ſoftin handling: but rodeſcribe the colour in words, it isnot poſ- 
ſible,butthis waie laic vpon paper with a; penſill a yellowe colour called Maſticke, which bong 
drie,laie the fame ouer with a littlefatfron ſteeped in water or wine, which ſerteth foorth mol 
lively-che colour , The whole plant is of a moſt ranke and vaholſome fimell , and periſherh at 
Et 4 Flu 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. -6tx 

a Eb jeanm maior ſanplici fore. | 5 Flos Aphricanu minor ty fore. 

4 ſing French Marigold. px.» The (mall French Marigolde, : © - + 
(2 


4 RN 


*% The place. | 


hey are cheriſhed and ſowen in pardenseuery yeere : they grow euery where alpoſt in Africke 


: 


ofthemſelues, from whence we firſt had them , andthat was when.Char/es the firſt Emyerour of 
Rome made a famous conqueſt of Tunis; whereupon it was called Flos Aphricanus, or Flos Tunc- 
Tenjis, TE [2-2] | Fe 

They are tobe ſowen inthe beginning of Aprill if the ſeaſon fall out ro be warme , otherwiſe 
they|muſt be ſowen in a bedof dung , as ſhall be ſhewed inthe chapter of |Cucumbers. They 
brig foorth their pleaſant flowers very late, and therefore there is the more diligence to be vſed to 
fowerhem very earely, bicauſc they ſhall not be ouertaken with the froſtes before their ſeede be 


ripe; 


| + The nones. | | | | 
T e Africane or French Marigold is called in Dutch Thunis bloemen: in high Dutch Jnbt- 
aniſcnegelin,that is the floweror Gilloflower of India : in Latine Caryophylius Indicus, whereupon 
the French men call it Oeilletz & Inde. Cordws calleth it Tanacetum Peruuianum , of the likenefle 
thelgeaues have with Tanfie, and of Peru a Prouince of America, from whenceir was firſt thought 
tobebrought into Europe. Geſnerws callerhit Caltha Aphricana, and ſaith thar ir is called in the 
-rthaginian toong Peay : ſore would haue it to be Perilims flos Pliny, but not properly : for Peti- 
Iu fpsisan Autumne flower growing among briers and brambles, Andreas Lacuna calleth it O- 
thonza, making it a certainc hetbe of the Troglodyres growing in that part of Arabia which leth 
toward Acpypt, hauing leaues full of holes as though they were eaten with mothes. GaZen'in his 
fourth booke of the faculties of Simple medicines , makerh mention of an herbe called Lycoper/6- 
: We tuice whereof, a certaine Centurion did carie out of Barbarie all Acgyprouer with fo rancke 

1, and ſo lothſome, as Galen himſelfe durſt not ſo much as taſte of it, but conieuredit to. be 
deadly zyet that Centurion did vic it againſt the extreme paines of the joints , and ir ſeemed to the 
1 | patients , 


61:2 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
paticnts chemſclues,to be ofa very colde temperature; bur doubtleſſe of a poiſonſome qualitiven 


neere to that of Hemlockes. nc | 

| | | " The temperature and vertnes. | | | 
A Thevnpleaſant fmell;eſpecially that commoy fort with ſingle flowers (that ſtuffeth the hexdtihe 
to thatof Hemlocke, ſuch as the iuice ole, 7 me is) doth ſhew thatitisof apoiſonſom &<ng. 
ling qualitie zandalſothe ſame is manifeſted by divers experiments:for I remember ſaith the fame 
| , thar[didſcea boie whoſe lippes and mouth whenhee beganto chewe the flowers gig 
fivell extremely ; as it hath often happened vnto them , that playing or piping with quils or kexes 
of Hemlockes,do holde them a while berweene their lippes: likewiſe he faith, we gave toaca the 
flowers with their cups,tempered with freſh cheeſe, ſhee foorthwith mightely ſwelled, and 2 little 
while after died: alſo micethart have eaten of the ſeede thereof haue beenefounde dead. All which 
things dodeclare thatthis herbe is of a venemous and poifonſome facultie; and that they ae 
notto be harkened vnto, thar ſuppoſe this herbe robe an harmeleſſe planr: ſo to conclude, thee 
lants are moſt venemous and full of poiſon, and therfore not to betouched orſmelled vnto, much 

Iſle vſcd in meate or medicine, : tops | | | 


z 6; 


Of the flower of the Sunne,or the Marigolde of Pern. (hap.24.7, 


1 Flos Sollergor. 2 © Flos Solis minor. 


The greater Sunne flower. : Theleſſer Sunne flower, 
W*Fg [ Vo 


= 


a WY YT 
\ WINE 


WMn; 


« ——_ 
= 
- I +: 
= {of 1 . 
- . 
: | 


x < 2 
NNN 
\ IQ wy 


 t% Thedeſeription, 


0 He Indian Sunne or the golden flower of Peru, is a plant of fiich ſtature and talenefle, 
thatin one ſommer being ſowen of aſeede in Aprill, it hath riſen vp to the height of four- 
teene foote in my garden, where one flower was in waight three pounde and two onrry 

and crofle ouerthwarr the flower by meaſure fixtcene inches broade. The tales are vpright an 

ſtraight,of the bigneſle of aſtrong mans arme,belet with large leaues cuen to the top, lite yntot! 


% 


| | HISTORIE OF PLANTS! .|- 613 
vreat Clore,or Burre : at the top of the ſtalke|commeth foorth forthe moſt part one flower , yet 
many|times there ſpring our fucking buddes » which come ro-no perfection :this great flower is in 
jhap « like to rhe Cammonmill lower , beſet rounde about with a pale or border ot goodly ye!lowe. 
Jcaucs,in ſhape like the leaues of the flowers of white Lillies: the middle part whereof is made as it 

were bt vathorne veluet,or {ome curious cloth wrought with the ncedle,whichbraue worke, if you 
do thtoughly view and marke well,itſeemeth to be an innumerable fort of ſmall lowers,reſemb ing 
enofe ornozellof a candleſticke,broken from the foore thereot: from which ſmall noz:ll (weat- 
«th foorth excellent fineand cleere Venice Turpentine, in ſight, ſubſtance, ſauour, and taſte. The 
whole plant in like maner being broken,{melleth of Turpentine : when the plant groweth to maru- 
ricie,che lowers fall away,in place whereof appeereth the ſecde, blacke, and large, much like the 
ſeede of Gourds, fer as though a cunning workeman had of purpoſe placed them in very good or- 
der, much like che honie combes of bees: the roote is white, compact of many firings, which pe- 
rithatthe ficſtapprochof winter,and mult be ſer in moſt perfe& dunged grounde :the maner how 
ſhall be ſhewed,when vpon the like occaſion I ſhall ſpeake of Cucumbers and Melons, | 
2 Theother golden flower of Peruis like the former, ſauing that it is alcogither lower, and the 
| Jeaues more tagged,and verie fewe in number, | | | 


} _— 
[ : 


3 Flos Solis minor mas. * | 4 Fles Solis mo Lys 
The male Sunne flower, [1 | ThemarigoldSunne flower. 


t " 


* The d;ſeription. | | 
he male flower ofthe Sunne of theſinaller ſort, hath athicke roore, harde, andof a wooddic 


ce, with many threddic (trings annexed thereto, from which' riſerh vp agraie or ruſler ſtalk 
tothe height offiue or ſixe cubirs, of the bigneſle of ones arme, wy ann. . $-- great broade 
Fancy with long foote ſtalkes, very fragill ot caſie to breake, of an overworne greene colour, ſharo 


and ſomewhatcut or hackt about the wh 4. like a ſawe ; the flower groweth ar thetop of 


ikebordered about with a pale of yellowe leaues; the thrummed middle part is blacker then 


Qq 3 that 


614 THE SECOND BOOKE OF!THE 
that of the laſt deſcribed. The whole flower:is compaſiced abour likewiſe with divers {ich 4; 
leaues, as thoſe are that do growe lower vpan the ſtalkes, bur lefler and narrower, The plant Kt 4 
euery part thereof doth ſmell of Turpentine, ,andrhe flower yecldeth foorth moſt clecre Turpen- 
tinc,as my ſelfe haue noted diuers yeeres. The ſeede is allo long anc blacke, with certaine lines or 
ſtrakes of white tunning alongft che ſame. The roote and cuery part thetcof periſherh when ic hath 
perfected his ſeed. Ws: | i 
The fema!c or Marigolde Sunne flower hath a thicke and wooddieroote, from which riſerh | 
a ſtraight ſtem,diuiding ir ſelfe into one or more branches, ſet with ſmooth leaucs ſharpe — 
flightly indented abeutthe edges. The flowers growe atthe top of the braunches ofa faint yello| : 
colour,the middle partis of a deeper yellow tending ro blacknes,of the forme and ſhape of a lingle 
Matigolde,whercupon I hauc named it the I=— Marigold. The cede as yet Lhauenotobſerueq. 
| 4-21 SN * T he place. / oh | 
Theſe plants do you ofthemſelues withour Fning or ſowing in Peru, andin divers other pro- 
ninces of America,from whence the ſcedes haue beene brought into theſe parts of Europe, There 
hach beene ſeene in Spaine andother hot regions a plant fowen and nouriſhed vp fromſecde, to ar- 
raine tothe height of 24.toote in one yeere. 7 | 
| | * Thetime, | 
The ſecede multbe fer or ſowen- in the beginning of Aprill if the weather be temperate, inthe 
molt ferull grounde rhatmay be, and where the Sunne hath moſt power the whole daic. | 
[ | * 7 he names. hb, [ 
The flower of the Sunne is called in Latine F/es $9/#4, raking thatname from thoſe thathaue te. 
portedit to rurne with the ſunne,the which I cduldencuer obferue, alchough I haue endeuored to 
finde our the truthof ir; but I rather thinke it was ſo called bicauſeit doth reſemble the radiant 
bearnes of the Sunne, whereupon {ome hai:2called it Corons Solis, and Sol Indianxs, the Indian Sun 
flower zothers hauecalled it Chryſanthemun: Ferunianum,orthe golden flower of Peru; in Englith 
the flower of the Sunne,or the Sunnc flower, l 6 | 
"Y |  t% The temperature: | 
They are thought tobe hot and drie of complexion. | 
| % The wertues. | 5 dope | 
A There hathnorany thing been ſer down either of the auncient or later writers concerniagthe 
verrues cf theſe plants znotwithſtanding we haue founde by triall, that the buddes before they be 
flowred, boiled andeaten with burter,vincger,and pepper,after the maner of Artichoks,are excee- 


ding pleaſantmeate, ſurpaſſing the Artichoke farre, inprocuringbodilie luſt. | 
B Theſamebuds with the ſtalks necre vnto the top(the hairineſſe being raken away) broiled vpon 
a gridiron,and aftctwarde caten with oile, vine ger,and pepperghath the like property. 


| Of Cammoill. Chap.248. 


: P *% Thekindes. | | 
'F Here haue beene ofthe auncients ſer foorth two ſorts of ſweere ſmelling Cammomils.Thela- 
ter age wherein we line hath founde two morc,beſides other wilde kindes thereof. | 


» 


* T be deſcription. 


V 


Bo | O diſtinguiſh the kindes of Cammomils with long deſcriptions it woulde bur inlarge the 
| volume,and ſmall profite wouldethereby redounde to the Reader,confidering __ 
well knowne to al . mrogrr allnot be amiſſe ro faic ſomething of t 


em ro 
keepe the order and method of the booke hitherto obſerued, The common Cammomullhathma- 
nie weake and feeble braunches trailing vpoh the grounde, raking holde vpon the top of the earth, 

, as irrunneth, whereby it greatly increaſeth.” The "ane are very fine and much iagged oor deepely 
cut,of a ſtrong fweete ſmell: among which come foorth the flowers like vnto the fielde Daiſic,bot- 

dered about .v: edge with a pale of whiteleaues; the middlepartis yellowe compoſedof {uch 
thrums,cloſe thruſt rogither;,as is that of theDaiſic, Lhe roote is verie ſmall and rhreddic, © 


1 
6 
F: 
m 
., 


2 The 


HISTORIE OF PEANTS. | 615 
* T; he ae ſcription. 


| =_ 7 cond kinde of Cammomill hath leaues,rootes, ſtalkes,and creeping branches, like vnto 
the precedent: the flowers grow at the tops of ſmall tender ſtemmes, which are nothing elſe bur 


ſuch yellowachrummic matrer,as 1s in the middle of the reſt of the Cammomils, without :'ny pale 


orbarder of white leaues,as the others hauc ; the whole plant is of a pleaſing lweere ſmell, where- 


4 ; 


won ſome haue giuen itthis addition Odorarion. 


2 Chamemelion nudwun odoyatum. | 
Sweete naked Cammomill, | 


INC; 
et =P 
INF TE— 


19 _ = 


- 
on 
_ 
* 
L 
* - 
- ' 
\ 
\\ 
-& 
Y 
"7 
% = 
6 Y " 
b, F 
- ET 
” \ 
4 . ” £ 
i .L 
w_ ; 
fl - : 
" 
TEN) 6 
= 
* WM 
»" a> 
: »5 
_— _Y 
7”. 
= 
02 


« 
# 
s 
, 
. 
_ 
[2 
x 2) \\ 
FY 


* The deſeription. 


3 Thischirde Cammomill differeth not from che former, Gauing that the leaues heereof are veric 
doubled with white leaues, inſomuch that the yellowe thrum inthe middle is bur lictle ſcene, 


.ndihe other verie ſingle,wherein conſiſterh the difference,  / |, FEY | 

4 Romiſh Cammomill hath many ſlender ſtalkes, yer ſtiffer and ſtronger rhen any of the others, 

by reaſon whereof it ſtanderh more vpright, and doth notcreepe yppon the earth asthe others 

doe, The leaucs are of a more whiti ur tending to the colour of the leaues of Woade. 

Jan mers be likewiſe ycllowe inthe middle, and about with a border of ſmall white flo- 
od are cn he nk | 


Qq4 | " 3 Chamonclun 


616 THE SECOND, 'BOOKE OF THE 


3 Chamenelum Anglicun forgot lics. 
” Dink — 4 


Y% The place. 


Theſe plants are tet in ingadin both forpleaſire and alſo profite. 
%* The time. 

They flower moſt parr of al the Sommer. 
* The nones. 

Cammomilli is called Challevche, of ſome anthems, and EE: F294 and Ho 4: Y 
mon, efpecially thar double flowred Cammcoſnill which Grecke name is kaken fromthe whireneſie 
of his flower: in Englith Cammormill: itis called Cammomill bicauſe the flowers hauc the _ 
£#\ov,OT An apple,which i is plainly percciued in common Cammomill. | 

% Thetemperature. 

Gemmonil ſaith Galen 1s hor and drie in the firſt degree, and is of | (4 parts: it is of forceto 
digeſt flacken,and ratifie; zalſo ir is chought to be like the Roſe in thigneſle of parts, comming to 
the operation of oile in heate, which are to man familiar and tergperate: wherefore it is a || 
helpe againſt weariſomneſle,ir caſeth and mitigaterh paine, it mollificch and ſuppleth, and theſe 

operations arc in our yulgar Cammomill, as common experience reatherh, for it heateth mod: 
rately,and dricth lictle, | i | | 
* The VertMes. 
A Cammomillis gobd Lpainſt te eollicks; and ſtone, prouoketh vine is moſt fngulringfr 
which are made agai)ſt the foreſaid diſeaſes, 
B Oileof Cammomullis exceedinggood againſt al maner of ache andpainezbruſings ſhrinking 
of ſinewes,hardneſſe, andcolde ſwellings. * 
C Thedecotionof Cammomill madeinwineand drunkezis goodagaintoldnxinte iowa 
lower belchings, voideth winde,and mightily bringerh downerhe montlycourle. | 
.D | TheEgyprianshaue viedit fora cncictgunta coldeagues : rhey:di 
' It.as Galen ſaith, | | 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. 617 
ie decoRtion made in white wine and drunke,expelleth the dead childe and ſecond; h 
birch ſpeedily,andelenſerh thoſe parts, Hr yy 9m gr _er-E. 
he herbe boiled 1n poſler ale , and giuen to drinke , eaſeth the paine inthe cheſt comm 
i dexpelleth rough and clammic flegme,and helpeth children of the ague. 
The herbe vſed in bathes prouokerh fiveare, rarifieth the skin, and operierh the pores, briefely G 
i mitigacerh gripings and gnawings of the belly, icalaieththe paines of the ſides, mollifieth bar} 
fwelliags,and waſtech awaic rawe and vndigeſted humours, © | | £5 

\Theoile compounded ofthe flowers,pertormeth the ſame , andis aremedie-aoainſt all weari. H 
ſomneſſe, andis with good ſuccefle mixed with all thoſe things thar are applied to mitigate painc, 


ing of F 


4 


D 
8 
Q 

8 
pa) 
8F 
S 
w—_ 
D 
O 
IJ 
y 
= 

D_ 
S 
= 
WV 


Herebe three kindes of wilde Cammomils which are pack x called in Latine Cora/e; one 


faire double flowers voide of ſmell , which a Kentiſh gentleman called Maſter Barrchmewyc L ne + 


618 THE SECOND! BOOKE OF THE 


| | | % The deſcription. 'F 
_ Aie weede bringerh foorth rounde ſtakes, greene, brittle, andfull of iuice, parted into 
manie branches,thicker,and higher then thoſe of Cammomill | the leaves inlike mancr 
are wider, and of a blackiſh greene colour , the Rowers like yams andeolour,: The | 
whole plant ſtinketh,artt) giuerh a ranke tmell. : [3-267 1386 nl RE. | 
2 Theycllowe Maie weede hath a fmalland tenderroote, fromwhich' riſeth vp a feeble ftalke, | 
diuiding it ſelfe into many other branches, whereupon do grow leaues not vnlike to Cammomill, | 
bur thinner, and fewer in number, The gowerg grow atthe top of theſtalkes, of a golde Nie, 
colour. | 4: "460 4 4.1 | | 
| HIRE % The place. q + 
They growe in Corne fieldes,neere vnto path waies,and in the borders of fieldes. 
| | *% T he tame. | 
They flower in Iuly and Auguſt, p TOyt 
| <6 | * The names. , | | 
| Maie weede is called in ſhops Corala fetida, of Leonhartus Fuchſas , Parthenium, 2nd Virginee, 
but notrruely : of others, 4»«r%: in high Durch Rrotendull 2 in lowe Dich Paddebloemen; > 
French Eſpargontte :in Engliſh Maic weede,yilde Cammomill, and ſtinking Mathes, | | 
| % Thet ture and vertacs. | | | | 
A Maiew:cdeis not ved for meare nor medicine, and therefore the faculties are vnknowne, and 
not founde out, yet all of them arerhougheto b®hor and drie, and like after a fort in operation to | 
Cammomill, but REY at all agreeing with mans natire; notwithſtanding it is commended " 
gainſt theinfirmities ofthe morher,ſceing all ſtinking things are good againſt thoſe diſeaſes. | 
B Itisan vnprofitable weede among corne, and raifeth bliſters ypon the handes of the :nl , 
 anidrcapels. {| 2 [ we | 


Of Pellitorie of Spaine. Chap.250. 


1 Pyrethrun of ficinarwn. = 2 Prethrom heefire- 
' Pelliroric of Spaine. 1 Wilde Pellitoric, 


-1 
2 
M94 $040 7 
$3a A 5-4 » , ='% 
Wh W.j 


kg 


HISTORIE”OF' PLANTS. | <9 
* Thhe deſcription. 55s 6OHARY 


rrethrum,in Engliſh Pellitoric of Spaine(by thename whereof, ſome So mptopery caltfan 
P otherplant, which is indeede the truce Þmperatorjr , or waſter watt, and not Pellitoric) ir 
' 4 hachgreat andfarleaues,like vato Fennell,crailing ypon the grounde:among which imme- 
diately fromthe roote,riſeth vp a fat greene {tem,bearing at the top a goodly flower, faſhioned like 
hegreat ſingle white Daiſte , whoſe bunch or knob inthe midſtis yellowe like that of the Daiſie, 
andbordered abour with a pale of ſmall leaues, exceeding white on the vpperlide, and vnder of a 
aire purple colour: the rootc is long,of the bignes of a finger, veric hot,and of a burning taſte. 
> ThewildePellitorie groweth vp like vnto wilde Cherwle, reſembling the leaues of Cauca/is, of 
aquicke andni ping taſte,like the leaues of Dittander or Pepper woort ; the flowers growe atthe 
top of flender ſtalkes in ſmall rufts or ſpokie ymbles, of a white colour : the roore is tough, and of 
the bignelle of a little finger,with ſome yy 41h belonging,and of a quicke biring taſte, 
*T ce, | | 
It growethin my garden very plentifully,| | ” | 
| * The time. 
| Itflowrethand feedeth in Iuly and Augult. 
*% The Aames. | | ; | 
| Pellitoric of Spaine is called in Greeke 49431, by reaſon of his hotand fierie rafte ; in ſhops alſo 
Prrethram: in Latine Sa/euaris: in Italian Pprerbro : in Spaniſh Peiirre: mFrench Pied a” Alexandre, » 
thatis toſaie, Pes CAMexandrinus, or Alexangers foote: in high and lowe Dutch Bertram ; in 
EngliſhPellitorie of Spaine,and of ſome Bertram after the Dutch name; and this is the righr Pyre- 
thrn,or Pellitoric of Spame,for that which ditiers rake to be the right, is another kinde of hetbe, 
commonly called 1mperaforia,or Maſterwoort, bur vntruly, being deceiued by Dioſcorides his cor- 
rupt copics,reading one thing for another, | | 
* Thetemperature and vertues. = 
| Theroote of Pellitorie of Spainc is very hotand burning, by reaſon whereof it taketh awaie the A 
colde ſhivering of agues that haue beene of long continuance, and is good for thoſe that are taken 
with a dead pallic,as Dzoſcorides writeth. ; | 
| Theſameis with good ſuccefle mixed with antidotes or counterpoiſons,which ſerue againſt the B 
' | migrir, andcontinuall paine of the head, the difſineſle called Ferrego, the apoplexie, the falling 
 fickneſle,che trembling of the ſinewes,and palfics, for it is afingular good andetfecuallremedie 
for all colde and continuall infirmities of the head and finewes. | | | 
Pyrethrwn,taken with honie, is good againſt all colde diſeaſes of the braine, 'S: 
Theroot chewed in the mouth,draweth foorth great ſtore of rheume,ſlime, and filthie wateriſh D 
| humours,andeaſerhthe paine of the teeth,cf] decially if itbe ſtampedwith alittle Sraphifagria, and 
 tiedimaſmallbaggeand pur into the mouth,and there ſuffered to remainea certaine ſpace. 
|  Eitbeboiled mvinegerand kept warme in the mouth ithath the ſame effec, | E 
The oile wherein Pellitoric hath bcene boiled,is good to annointthe bodie toprocure Fveating, F 
andisexcellent good to annoint any part that is bruſed andblacke, althovghthe member be decli- 
ning to mortificatiors it is good alſo for ſuch as are ſtriken with the palſie. | | | 
Itis moſt ſingular for the Chirurgians of the Hoſpirals;to put into their ynCtions contre Xeapo- G 
it anwn morbam and ſuch other diſeaſes that be colin germaine rhereunto. 2 


Of Leopards bane. (hap.251. 
% The deſcription. T7 


1 F this plant Doronicamrhere be ſundric kindes, n—_—_ I will onely touch fower, whom 
Dodonews vngroperly calleth _frogzgum pardatianches, which hath hapned through the 
negligenceof Dioſcorides atid Theophraſts, whoin deſcribing Doronicumytaue not onely 
omittedthe towers thereof, but haue committed that negligence in many and diuers otherplants, 
lcauing out in many plants which they haue deſcribed, the ſpecial! accidents, which hath not a lir- 
th tronbled the ſtudie and determination of the beſt Herbariſts of late yeeres , riot knowing cer- 


= ; raitily 


\ 


— _ 


630 THE-SECON D”BOOKE OF 'THE 


Vo 


rainly whatto determine and ſerdowne info ambiguous a marter , ſomeraking irone waje, ſome 
another,and ſomeeſtecming irto be Aconitwm;bur for berter vndetſtanding heereof, knowe thac 
this worde Aconitur as it is a name attributed rodiuers plants , ſoir/is to be conſidered that all 
plants called by this name aremalignant and venemous, as with themiceand roote Whecof, ſuch | 
as huntedafter wilde and noifome beaſts, were woont ro imbrue anddippe their arrowes, the ſg. 
ner and more furely to Gdifparch andflea the beaſt in chace. Burfor the proofe of the goodneſit of 
this Do7onicum and the reſt of his kinde : knowe alſo that ZObel;as writeth of an excellent learned. 
man called /ohn de Froede who did eate veric many of the rootes at ſimdrie times,and founde they 
verie pleaſant in taſte and verie comfortable. But to leaue contronerfies, circumſtances,and obiec. 
tions which hecere might be brought in and alleaged , aſſure your ſelues that this plant Dorozicun | 
minus off icinarwn ( whoſerootes Pena reporteth to haue found plenifuti gong ypon the Pede. 
mountaine hils and certaine hic places in Fraunce)hathmany grearleaues ſptcad vpon the groung, 
- fomwhat routd,8 rough haired like Plantainez among which rife vp mahie tender rough ſtalks hy 
_ cubites andan halfe high,bearing at the rop cerraine fingle yellow flowers; which when they yade, 
| change intodowne,and are caried away with the winde: the rootesare thicke and manic, very ho. 

kedly rooting ap tangling one within another , reſembling a ſcorpion , andin ſome yeeres do 
grow in our liſh gardens into infinite numbers. | | 1 | 
2 Theſecond kindeof Doronicamn hath larger leaues thenthe former, but rounde and broader al. 
moſt like the great Clot or Burre z among which tiſeth vp a ſtalke two cubirs high : the flowers are 
like the former:the roote is longer and biggerthen the ,barredover with many ſcaliebarks, 
in colour white,and ſhining like white marble,hauing on eche fide one arme or finne, not ynlike to 
the ſeaſhrimpecalled Squrils marina, or rather like the ribbes or ſcales of a ſcorpions bodie, andis 
ſvecrtin taſte. | == q | 


'# 


_ 


1 Doronicun mains of fieinarums, þ 2 Doronicen minus. 
Gicat Leopards bane, ll | Small Leopards bane. 


: , ' 2+; 4 
.* 
X F_ 1 
s bane et LAICETG 
© 1Y,& + 'F 


\ 1, 
& > rp 


Fo 4 a 
— - _ # 
$4 oth 4 I 
2 M 
! 7 ” G 


"EY = " » #7 
L236 ils #4. S387 EROS 


*% The deſeription. 


3 Thethirde kinde of Doronicum , growin anmapes fn great abundance in the mountaines'of 
Fra 


unce,jsallo broughtinto,and acquainted with our Engliſh groundes, bearing very large leaues 

of alight yellowiſh greene,and haiels like rv Or Comms Sets The baker ine © c obes high, 
having at the top yellowe flowers like Buphthahnue, or Confoliden media vulner ariorin : all the roote 
oueris barred & welted with ſcales like the taile of a ſcorpion, white of colour, & in taſte fveer, with 
ſome bitrernesyeelding foorth much clammineſſe,which is very aftringenr, Pl 
4 Thefourth kindeBeereof is foundein the woodie mountaines'  Tauritum and Sauoie, 
like vnto the former , ſauing that the leaues are ſomwhar rougher, the flowers greater,and the 

talks higher, But to be ſhorr,eche of cheſe kinds are fo like one another,thar in ſhew, taſte,ſrae!,& 
maner - ag ſceme to be as it were al onextherfore it were ſuperfluousto ſtand ypon their 
varicticot names, Pardalianches,MyotFoman,T he lyphonum,Camorumandiuch like,of Theophraitus, 
Dioſcorides , Plinje, or any of the newe writers, whichnames they haue given vato Doron:cum, for 
by the opinion of the moſt skilfull inplants, they are but Sywonymies of one kinde of plant. $.2e 
though theſe olde writers ſpeake of the hurrfullqualicies of theſe plants: yer experience teacheth 
vs thatthey haue written what they hauc heard and read,and not what they haue knowne andpro- 
ved: foritis apparant that Doronicum by the conſent of the olde and newe writers, is vſedas n an- 
naote,or certaine treacle,as well in the confections de Geminis Me ſu, as inelettuario Avomatur. 
Andmough Mathiolus diſclaimethagainſt rhe vic thereof, and callerh it Pardalianches, that is; 
Wolfes bane: yetlet the learned know,that Quantitss non qualitas nccer; for as Saffron is comforta- 
bletotheharr; yet if you giue thereof, or of muske,or anyfuch cordiall thing ; too great a quanti- 
tie; killerh the partie which receiverh it. | [<5 | 

og A Yu & Theplace, © | 
The place is ſufficiently ſec foorth in the deſeriprion , US a ſhall vnderſtande that T have the 
N ofirſt inmygarden, andthe thirde hath beene founde and gathered in the colde mounraines of 
{,mberlande by door Pennie, lately of London deceaſed, amanofmuch experience and 
wedge in Simples whoſe death my ſelfe and many others do greatly bewaile. 


622 THE! SECON D'BOOKY®E 'OF!THE 
They doflower imthemonerhs ofIunc and Julic. ll | 
| R * The names. Fi | 
| Concerning theirnames I haue alreadic ſpoken, yer fith I woulde be glad that our Engliſh mo- | 
men might know how to call ig,they may terre Doronicwmby this name, Crayfiſh, Piſſe inbed hi. 
cauſe the flower is like Dandelion,which is called Piſle in bed, [1 #4 | 
Que quia na ſeuntur dura Vinacia cante, | | 
Agreſtes Aconta vocant.. 
[This froth(as men ſuppoſe)tooke roote 


” 


and thriuing inthe barling ſoile in burgeons foorth did ſhoot, 
To bane and miſchiefe men withall : and for bicauſeghe ſame 
did growevpon the barc hard flints,folke gaue the foreſaid name 
_ of Flintwoort thereunto, : (| 


"y 


- 


* The nature andwvertues. | PO 
A Thave ſufficiently oken of that for which Thaue warrant to write, both touching their natures & 
vertues, for the matter hath continued ſo ambiguous & ſo doubrfull; yea,& ſo full of controuctiics, 
that Idare not commit that to the world which I haue read : theſe few lines therfore ſhal ſuffice for 
this preſent: the reſt which might be ſaide I referre tothe greatand learned doRors, andto your 
owne conſideration, p-1 : SE: | ben Mr 
B Theſe herbes are mixed with compound medicines , that mitigate the paine of the cies, and by - 
reaſon of his cold qualitie, being freſh & green,it helpeth inflammations,or fierie heat of the cies, 
C Iris reported andaffirtycd,thar itkilleth Panthers, fivine,wolues, and all kindes of wilde beaſts, 
being giuen them with fleſh. Theophreſtaa ſaith that itkilleth carrle, ſheepe, oxen , and all fower 
footed beaſts within the compaſle of one daie, not by taking it inwardly onely, bur if the herbe 6r 
roote be tied yntotheir priuic parts : yet he writeth further,that the ropte being drunke, is a reme- 
dic againſt the ſtingings of ſcorpions:which ſhewerh that thisherbe orthe roortherof is not dead- 
ly to man, bur to divers beaſts onely. whichrhing alſo is found our by triall, and manifeſt experi- 
ence: for Corradins Geſnerw amanin our time ſingularly learned , and amoſt diligent ſearcher of 
many things ſhewerh,that he himlſelfe in a certaine Epiſtle written to CLa-!phs Occeo, hath often- 
times inwardly taken the roote heereof greene,drie,whole, preſerued with honie , andalfobeaten 
topowder, and that cuenthe very ſame daic in which he wrote theſethings, he had drunke with 
warme water two drams of the rootes made into fine powder, neither felthe any hurt therbyz and 
that he oftentimes alſo bad ginen the ſame to his ſicke patients , both by'it {elſe & alſo mixed with 
other things,and that very !uckelie. Moreover, the Apothecarics in ſteedeof Doronicum, do vic 
(though amiſle)the rootes thereof without any tnanifelt danger. [ | 
D Thatchis« Aeonzte killeth dogs.it is very certaine and founde out by triall, which thing Aſ#thi+- 
 kacould hardly belecue, butrhar at length he founde it our to be true by a manifeſt example, as lic 
confeſleth in his Commentaries. | | uy 


Of Sage. Chap.252. 
'T3= be diuers ſorts of Sage, twoe{pecially obſerued of the auncients. Thelaterwriters have 
oung more, | % The deſcription. it | 
1 75 HegreatSageis very fullof ſtalks, fower ſquare, of awoodie ſubſtance, parted into bran- 
ches,aboutthe w hich grow broad caues,Jong,wrinckled, rough, whitiſh, very like to the 
| leaues of wilde Mullein, but rougher, and nor ſowhite, like in roughnes ro woollen cloth 
thread bare; the flowers ſtande forked in the tops of thebranches like thoſe of dead Nettle, or of 
Clarie,of a purple blewe colour,inthe place of which groweth little blackiſh ſecede in ſmall husks. 
The roote is hard and woodie, ſending foorth a number of little ſtrings. | | 
2 Thelefler Sage is alſo a ſhrubby plant, ſpred into braunches like ro the former,but leſſer : the 
ſtalks heereof are teriderer : the leaues be long,lefler, narrower, bur notlefle rough ; to which there 
do growe in theplace wherein they are fixed to the ſtalke , two little leaues Rtanding on either {idc 
one right againſt another, ſomewhat after the maner of finnes or little cares, the flowers are ©® 
blewe like thoſe ofthe former :the roote alſo is woodie, both of them are of a certaine ſtrong ſme) 
but.nothing at all offenſiue, and that which is the lefler is the beter, || a this 


PI ——_— © _ - 
* ® + US» 
#4 g "7 4.5 " 6 F\ 
i o 4 . Md a 
oY : —— " 
- 44 
\$ 
o; 4.4. , 
4 . 
z 4 - . 
< . « 
= M o 
*» 4 
_ 
. 


= > py _— 3, 


4 Sluia Alping, 
Mountaine Sage. 


_ id 
=o WH 


MEDI = "TY 
7117) VU ad Ny, 


XRD 
DELSA 


<L 
by 
Qu 
[2H 
© 
ma 
& 
O 
_ 
ON 
4 Þ 


.* 
4 
E 
E 
3 
0 
(ny 


Indian Sage, 


J 2 N | »— 
EL 


= , 2 SH 
SVISR>QNRNR) 


3+Stluir Indica. 


624 THE SECOND| BOOKE OF. THE 


* The ae ſeription. 


2 This Indian Sage hath diuers bravnches of a woodie.ſubſtaunce, whereon do erowe ſina!l 
lcaueslong,rough, &narrowe,of an ouerwworneTolour, & of a'moſt fweet and fragrant finell, The 
flowers grow alongſt the top of the braunches of a white colour, in forme like the precedent. The 
roote is rough and wooddie. z #1 | 
4 Themamaine Sage hathan vpright ſtalke, ſmooth and plaine, wheteupon doegrowe broad. 
rough and rugged leaues,flightly nicked, and yneevenly indented about the <cges, of a hoarie co. 
lour,ſharve pointed,and of a ranke {mel]. The flowers growe alongſt the top of the ſtalke, in ſhape | 
like thoſe of Roſemarie,of apurpliſh colour rending to blewneſle. The roots is likewiſe woodie, 

We haue in our gardens a kinde of Sage,the leaues whereof are reddiſh,parr of thoſe ted leaves: 
are ſtriped with white, other mixed with white , greene andred, euct as nature liſt toplaie with 
ſuch plants. | | '* 

WW c haue elfo another, the lcaues whereof are for the moſt part white , ſomewhat mixed with 
greene,often one leafe white,and another greene,cucn asnature liſt,as we haue faide, | 

© Oy EE 08 * The place. x | 

Theſekinds of Sage do not growe wilde in England,[ haue them allin my garden,moſt of them 


are very COmmon. 


, 


| OR + The tome. 'S 
Theſe Sages flower in Iune and Tuly,or later : they are fitly remoouedand planted in March, 
Et ---3- 3 * The names. 'F | 
Sage is calledin Greeke i>viroaur:the Aporhecaries,the Tralians, andthe Spaniards, keepe the 
Latine name Salxi4: in high Dutch Salben; in French Savge: in loweDurch Sautie; in Engliſh 
Sage. | f | £F& 
" T81 | % 7 he temperature. $1 Be 
Sageis manifeſtly hot and dric in the beginning of the third depree, orin the later ende of the | 
{econde,it hath adioined no little aſtriction or binding. I; | 
Et $% The vertues. | | | 
A Cerippa, and likewiſe THetiae, called itthe Holie herbe, bicauſe women with childe if they be 
like to come before theirtime,& aretroub'ed with abortments doeatethereofto their grey; good; 
for it cloſeth the matcix, and maketh them fruitefull z it retaineth the birth, and giucth it life; 
and the woman abour the fourrh daic of hir going abroade after hit ch:ilding , ſhall drinke nine 
ounces ofthe iuice of Sage with alittle ſalt , and then vſe the compare of hir husbande, ſhe ſhall 
without doubr conceaue andbring foorth ſtore of children, which axe the bleſfing of God: thus 
farre Agripps. | ne | | 
Sage 1s ungtaſ cy for the head and bfaine, quickneth the ſences and memorie,ſtrengrhneth 
" theſinewes,reſtorerh health to thoſe that haue the palſic _ a moiſt cauſe, taketh away ſhaking, 
or trembling ofthe members,and being puryp into the noſtrils,it draweth thinne flegme out of the 
_ head. | pg E--1 by | 
'C lrislikewiſe commendedagainſtthe ſpitting of bloode, the cough, and paines of the ſides, and 
bicingof ſerpents, | EF 4-9 ; þ 
D FThciuice of Sage drunke with honie,is good for thoſe that ſpit and vomite blood,and Roppeth 
the Auxe thereof incontinently;expelleth winde,drierhthe dropſie,helperh the palſicNtrengrhnerh 
the finewes,and purgeth blood. Bj. 5 | 
E Theleauesfoddenin water, with Woodbine leaues, Plaintaine, Roſemarie, honie, allow, and 
ſome white wine ; maketh an exccilent water to wafh the ſecretparts of man or woman, andfor 
cankers orother ſoreneſle in the mouth, eſpecially if you. boile in the ſame a faire bright ſhining 


: 


{eacole,whichmaketh it of greater efficacie. 0 | : W - 

F Nomanneedeth to doubr of the wholeſomneſle of Save ale, being brewed as it ſhoulde be, 
with OT Betonie, Spikenard, Squinanth,and Fennell ſeedes. 1 

G Thelcauesof red Sage putintoa wooden diſh, wherein is put veriequicke coales, with lome 

 _ , athes inthEbortomeof the diſh to keepe the ſame from burning, and alittle vineger ſprinkled vp- 

* ontheleaueslieng vpon the coales & (owrapped in a linnencloth,& holden very hotvnto the fice 

of thoſe that are ttoubled with a gricuous ſtitch, taketh away the paihepreſently: rhe ſame he 

greatly the extremitic of the pleutiſic. FEA 32h. of 


A Þ : F —_ 


- HISTORIE 'OF: PLANTS. "_ 
Of French Sage,or woodie Maullein. Chap.25;. , 


% The deſeription. 


| Ilde Mullein, woodie Mullein, 314- 
\/ \ thiolw his Mullein, or French Sage, 
| groweth vppe like a ſmall woodic 
| ſhrub, hauing manie woodie braunches of awol- 
| lie and hoarte colour, foft & downie;z whezupon 
| areplacedthicke hoarie leaues,of a iftrong pon- 
| ricke ſauour, in ſhape like the leaues of Sage, 
wherupon the vulgar people call ic French Sage: 
. towarde the toppe of the braunches are placed 
| roundels,or crownets, of yellow gaping flowers 
| like thoſe of dead Nettle,burtmuch greater. The 
' roote 15 thicke, tough, and of a woodie ſub- 
ſtance, as is all the reſt of theplan, 
Theres another fort heerof that is very ſweet 
| like the other, ſauing that theleues &enery other 
partof this plant,hath a moſt ſweer and pleafanc 
{mell.and che other more ſtrong and offenſiue, 


T3t4s Fur; op eng 


2 F 


v \) 
2 
d #. 
ky ”» x 
"v A 
[ _. 
4 


& Theplace. | 

Theſe wilde Mulleins d oe wilde indiuers 
| prouinces of Spaine,andalſoin Languedoc, vp- 
on dric banks ks Ear chem both 

' in mygarden,and many erafeeedl "kx 

* Thetine, f 

They flower in June and Iulie, 
The nawes. _ £6 

| Theyarecalledoftheleamed men ofour time, 
Verbaſca ſylueftria 3 the firſt is called of the Gre- 
cians ex*u&, or enlut+: in Latine Elchnium, 
| | or after others Elychintmn; bicaule of the cot- 
| | | tonie ſubſtaunce thereof}, matches, or weekes 
were made to keepe light in lamps :.Yerbaſeuvs Lychniris, as Dioſcorides himlelfe teſtifieth, is named 
alſo Thrjallis, or Roſe Campion; but the lowerof Thryalls isred of colour, as Nicanderin his vers 
ſes ofcounterpoiſons doth ſhewe , burthe flowers 3f theſe are yellowe: therefore they are neither 
Thryalls nor Lychaitis : but SyluefreFerbaſenm, or wilde Mullein, as we haue alteadie taught in the 
chapter of Roſe Campion, that Thryalis Lythnztt ſatius or roſe Campion, There is nothing to 
the contrarie,, but thatthere may be many plants with ſof: downie leaues fit ro make candle weeke 

ef:in Engliſh it is generally called French-Sage,we may call it Sage Mullein. | 

, ' 2 %'Thetemperature. 4 


As theſebe likein vertues to the others going before, ſorhey be likewiſe drie in tempera- 


eure, 4. © + G 
G73 CR eo Fa" ' '*% Thevertues 


Diofeorides ſaith, that the leaues are Ramped and laidein maner of a pukis vpon burnings and A 


. 


: 
2 © 


«a # 


«© 7 « P : < 
b # x - : ) , V ; FT J 
w nt; 


THE SECOND"BOOKE' OF 'THE 
Of Clarie, . (hap. 254- 
OO 00 e Fhekindes, | 
There be diuers kindesof Claric,ſome wilde, others of the garden, as ſhall be declared. 
x Gallericu. © On Gallariumalteran. 


#dj + - 
> 
CA P. N ) 

J.x 


RC * 


pL 


F 


. PA 
S 3p 
/ MN WH 
» _ (72 ' TP 
PIN NES IN) | 
s AY By »- AM” 


J 
nll ® 
> x 


. 2 4 , 


| * T, ve deſcription. | 
I gf He firſt kinde of Clarie which is che right,bringeth foorth thicke ſtalkes fower ſquare,vo 


p 


foote ng pgs into braunches:it hath many leanes growihg both from the roots,and 
along the ſtalkes and braunches by diſtaunces,one againſt another by two and two, -6rms 
a handfull broade or broader, ſomewhat rough, ynequall,whitiſh,and hairie, as be alſo the ſtalks 
- The flowers are like thoſe of Sage, or of Jeaf Nettle, of colour white, our of alight blewe: atrer 
which grow vp long toothed huskes in ſteedof cods, in which is blacke ſeede. 'i he roote is full of 
ſtrings : the whole hezbe yeeldeth foorth a ranke and ſtrong ſmell thar ſtuffeth the head: jt periſh- 
eth atcer the ſecde is tipe,whichis in the ſecond yeere after it is fowen, A TS 
2 Theſeconde kinde of Clarie hath likewiſe ſtalkes fower ſquare, a foote and ahalte high: the 
leaues alſo be rough and rugged, leſſer, and norſowhite. The flowers be alike, of colour purp|c'® 
blewe : therootes beas rhole of the former are. This hath not ſoſtrong a ſent by a great dea&-; 
There isa kind of Clariewhich Fuch/au pitufeth for wild Claric.chachath ſhorter ſtalks,"#" 
alſo and fower ſquare: the leaues lefſer,Jong,deeper indented : the lowers blewe of colour, {weers 
of {mell, but nor fo ſweere as thoſe of the right Clarie: the huskes or cods when they axe Tipe bends 
downwards;the ſecede is blackiſh;the rootes/in like maner are blacke and full of ſtrings ks 
6 3-25 7'Þ ; "DG 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 629 


| 3 The thirde kinde of Hoyminwmn, called Touts 
|  Calwrepreſenteth inthehigheſtrop of the ſtalke 
| | adiſtaffe, wrapped about with yellow flaxe,wher- 
| . ofittooke his name, hanhag hoodia rootes, with 
| | certaineſtrings annexed thereto like Galeopſis, ot 
EY | like vnto therootesof Clarice, which doe yeelde 
VYY -  foorth ſundric fower ſquare rough ſtalkes; rwo 

{> | | cubirs high; whereon do growe leaues like thoſe 

8) t- | of the Nettle, rough, ſharpepointed, andof an 
{IS | | ouerworne greene colour : the flowers do growe 
| | alongſtthetopof the ſtalkes, bycertaine ſpaces, 
| | ſet rounde abour in ſmall coroners, or wharles, 
[| like thoſe of Sage in forme, bur ofa ycllowe C0- 


| {Jours 


* The place, 

| | Theſedogrowewildeinſomeplaces,notwith- 
 Nanding they are manured and plantedin gar- 
| | dens almoſt euery where,exceprlupiters diſtaffe, 
| | being akindethereof, whichT hane in my garden. 
They flower in Ime,July,and Auguſt, 

*% Thenames. | 
| | Clariciscalledofthe aporhecaries,Ga/ztriewm:; 
 itis likewiſe named Oraa/a, of fome Torts bong but 
not properly : of others Scartea, Sclarea, Centrum 
|  Galliand Matriſaluia:inltalian Stieriacin French 

\ | Ormale:in high Dutch Scharlach: in low Durch 
Scharleyet in Engliſh Clarie,or Clecre eje, | | | | 


lupiters diſtaffe,js called Colws /outs,of ſome Galcop ſis Iutea, but not properly,of divers Horminum 
luteemoryellow Clarie, and Horminun Tridentinum,or Claric of Trent, b-F to 
% The temperatare. ; 
Claric is hot anddriein the third degree, | | 
* Thevertues. | 


Theſeede of Clarie udered, finely ſearced and mixed with honie,taketh 
the cies,and cleererh the ſight, | a 


| Theſameſtamped,infuled,or laide to ſteepe in warme water, the muſlilag orflimieſuſtaunce ta- z 
ken and appliedplaiſterwiſe,draweth foorth iplinters of woode, thornes,or anyother thing fixed in 


the bodice : it alſo ſcattereth and diſſolueth all kindes of ſwellings,eſpecially inthe ioints, 


away the dimneſle of 


Theſeede poudered and drunke with wine,ſtitreth vp bodily luſt. | | &-: Fn 
Theleaues of Clarie taken anic maner of waie, helpeth the weaknes of the backe proceeding of xy 


the ouermuch flowing of the whites, but moſt cfteRually if they be fried with egges in manner ofa 
anlie.cither the leaues hole or ſtamped, = | | wh agls 


Of wilde Clarie,or Oculus Chriſti. Chap.255. 


% The deſeription. 
! Culus Chrifts,is alſo akinde of Claric.bue leſier : the ſtalks areman acubite high,ſquared - 1:5 
Q and fomewhar hairie : the leaues be broade, rough, and of a black greene colour, The - | 


flowers growe alongſt the ſtalks, of a blewiſh colour, The ſeede is rounde, and blackiſh, 
terooteis thicke and rough, ith ſome threds annexed thereto. {$85 s 


Rr 3 B: | 2 The 


mY 


6:38 THE SECOND |BOOKE OF THE 
2 The purple Claric hath leaues ſomewhat rounde, laide ouer with a hoare cortonie ſub 
ſtaunce , not much-volike Horchounde : arjong which riſe vp ſmall hairie ſquare Ralkes les [ 
warde the top with lictle leaues of a purple colour, which appeere ar the firſt viewe to be Hey 
andyer are nothing elſe bur Jeaues, rurned-into an excellent purple Eolour : and among the! f 
beautifull leaues come foorth ſmall lowers ofa blewiſh or watched colgur,in faſhionlike vnto the 
flowers ofRoſemarie,which being withered,the huskes wherein they did growe containe crane 
blacke ſeede,whichtallcth foorth vponthe ground very quickly,bicauſe that everyfuch huske doth 
'turne and hange downe his head towarde the grounde, The roote dieth ar theficſt approch of 
wW1Ater, | E! | | 


I 
: 


1 Horminum ſylueftre. bj _ 2 Horminumſylueſtre ljopurpartis,” 
Clariewithpurple 


\\ , \ df 
'FI.4 v: Y & 
YAM 


F 
* Is > WH Ca3F, 
Mm A [LK _ > 
F & £ # _— 4 "a. ' Y iy 
, >. WER... —— . 
£2 PE), 5 © E a. 7” AP Ly 


*S 


: 
—— 
” A 
NM, > 4 oF 
Lv 3Sr7, ad 
F\ = T4, 
, ks 
, \ SR. 
._. ” 


\ & 
an = 
4: 


\ ; 
\ S 


| & The place. i 
The firſt groweth wild in divers barren places moſt in every countrey, eſpecially inthe fields of 
Holburne neere vnto Graies Inne, in the high way by the end of a bricke wall: at the ende of Chel- 
ſey nextto London,in the high way as yougo from the Queenes pallace of Richmond to the wa-' 
ter ſide,and diuers other places. | } | Le 
The other is a ſtrangerin England: it groweth inmy garden, 
% 7 he time. 
They flower and flouriſh from Iune totheende of Auguſt. 
|  *% Thenones. W-- | 
Wilde Clarie is called after the Latine name Oca/us ChriF4, of his effeCt in helping the diſeaſes 
of the ejes,in Greeke 3+wwrey : and likewiſe in Eatine Horminum,of fone Geminalis : in Engliſh wilde 
Clarie,and Ocu/xs ink vg | Tay ; | 
Theſecond is thought of ſome to be the right Clarie, and have called it Horminum vero, but 
with greatererror : itmay be calledin Latine Hormywm /plueſftre foals & | floribus pur puren, Clare 
with leaues and flowers of a purple colour, | Ec tf ”y 
: i * 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. | | '9 
les * The temperaturs and wvertues. þ F- | 2 
The temperature and faculties arereferred'vnto the garden Claries,yet Pals CAEginata faich, A 
is hot and moderately dric,and italfoclenferh, fs bs Genie 

The ſeede of wilde Clarie as D#oſcorrdes writeth being drunke with wine, ſtirreth vp luft, it clen- B 
ſeth the cies from filmes and other wnperfeFions being mixed with honie. | | 

+ The ſcede put whole into theeies ; clenſerh and purgeth chem exceedingly from wateriſh hu- C. 
- mours.cedneſſe, infammation,and divers other maladies,or all that happen vntothe cies , and ta- 
keth away the paine and ſmarting thercof, eſpecially being putinto the cies one ſeedeat onetime, 
and no more,which is a generall medicine in Cheſhire and other countries thereabout, knowne of 
all. and vſed with good ſucceſle, bk | [-' 

The leaues are good to be put into portage and brothes among other potherbes ; for they ſcat- D 
ter congealed bloud,warme the ſtomacke,and helpe the dimnes of the eies, = |. 


Of eMullein. Chap.256 


*% The kindes. : | '® 
T Here be two kindes of Mullein , one white,another blackezof the white there arerwh ſorts, one 
' with broad leaues,and another with narrow leaues: Dioſcorides,and Galen after him have added 
wilde Mulleins,Primroſes, Cowlips, and Roſe Campions,and firſtof the true Mullein, 


” 


I'Ti ;þ [as Barbatune, | 2 T ap ſus Barbat ws flore alt 
Mullein, or Higtaper. ws 6, hte White flowered Mullein. 


EE] AN - LY 


T 
we Ee See ©, 


F He male Mullein or Higtaper , harh broade leaues, very ſoft, whitiſh and downie zin the 
midlt of which riſerh vp a ſtalke,ſtraight, fingle, and the ſame alſo whitiſh all ouer , with a 
| oaric down,and couered with the like leaues,bur _ andlefler,cuen to the top: among 

= E-31 | which, 


. 


x 


£30 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
which,taperwiſe are ſet a multirude of yellowe flowers, conſiſting of five leauesa peece:in the tl 
ces whereof come vplittle round veſſels,in which is conteined veric {mall leede. The rooteis lon 
a finger thicke,blacke withougand full of ſtrings. ute! hob & 
2 Thefemale Mullein hath likewiſe many white woolley leauecs , ſer vypon an hoarie cononje 
ypright ſtalk, of the height of fower or five cubirs ; the top of the ſtalks reſembleth a rorche decked 
with infinite white flowers, whichis thc ſpeciall marke to know it from the male kinde, -beinglike in 
cucric other relpeQ.., | | 
% The place. | 
Theſe plants do otowe of themſelues neere the borders of paſtures, and plowed heldes, of cay- 
fies,and drie ſandy ditch bankes,and in other vncilled places. 'They grow i in great. plentien neere vn- 
. .toalymekill vporrthe endof blacke Heath next to London, as alſoabour the Queens houſe at E]. 
tham.ncere vnto Dartfordin Kent: in the high waics abour Hicgaps: yieere bondon jandin molt 
countries of England that are ofa {andie ſoile, | | 
| *% Thetime. | | 
They arefound with their lower from tuly! to September , and bin foorth their ſeede, the ſe 
conde yeere after * ſeede is ſowen. 
% The Names. | | 
Mullein is called i in \ Greeke eawws,in ſhops Tapſus Barbatma, of dived Candels Regia, Contr 
and La#aria : Deoſcorides, Plinie,and Galen,do call it Yerbeſeum: in Iralian Perbaſeo , an de, 
baſſ : inSpani{h G-rdolobs 7 in high Dutch Uhullkraut : in French Bozi/on : in Engliſh Mullcin, or 
rather Woolen m__—_—_ Jong Woorr, and Bullockes 2 and of ſome Has 
bearde. 
* T he temperature. _ 


__ _  Mullleinisof remperanur dric : the leaues hauc allo a digeſting and Pen qualitie, as Gul 
aftirmerh, b- 


% The wertues, | ] 
Theleaues of Mullin being boiled in water, and laide vpon hard Fllngs, and inflammation 
of thecies,cureth andceaſeth the paine. | 
The roote boiled inred wine and drunke,ſtgpperh the laske and bloudic flixe. | 
The ſame boiled inwarer and drunke, is good for them that are broken and hurt inwardly, , and 


preuaileth much againſt the 01d cough, 


A little fine treacle ſpred vpon a leafe of Mullein, &laide ro the pile} or Hemorrhoides , cured 
the ſame: an ointment alſo made with the leaues thereaf and old hogges greaſe, worketh he ame 
effect, 

E Theleauesworne | ender the feeredaic and hich t, in manner of a ſhoe ſole, or ſocke , bringeth 
downe in yoong maidens theit deſired lickneſſe , being kept vnto their feete with ſome ſockes, or 
otherthing for talling away. 

Fs countrey people ſpecially thoſe huckand men in Kent, doe pine their cattell the habe to 


againſt the c ofthe lungs,bcing an excellent a tooucd medicine for rhe ſame,where 
upon —- $44 call —__ Lon | f _ 


G * Poke and Maſticke ad: ina chafing diſh of coles, and ſer within acloſe ſtool, and 
the fume thereof taken vnderneath, doth perfeAly cure the piles, hemorrboides, andall diſeaſes 


hapning in thoſe lower parts,if alſothere| be at cuery {i < g (which muſt be eilecuerie day) 
alcafcof the hcrbeboundto the place,and there kepr varill th next x an. 

H Therebe ſomewho thinke that this ne being bur caried abourpn oth helpe the falling 
ſicknefle, eſpecially the leaues of that which hath notas yer bore flowers, and that is ga- 
chered when the ſunne is in Virgo, and 7 Nur in Aries, which 7's notwithſtanding is vane 
and ſuperſtitious, | 

I The later Phifitions commende the #7" Wl flowers , bceing ſteepedinoile andferin mar 
bes þ vntill they be waſted into the oile and conſumed awaiCc, to. e a remedie againſt 
piles. 


K Thereport oeth faith Plniethat figges donor 6-20 at all, charge wr inthe, __ " 
13 (19 king Died alſor m 7  þ od | 
o 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 631 


MET , 
£ .< 


. 


IT » . Y - v 44 4 . FRY . , : 
we = , L3 th - . ! 
'# " 4 ; i 
d : ” þ 4 : : 
& p : 14 # : 

F 3 . ; : | 
O ba ee Mullen. AD 275 }» | 
" Oo $ ' 5 : 
; p | . | 

. i : , A $44 ; 
a w 4 ; Ht %l 
* I-44 , Ec : F- | 
| | . 4 *K4 # z As ; 


1 Yerboſeon albums. 


% 


. X The deſcription. | | | | 
1 He Baſe white Mullein hath a thickewoodie roote, from which riſeth vpa ſtiffe and haity 
ſtalke,of the height of fower cubirs , garniſhed with faire grayiſt+leaves like thoſe of Ele- 
cainpane,bur leffer :the flowers growe rounde abourrhe ſtalkes raper or torch faſhion,of 
awhitecolour, with cerraine golden thrumsin he middle: the ſeedefolloweth, ſmall, and of the 

colourofduft, '- 1, Wy TE WY 
2) Blacke Mullein hath long leates not downie at all, Jarge and ſharpe pointed, ofan ouerworne 
blackiſh greene colour, ſomewhat rough,and Reongly fmelling : the flowers grow at the top of the 
Ralks, of a golden yellow colour,withcerraine threds in the middle therof. 1 heroor differcth nor - - 

from the precedent. F.-] | | | | 


3 Candleweeke Mallein hath large, broade,and woollie leaues, like mito thoſe of the common 
Mullein:among whichriſeth vp a ſtalke couered with the like leaues,cuento the braunches wheron | 
the flowers dogrowe, bur leſſer and leſſer by deprees. The ſtalke diuideth it felſe rqward the top in- 
todivers braunches , whereon is ſer round about many yellowe flowers , which oftentimes doe 
yk into white, varying according to the ſoile and climate. The roote is thicke and wood- 
ic, TH ; | L rs 
4 Theſmall candle weeke Mullein differgth litle from the laſt rekearſed , ſauing thatthe whole 
plantofthisis of aberter ſauour wherein eſpecially conſiſterh rhe difference, | 
74 —-" M4 | -| $3 Prins 


— 


as | - THE SECOND \BOOKE"OFiTHE 


3 Verbaſtum Lychnite Mathioli. | 4 Yerbaſcum 'Lychnite minus. 
Can e weeke Mullein. 5 AP ERIN vt all a ndle weeke Mullein, 


Theſe plants do growe bud the other Mulleins do,and inthe like ole 
* The time. | 

The time likewiſe anſwereth their flowring and ſeeding. 
*% The names. 


Their capitall names es expreſſed i in the ticles ſhall ſerue for theſe baſe Mullin, conſidering ae 
are all,and cuery of them kinds of Mulleins. | 


* The « 7 Apgar | | : 
Theſe Mullcins are dry without any manifeſt cat,yct doubtleſle hotter and drierthen the com- 
mon Mul!cinor Hygraper. | 
* The VErtmes. 

A Theblacke Mullein, with his pleaſant yellowe flowers, boiledin water or wine and dronked, is 

good againſt the diſcaſes of the breſt and lungs,and againſt all ſpitting of corrupt rotten matter. 
'B Thelcaucs boiled inwater, ſtamped and applicdpultis wiſe ypon colde fwellings (called Ocde- 

mat) aneallo vpon the vicers and inflammations of the cics, curcth the ſame. . 
C The flowers of blacke Mullein are pur into lie,which cauſerh the baire of the head to waxe yel- 

lowe,if it be waſhed and combed therewith, 


D Thelcaues are put into colde ointments with good ſucceſle, again ſcaldings and burnings 


with fire or water. 
E 


Apwleius reporteth a tale of Vhyſes, Mercapie and the inchauncreſle: Circe andtheir vic of theſe 
herbes intheir i incantations and witchcrafts. | 


o 


HIST ORTE' OE PLANTS. | | 633 
Of eMoth eullein. * Chaprng$0 nn | 


3 5 ; | 4 » 
| | F 4 RIS {0F S. - i vil wo, 
* The kindes. ed SEE = 36 HEE. 


- chere be digers forts of Milleins , &cbaſe Mulleins;ſo is there likewiſe njany ſores orkinds 
Lo 4+ differing eſpeciallyin the colour of their fowets , ofiwhich number you ſhall 
recciue tw or pictures, for the reſt you muſt content your ſehues'with heir deſcriptions,re- 
i  frmes vero farther conſideration, a ſecond editions BN ere | pn _ 


, . - * / Lg 
&: \ & ' 


1 Blattarie Ply. 4 
?linies Moth Mullen, 


a "* 
# 


* Thedeſeription. | 
1 TY Lenie hath ſer foorth a kinde of Blattaria, which hath long and ſmoorh leaues , ſomewhat 
iaggedor ſnipt about the edges: the ſtalke riſeth vp tothe height of three cubits, diniding ir 
[Ro the cop into ſundrie armes or branches, belet with yellowe flowers like vato 


- 
* 


2 Blattariawith purple flowers hath broad blacke leaues, withour any manifeſt ſnips or notches * 
the ſlides, growing flat vpon the ground: among which riſeth vp a ſtalke two cubirs high, garni- 
d with flowers like vnto the common Blattaria, but that they are of a purple colour,and thoſe 
fewe threds or chiues inthe middle , ofa golden colour: the roote is as thicke as a mans thumbe, 
with ſome threds hanging thereat,and itendureth from yeere to yecre. 


, There is anotherkinde like vnto the blacke Mullein, in ſtalkes, rootes, and leaves zand other re- 
pects,ſ auing that his ſmall flowers are of a greene colour. | | 


Thereis another like vnto the laſt before written , ſauing thathis leaues are _ ſodcepely cut 


"out the edges.and that the Gaall flowers have ſome purple mixed with the greenneſle, 


*% The 
. 


—_— 
po 


634 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
| 44 Theplace. 
The firſt ſecond god | fourth grove in my garden :thechixd Ihaue note ſeene. 
' * The time. 
Tocy ripe ane. . vis I 


#7 7 henames. 


not: 40! wn 


 - Cliberning the hs BON rae} 4 ended the Hides of Blatteria, of Moth Mulleins, Ifinde | 
nothing writren oithemyſauing that mothes butterfies,and all maner of fwaller flies ang bats, do | 
reſort vnto the vpn whereſoencr theſe herbes be laide or ſtrowed, ; | 


- " 
A”: 
WV 


« bY 


of Malt he (A) tip Clad 


AEthiopis. 127 | ' 
 AEchiopian Mullin, 'F g | * The aeferiri 


Vilein of Acthjoriabaiiaygrery tes | 
hoarie leaues ſpred vpoythe ground , very 
ſofr and downie ar rather woollic,like vnto 
| | ehdle of Hhgraper,burf: whiter;ſofter,chickerge 
| fuller of woollineſie , which woollis ſolong, that 
' one may withhis fingers pull the ſame from the' 
| Jeaues,cuenas wooll is phlled from afſhecpesskin: 
| among which leanes nieth vppe a fower ſquare 
; downie ſtalke,ſet with thelike leaues, bur ſmaller, 
- which ſtalke js diuided atthetop into other bran- | 
| ches,ſet about andordetly placed by certaine di- 
| ſtaunces , hauing many flowers like thoſe of 
| Archangell,of a white colour tending to blewnes, 
- which being paſt, therefucceedeth rounde blacke 
| ſeed,liketho cot Colewoorts: theroorc Py 
; hard,and of a woodie ſubſtance, 
| *% The place. 
-  Irgroweth naturally j in AErhiopia, andin Ida, 
_ **-ahillhardbyTroie,andin Meſſenia,a ;prouinceof 
BA Morea,as Plimyſheweth in his 27.booke 4.chap- 
IJ - rer:italſo growerh j in Meros, an Ilandin theriver | 
| Nilus, hauingacitie of the ſame name in AEthi- 
| opia,which leth vader Eegyprir likewiſe rome 
/ inmygarden, 
þ % Thttime. 
It Rowrethand fouriſhcrh in Iime,and pate 
oY ' eth his ſeede toward the endof Avgult, 
\ .  % The names. | j 
Itiscalled in Chobe Adoms : :andin Latine AEthnopis , of the counrey in which it orowerh: -a6 
for that cauſe itis likewiſe called Meroides,of CMeroe as Phmie wriiteth: of fomebic aule the Greeke 


worde Aivy, fignifiethin Latine Feuzle aduſts , Or Crmere aſperſe , or cougred with aſhes : in Englith 
* we maycall it Mullcin of AEthiopia,or "7 Mullein, 


+ The 
® 


HISTORIE. OF PLANTS. | 635 


. * The nature. 
+: is drie without 2ny maniteſt heare. 
AEvhiopis 1 *% Thewvertnes. *© 


ood for thoſe that have -& pleuriſie, and for thoſe H WO breſts charged A 
4 at. wk. rotten matter,and for ſuch as are greeued with the aſperirie hex roughnes in the 
puns againſt the Sciatica,ifone drinke the decoftion of che thereof. _ 


ſes ofthe breſt and himgs;it is good to licke of ; of a ior made wich B 
NS heceal and honic,and fo are the ode cndcd with as ſuch maner as they cons 
die theroors of Eringos. | 


Of Clipe. Chap 260. 


& 2 Primuls auf inodora lates. 
; charts MF Field > 


+ The efriptin, | 


Hole herbes which at this day are called Primroſes, C 


Cori i Frye , re ree- 
koned among the kinds of Mullcins , notwithſtanding for | S 
ſhalled them in a chapter , comming in the reerwarde as next 1 


ins,for that the ancients haue named them Yerbeſeali,thar is arp” 

whichis calledin Engliſh the field ConilipJas as common as the reſt ztherefore I ſhall norneedto 
{pend much time about the deſcription. 

2 Theſecondis likewiſe wellknowne by he name of Oxelip, and differerh not from the other, 
ſane that the flowers are not fo thicke thruſt togither as the former, and they are fairerand fewer 
in number,and do nor ſinell ſo pleaſantly as the other 3 of which kinde,we haue one lately come in- 
to ourgardens,whoſe flowers arc curled and wrinckled after a moſt REG Mmancr, whicirour WO- 
"XK have named Lacke an apes —_— 


3 Primnls 


7d 


Double whice Primroſe. 


=. 1 2 
— 1 44% 


—— 
, 


gemnato, 


Collps ewoina hoſe. 


4 Primuls wer is fore 
'6 Primula werts flore 


OOKE OF THE 


ole. 


Q 
£ 
(21 
Gs) 
a” 
" 


5s Primulaverts a Mi] 
Fielde Pri 


3 Primuls hortenſ(is Anzlica. 
Double Paigles. | 


636 


-HISTORITE"OF PLANTS. 
_ | £1499 * The ac (cyivtion. . | | 

, DoublePaigle,/ called of Þ ana, Primula borten/'s Anglica amwninm maxims , & ſerotima foribus 
; 4 chatis', the greateſt Enghhgarden Cowſhp with double yellovvefiowets, 1510 commoniy 

ne;that ieneedethno deſcription. - {© [6 8L ns SR by bk 

The tourth is likewiſe knowne by the name of double Cowſlips , hauing bur one flower wirhin 
another,vhich makerh the ſame once double, where the other is many times Couble, called by P.e- 
uu Geminats, forthe likenefle of the flowers, which are brought foorth as things agaiſtnature, oz 


S. FI | 
The fit being the common white fielde Primroſe needeth no deſcription, | f 
4 - Thefixt which is our garden double Primroſe, of all the relt is of greateſt Heautie,the deſcrip. 
tion whercot I refer vato your owne conlideration. | | | 
The feuenth kinde is alſo veric wellknowen, which isa Primroſe thathath greeniſh lowers 
thatare ſomewhat welted abour the edges: torwhich cauſe Pex hath called it Swarum privzat:, 
fortbw ob ſeure virentibus fombriativ. £52] | 
7 Prumwla flore viriat. == | | | 
Greene Primroſe, ons * The deſcription. | - 
| ' | There isa ſtrange Prunroſe fonnde in a woo 
' in Yorkeſhire, growing wilde, by the trauell and 
4 | | | induſtry of a learned gentleman of Lancaſhire, 
1 | \ called maſter Thomas Hesketh, and a diligent 
ſearcher of Simples, who hath not only broughc 
 rolight this amiable and pleafant kind of Prim- 
| roſe, but many others likewiſe, nener before his 
; time remembred ,or founde out. This kinde of 
: Primroſe hath leaves and rootes like the wilde 
- 4 fielde Primroſe in echoreſpe&; it bringerh forth 
| among the leauesanakeditalke of a grayith or 
' ojerworne greeniſh calour: ac the top whereof 


—_ 


- | no more, like vnto thatfingle one of the fielde ; 
| but inthe ſommer crime it bringeth foorth a ſofe 
 ruſlethuske orhoſe, wherin ate conteined many 
' ſmal lowers,ſor.ctimes tower or fiue, and often- 
; times more ,, very thicke thruſt rogither , which 


| it is one'double flower made of a number of 
ſmal ſingle flowers, never ceaſſing to beare flo- 
 wers winter not ſomimer,as before is ſpecified. 
| *& 7 he vlace, | 

Cowſlips and Primrofes ioiz in moiſt and 
 dankiſh places, bur not alcogither couered with 
' water; they are found jn woods and the burders 
officlds: the Primroſe found by maſter Hesketh, groweth.in a woode called Clapdale, thice miles 

from arowne in Yorkeſhire called Sertle, TY / of rega | 


* T he.time. | 
They flouriſh from Aprill to the end of May,and ſome one or other of them do flower all the win- 
* \ * The names. | | 


They arecommonly called Primule werubicauſe they are the firſt among thoſeplantsthat co flo- 
rerin the ſpring,or bicauſe they flower with the fir(t. They are alſo name! AHrthrerice and Herbe 
Paralyis, for they are thought to be good againſt the paines of the joints and {inewes zthey are cal- 
ledin Italian Bracke Cucnl; :in Englſh pettie Mulleins,or Palfic woorts,of molt Cowſlivs. 
*Negreater ſortcalled for the moſt part Oxeſlips and Paigles,arc named of divers Herbe S Pe- 
3ri*mEngliſh Oxefſlip and Paige. [| | | | | 

common Primeoſe is vſua!ly called Primyls veris , moſt Herbariſts do refer the Primroſes 

| ro 


a 


637 


doth growe in the winter time one flower and 


| maketh one entire flower, {ceming tobe one of | 
the common double Pamroſes, wheteas indeed - 


appa——_— —C__—_ 


Err —_— es ts 


638 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


to the owe, called in Latin Yer beſexla,or pettic Mulleins;but ſeeing the leaues are neither woollie 


nor rounde , they be hardly drawne vnto them for Phlomides are Geſerihant by Teath as'Pling | 


hath interpreted it, Hirſaris and Rotwedis hairic and round, which Plinje in his 25.booke: 10, 
tranſlaterh thus ; Sant & Phlomides due Hir ſut e, rotundis PR which is as much to-ſajein 


A 


B 


D 
E 


Engliſh,as there be alſo two petri Mulleins, hairie,rounde 


Jowe,or ſhort, - 
E + The remperature. " [4:46 Aid 
The Cowllips and Pruntoſes are in temperatpre dric,anda littleornothinghor, +++, 
a | f wI% | ons of al | 4; 
The Cowlſlips are commended againſt the paine of the ioints, called the gotit;8flacknes&f 
Curved eukichis the pallie.) The decoQion of the rootsis thought to be profirablie given 5. 
the ſtone. in the kidncies and bladder: and the inice of the leaues for members that are looſe and 
out of ioint,or inward parts that are hurr,rent,or broken. | bt 21 || 

Adram & a halfe of the powderof the dried roots of field Primroſegathered in Autumne,giuven 
to drinke in ale or wine,purgeth by vomute very forcibly, (but ſafely)waterith humours, cholerand 
fiegme,in ſuch maner as_Azarwm doth , experimented by alearned and skilfull Apothecaiic of 
Gvlcheſter,maſter Thomas Buckſtene,and ſingular in the knowledge of ſimples. 

A conferuemade with the flowers of Cowllips and ſugar, preuailech woonderfully againſt the 
palſie, conuulfions,cramps,andall the diſeaſes of the finewes. | 


« 


Cow(ſlips or Paigles do greatly reſtraine and ſtop the bellie in the time of a greatlaske or bloy. 
dic dixe.ife the decoQtion thereof be drunke warme. | 

ApraGtitioner in London, who was famous for curing the frenfie, afterthar he had perf0rmed 
his cure by the duc obſcruation of Philicke, accuſtomed cuery yeere inthe moneth of May to die | 
his patients after this ſort .R,Theleaucs & flowers of Primrofe,boile them a lictlein fountainewz. | 
ter, and in ſore Roſe & Betonie waters,adding thereto ſugar , pepper, ſalt,and burter which being 
ſtrained,he gaue them to drinke thereof firſt andlaſt, 4 1 | 

The rootes of Primroſe ſtamped and ſtrained, and the iuice ſniffed intothe noſe with aquill,or | 
ſuch hke,purgeth the braine,andqualifierh the paine of the migrime, | | 


G Any t made with the iuice of Cowllips, and oile of Linſeede, curerh all ſcaldingsorbur. | 


- flowersare ofa whitiſhcolour, 


nings with fire, water of otherwiſe. | EFF of | 
The flowers of Primtoſes ſodden in vineger,and applicd,do heale the kings cuil,healeth alſo the 
almonds of the throte and vuula, if you gargariſe the partie with the decottion thereof. — 

The leaues and flowersof Primrofes boiled in wine and drunke , is goodagainſ all diſeaſes of 


the breſt andlungs,and dtawerh foorth of the fleſh any thorne or {plinter;or bone fixed therein, 


Of Birds eine. Chap.261. 


*The deſeription. 


x (© Ome Herbariſts call this plant by thename of Suniculs anguſtifolia, making thereof two | 
kinds,and diſtinguiſhing them by theſe termes, muator, 8 minor, /aie media : others callthem | 
| Paralytica alping, which without contrauerfie are kindes of Cowllips, ren Mr 
aſivell in ſhape as in their natureand vertues, hauing leaues much like vnto Cowflips bur ſmaller, | 
growing flat vpon the grounde,of a faint greeniſhcolour , on the vpperſide and vnderneath of a 
white or mealic colour:among which riſe vp ſmall and tender ſtalks of a foote high , hauingar the | 
top ot cuerie ſtalke a buſh of ſmall flowers, in ſhape like the common Oxelip, faving thatthey are | 
of a faire ſtammell colour tending to purple: iniihe middle of cuery ſmall flower appeereth a !i 
yellowe ſpor, KATY Na cie ofa bird, which hath mooued the people'of the north WHere | 
itaboundeth)to call it Birds cine. The ſeeds is ſmall like duſt and the roote white and chreddie. = 
2 Theſecondis like the firſt fauing that the whole plant is greater,in eche reſpeR, andhat the | 


r Prins | 


HISTORIE” OF' PLANT $. il. 


——— 


3 = k 4 
" - / 
ee AY 
Md = gy k 1 
A . -. ” ; 
» % —_— j 


*The place. | 


Theſe plants do lentifully in moiſt and ſquallic grounds,in thenorth parts of Eng- 
land;as in Haas nomcrs Blackburre in 6 mar 4 and ten miles from Preſton in dar. 4 
nelle alſo at Crosbie, Rauenſwaith,and Cragge cloſcin Weſtmerland, | 

They likewiſe growe in the medowes belongingtoa village in Lancaſhire neere Maudfley cal- 
led Harwood,and at Hesketh nor farre from thence,and many othec places of Lancaſhire, but not. 
on this ſide Trent that I covlde ever haue any certaine knowledge of ; L'Obelimcreporteth that 
Door Penne (a famous Phiſition of our London Colledge) did finde them in theſe Southerne . 


. 
E 


They flowerandHouriſh from Aprill tothe end of May. padked <4 


- Thefirſtis called Primroſe with the redde flower : the ſecond Primroſe with the white flower d. | 


* Vltivarue) <0 | * The nature andvertue oo [take | 
own; 7*andverrues of theſe redand white Primroſes , iſt be ſought out amongſt thoſe 


: 
4 F = 


: | 

þ - My # od $5 3% 
; ” - X » 4 4 $4 
b - 


| 
4 
4 48+ 
: 
: 


Of 


THE SECON D: BOOKE: QF. THE 


Of Beares eares,or mountaine Conſlips.. .(b, 


' %The kindes. 


'F” Here be divers ers ifouteaine Confliphr Beares cares, di 

of their flowers, as ſhall be declared , norwithſtanding it may appe 
there is great difference in the rootes alfo, conlidering ſome of them ha; 
others threddic : norvithſtanding there isno difpencei in their rootes at all 


1. Auricula Y rſh, fore Iuteo. | | | 2 "Auricul: Pf fore Purpures, 
Yellow Bcares & carc. SRI Purple Beares care. 


: 

F ay /v Dd a 
AINEET 4 
DR 7 5 2 
% , * a | ” ! 


I 


\ Pricala Pr pw called of Fe ns 64 and I | 
fon of 4: war facultic in healing of meadoeabs | 
 callit Parahtica,bicauſe ofhis vertues in curingthe marian ps,and conuulſions,and | 
is numbred among the kinds of Cowllips, whergof no.doube theyare kinds $,As _ are which do | 
heercafter followe vnder the ſame title, alchou 1there be ſome d4 n.the-colc 
wers. This beautifull and braue wy mr hath thick 
«e thole of « 


open,and conſiſting oo one. onchy lag 

Oxelip. - Af 
2 Theleaves of this kinds which blaredh BIG LE flowers , are not b much file | 
edges : thele ſaidc purple flowers haue alſo ſome yellowneſle in the middle, butthe flowers 8 
at ſo much laid open as the hn HI in all ccſpeas they aic like, , Fo 1 | 


\ 1 "HISTORIE| OF. PLANTS. || 
vs 4 <Avieule Pf wg Cloſe 
PYA | 


a 


” 2 | *Thedeſeription. 


Carolus Cluſtasſerteth foorth in the booke of his Pannonicke trauels two kinds more,which he 
bath founde in his trauell ouer the Alpes,and other mounraines of Germanie and Helueria, bein g 
the third in number,accotding to my computation: it hath leaues like the former,but longer;lrrtal- 
' ker and narrower toward the bottome, greene aboue,and of a pale colour vndernearth. The Lowers 
arein faſhion like vnto the former, but of a moſt ſhining red colour withinzand on the outſice, of 
the colour of a Mulbericzin the middle or cic of the flower, it is of awhitiſhorpale colour: the 
rooteis like the former. | £2] + | | ; | 
4 Thefourthis a ſmaller plant then any of the foreſaid, whoſe leaues arethicke and fat, nothin” 
atall ſnipr about the edges,grecne aboue,and grayiſh vnderneath ; rhc Cowers are like the forine:, 
ſhining about the edges,of an onerworne colour toward the middle, and inthe middle commeti: 
atorke couered with an hairineſſe:the roote is blacke and threddie, | 
5 Thebluſhcoloured Beares care hath diets thicke, fat, leaues,fpred vpon the grovnde, of a 
whitiſh greene colour,fleightly indented in the edges :among which'iſeth vp anaked ſtalke , like- 
wie hairic or whitiſh,on the top whereof ſtande very faire flowers , in ſhape like thoſe of the cor 
mon Cowſlip,bur of a whitiſh colour tending to purple, which weterme bluſhcolour. The roo is 
ox reddiegas arcall the reſt, alrhough the graver hate onutred them in che cutting of 
thefigure, ie muſt be vnderſtoode,that their rootes arc all alike, | 
6  Thebrightſhiningred Beares eare of Marhiolees deſcription, ſeemeth to Jate Herbariſts ro be 
rather aSgure made by conceit or imaginatian,then. bythe fight of the plant it ſe!fe, for doibrletle 
we are periwaded that there is no luch plant; bug only a figure foilted for oſtentarions ſake, the de- 
{cription whereof we leaueto a furcher conſidetationn;/bigauſe we haue nor{cene any ſuckplanr, 
neitherdowe belecuethiereis any ſuch, >: + 151 17 ES SCE IG RG 
F $i r 5 CAuriculp 


642 THE SECOND! BOOKETOF' /THE 
5 MericweV rf erubeſtens, [ | 


mn 


# 3 


- 
# 


2; 


i 
a 
| | 
© I 
I 


* 2 ; 
b ” 7 F ' 
; Po 
$4 wm 
Ma L 
: 


ms 


jr 


__ 


—_— 


fan 


IND 


A - 


7 AnriculaVrſjmmims. | | S « AuiculePr minima fore ninee. 


Stamell Beares care. oy Little white Beares cate. 


os HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 
© 1.0165 nexr the grotindſomewhat ſhorter bur of the ſame forme;among whi 
low "ore ſtalk of aninebe long, whereon doth ande a finall lower , confi 
| Jeaues,ofabrightredorftammell colour. || Sd dies : veNRt | 
Ee e® white Beates eare differeth nor from the laſt deſcribed but in the colour of the flower, 
' for as che others arered,comrary theſe are. very white , and thewhole pl: is leſſer; wherein con- 

clerh the difference. Theroote is long,tough, with ſorne fibres hetero belonging, neither of theſe | 
mo laſt wiitten of will be conretit to growe in gardens. | 

% The place. | 

They grow naturally vpon the Alpiſh, and Heluetian mountaines,moſt of them do grow in our 

Landon gardcns. w.. Bj | | 
*% The time. 


Theſe herbes do flowerin Aprill and Maie. 
| * The names. | | | 

Either the auncient writers knewe not theſe plants, or elſe the names of them were not by them 
or theirſueceſſors diligently ce . & i*r 2d vnto poſteritie 3 Mathiolwsand other later writers, haue gi- 
ven names according to the mils, or of the ſhape that they beare, vnto other plants accor- 
dingto the likeneſle of the qualities and operations: you may callitin iſh Beates care: they 
thar dwell abour the Alpes do callic Dyaſtkrawt, and Schwindlekrawt, by reaſon of the effects - 
thereof for the roote is among them in greatrequeſt, for the ſtrengthning the head, that when 
they are on the tops of places thatare high,giddines, and the ſwimming of the braine may nor af- 
git them : iris there called the rocke role, for that it groweth vpon the rocks , and reſembleth the 
braue colour of the roſe, | 


3 


* The nature, 
Theſe herbes are drie and verie aſtringent. | | 
| | * Thevertues. 
Ithealeth all outward andinward wounds of the breſt,and the enterocele alfo,if for ſome reaſo- A 
nable ſpace of time it be purin drinkes,or boiled by ir ſelfe. | | | 
Theſe plants are of the nature and temperature of Primals veri, and are reckoned among the g 
Sanicles,by reaſon of their vertue. | | is 
Thoſe that hunt in the Alpes & high mountaines after Goats and Robucks, do as highly cſteeme © 
heeteof as of Doromenm,by reaſon of the fin g- effects thatit hath, bur(as I ſaid before) one eſpe- 
cially,cuen in that it preuenterh the loſle of their beſt ioinrs (I meane their necks) if they take the 
roots heerof before they aſcend the rocks,or other high places. | | 


Of mountaine Sanicle. Chap.263. 


*T. he kindes. 


* Here be ſundrie ſorts of herbs conteined vnider the name of Sanicle, and yet not one of them 
agreeing with our Sanicle,called Dzepex/ie, in any one reſpeR,exceptin the vertues , whereof 
no doubr they tooke that name, which number doch daily increaſe by reaſon that the later writers 
have put dowrie mote newplants,not written of before by the aunicients, which ſhall 'be diſtingui- 
ſhedin this chaptetbyſeuerall titles, | we 5/446 Bac (44 


r jm hath ſmallfarand roundeleaves, — about 
J the edges ,and faſhioned like vnto the leaues of Saxifragia aures, orrather Cytlamer folio 
 hitders;of adarke colour ;; and foimewhathairic vnderneath, am ich riſe-vay. 

ſundrie ſtalkes, beſet with like leaues ,; bu , andof acubire high, dividing ves into. 

mrony ical] armes or braunches, bearing dinerslittle'white flowers ; ſported moſt curiouſly with 

'oodie ſpecks, orpricks, inſoruct: tharif you-marke 'the admirable workmanſhip of the ſame 

weoufhn fuch glorious manner , itrmuſt necdes ppaacuqmnia minde of his creator : the 
| ws as 2 | : Hfiowers 


xY:; 


644 THE- SECOND: BOOKE OF.THE 


= 


hath ſundric ſn: 


>; 


1, 0 wu Thedefeription. Li--, Sl 

3 Thethirdekinde ofmountaine Sanicle, Ce Ti tours haue called Sanjcule elpina fore rubre; | 
the leaucs ſhoore foorth in the beginning of the ſpring , very thicke and: and are like a purſe or | 
rounde lumpe.at their firſt comming our of the ground 3 and when itis {pr abroad,the vpperpart | 
thereof is full of vaines or ſinewes, and houen vp or curled like Rananculas Luſitanicus, Of ® ui | 
crumpling of a cabbage leafe, and are notonely indented about the edges, bur eche leateis nk] 
ded 5. my Axes as tagges ot cuts, deepelyhackt , greeniſh aboue, and of an ouerworne a | 
colour vnderneath hot in raſte :from chemidile hereofſhooteth _ ha bar or naked ſtake, "we 
incheslong,ſomewharpurplcin cojour, bearing at the ropatufrot hollow flowers, looking gy | 
1 hanging downeards like hatle bels; norwntdebinformeto thecommon Cowfli s,burofaine xs 
red colour tending to purple, having in the middle a certainering orcirceof white, 
Pointelsor ſtrings, hich turneintoan head wherein is cont: ſcede. The whole 
(as it were) with arough woollineſle: the roote's fibrous and lueddie, = | 

3; 3 OISST3REETS 0 SEE LTHUTE 2, - 


T , [us 

» ft © ; 
2. be p wp _ <—_ : 

. oY : : ; #5 *'q » : 

PUT! Sf tv : 

y ; 3 % 


Fi 4a%s : 


yg -* - 


| HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. #*G 
_ .,_ ere is another-figure ſer foorth which may ſeemevnto the ignorantro be one of the ſame 
«1p There 1s in oepoinoheres incl hey aeuroneandhellne lanit;6ne of 

kinde,por td willingly hane leftfoorth f our volume , bur fearing that ſome nor knowing 
a rye uy m EL mewnk hae 


_ 


iy 


tarrhey be one why we left it out; burhencefoorth I doubt not ur thi . 
ſhall ſaccedewi leauc ir outasneedeleſle, contidetng Re EITHA LO 
byadrieand withered plant,andrhe otherby the liuely b irſelfe, Pre. no 
= hd ina Cluſ#,ſme Cortu a Mathioh. ad 4 Corruſe verior Icon. ITY 

; gx ane. man y/ ya : Bu Beares care Sanicle the true figure. 


. 
\* : 
; % F PLS As,” 
o 074 
' 5, » 4, 4 
AMAL 
% N i? " T 
if WT <> C 
6 a * 47 : 


Y ” 


% j > 


| | % Theplice. 2 TE 

Theſeplants are ſtrangers in England,their aupal countrie is the alpiſh mountaines of Helue- 
tia. They growe in my garden, where they flouriſh exccedingly, extepr Bntrerwoore which grd- 
wethin our Engliſh ſqually wer grounds, and will not yeelde toany culturing or tranſplanting : it 
groweth eſpecially in a field called Cragge cloſe, andat Crosbie, Rauenſwaithin Weſtmerland, 
ypan wh. rough fels, twelue miles from Lancaſter, andin Harwoode in the ſame countie neete 
tBlackburne, ten miles from Preſton in Anderneſle vpon the bogs & mariſh grounds, andinthe 
boggie medowes abour Biſhops Hatfielde ; and alſo in the fens, in the waie to Wirtles mearefrom 

jin Huntingdonſhire,” "1 | 

| * The time. 
* They flower and flouriſh from Maie to the ende of Tulie, HENLEY 
ry *% The names. hs. bl. 
- Thefirſt is called Seniculs garts24; taken fromthe ſpots wherewith theflowers are marked , of 
L'Obeliny Geum Alpinam, makingit akinde of Auens :in Engliſh ſpotted Sanicle; of our London 


Eames pratling Parnell. | ins | | 
enes or fulnes ofthe leafe , or of farning , in Yorkſhire | 6 


= 


© Theſecond is called Pineniculs, of thefa 

where it doth eſpecially growe,, and in greateſt abundance, it is called Butrerwoorts, Butter 

TOote, and white roote, bur that name belongeth more properly = Salomons ſeal. . 
| 5 3 *T 


546 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
me} - | | Thetenperaiare. "a 

, -Theyare hotand dricin the third degree, * 

The husbandmens wiucs of Y DEE dw onto thedugrof die | 
_ The husbandmens wiucs orkthire,do vie troannoint cirkine with thefar ang. 
oilous iuice of the herbe Butterwoort,when they are bitten with any venemous worm | 
 rifted,and hurtby any other meanes., v4 ' p | FWOE cet, 
B Fu lo hain doth rot their ſheepe,whenthey are for want of other food conſtrained toieue 


vi » 


| Of Foxe gloues.  Chap.264. | 


1 Digital pur pares.. 
Purple Fox el S, 


4 


"SY | | E- it | | 

x JF Oxe | ey with the purple flower,is moſt commonzthe leaues whereof are es 4 | 

| | Prom ,of 2 light greene,in mannerlike thoſe of Mullein, bur leſſer, and notiodownie: | 

theſtalke is ſtraight, from the middlewhercof to the top ſtandethe flowers , ſerin courle | 

one by another ypon one fide of the ſtalke, hanging downwardes withthe bottome vpwarde , it | 

forme long, like almoſt to finger ſtals, whereof it rooke his name Dzgite/s, of a red purple colour, | 

with certaine wife ſpots dafhc within the flower,after which come vp round heads, in which lierh | 

, the ſeed. forwhar browne,and as ſmall as thoſe of Time, The roots are many ſlender firings. © *, 

| 2 ThatFoxeglones with white flowers differcth not from the precedent, bur in the colourof | 

the fowers,for as the others were purple,theſecontrariwile are of a milkewhite colour. | | 

We haue in our gardens another ſort heereof, which bringeth foorth moſt plealant yellow flo- | 
wers,and ſomewhar leſſer then the common kinde,whercin chey differ, "5a 


& : 
- 
b no 
y : 
af 
: % 
{® 


"y 


l 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 6p 
' Wehauealfo another ſort, which we call Digir:/s ftrragines , whoſe flowers are of the colour 
of tuſtic iron « whereof it rooke his name; and likewiſe makerh the difference, 
l | | % "_ Pace. R —_ X 
A lone groweth in barren ſandie grounds and vnderhedges a enery where. 
« ith white flowers do grow naturally in Landeſdale; and Crauen, inafield called Crapge 
cloſe in thenorth of England: likewiſe by Colcheſter in Eſſex ; neere Exceſter in theweſt parts, 
| andinſome fewe other places. The other two are ſtrangers in England,neuerthelefle they do grow 


z 


the others in my garden. * The time, 
_— flower and flouriſh in Tune and Iuly. | | 
| * The panes. 


Foxe gloues ſome call in Greek Yvwar,& make it tobe Verbaſci ſperiem, or kind of Mulle in:in 
Latine Dig/t4/6:4n high Durch Ftngherhut, and Fingher kraut ; in lowe Dutch, Unger hoet ; 
French Ganteswoſtre dane : in Englith Foxe gloues. E232. |; 

8 The temiperature. + 

The Foxe gloues in thar they are bitter,are hortand drie,with a certaine kinde of clenſing quality 
joined therewirh,$etare they of no vie,neither haue they any place among medicines,acccrding to 
the auncients, | | | | 


v* The wertues. 
* Foxe glove boiled inwater or wine, and drunken,doth cut and conſumethe thicke roughneſle of A 
fle and {limie flegme and naughtic humours 3 itopeneth alſo the ſtopping of the liver, ſpleene, 
and milt,andof other inward parts. EY | 
Theſame taken in like maner, or boiled with honied water or ſugar , doth ſcoute and clenſe the B 
breſt,ripeneth andbringeth foorch rough and clammic flegme, ms 
They ſerue for the fame purpoſes whereunto Gentian doth tende, and hath beene vſed in ſteade C 
thereof,as Galen ſaith, | E537 | 


Of Bacchartis out of Dioſcorides. (hap.265. 
Baccharis Monſpelienſium. þ+-4 | 

Plowmans Spiknard. |S] % The deſeription. | | 

| ' A Bourthis plant Bacchars, there hath beene 
great contention among the old andnewe 
| © writers; Mathioln54and Dodonews hane milf 
taken this plant, for Con;z4 mazor, or Coniza Hele- 
nitis Cord; ;, Virgil and CaAthenemiaue confoun- 
ded Baccharis,and © Arjizarum togither : but follo- 
wing the auncient writers , ithath many blackiſh 
rough leaues,lomewhat bigger thenthe leaues of 
Primroſe:among which riſeth yp a ſtalk twocubits 
high, _— at the top little chafhe or ſcalie flo- 
wers in ſmall bunches , of a darke purple colour, 
which turne into downe,andare caried away with 
.the winde,like vnto the kinds of Thiſtles: the root 
is thicke, groſle, andfar, ſpreading aboutin rhe 
.carth, full of ſtrings : the fragrant ſmellthat the 
.roote of this plantyceldeth, may well be compa- 
| » 4D IP, So red vntothe fauourof Cinnamom, Helenmm, or 
TL NN LO Enula Campana, bcing a plant knowne vnto ve- 
Fm NON M2 rieman {t ſorts of people : I meane in moſt 

PA UNE AV IP - X pony y or moit torts Or PEOp a 


\ W J 


S | p * "-b : : — 
Weds ME /C68 F parts of England, 
$A i } - v.. - - = \ > ſ —_D | | | | 
4 LO Hf .. S k. ' : 


© 
| *& Theplace. * Y 
| Baccharsde;igiteth ro growe inrough &crag. 

; Bi&places, andinaleane foile where nomoiſture 

* Is :1t growerh very plentifully, abour Montpellier 
in France, aud diucrs places in the Velt parts of 
England, S! 4 *% The 
FE F 


GE, 


643 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 


| % Thetime. 
Ir ſpringeth vp in Aprillje flowrethin Iune,and perfeRerh his ſeede i in Augult 
|  *% Thenames, | 
The learned Herbariſts of Montpellier, hauecalled this plant Recehadbthe Grzcians 64,00 
| atterothers muraces, 7 reaſon of that ſweere andaromaticall ſauour which his rooteconretines = 
and yecldeth : in itmay becalled the Cinamom roote,or Plowmans Spiknarde : y;rgyfy 
hisſeuenth ecloge othis Bucolicks, maketh mention of Buccharis, and dothnor onely ſhew that; 
is a garland Pn alſo ſuch a one as provailych againſt inchantments Hying 


——— beceberd frontem f 
Cingite,ne vat: noceat mala lingua futuro. 
Decke the forchead of the Prophet with plowmans Spkndid 
To keepe him from anill toongthar hurtes withourregard, | 
= Facehars is likewiſe an-oinmen tin Atheneus, in his 15.booke, which may take his uame alt | 
ſweete herbe Bucchavris: for as Plinie writeth,t Ariſftophanes of olde,being an ancient comical! pott, | 
witznefieth,that ointments were woont to be mace of the roote thereof: to ins briefe, Cratenes his 
Aſarwn;is the ſame that oa wo his Bucchar# is. Wo” | 


4) The temperature.” 
Baccharis or Ptowmans Spiknard isoftemperature very aſtringent orbindin. 
% The vertues. 

A  Baccharisor the decoftionoftherootc a5 Paulus AEgineta briefly ſerreth downe, doth open a | 
pipes and paſſages thatare ſtopped,prouoketh/vrine,and bringeth downethe deſired lickneſſe: the | 
leaues thereof for that they are aſtringent or binding, ſtop the courſe of fluxes and rheumes, | + 

Be - Baccharisis afingular remedie to heale inflammations and Saint Anthonies fire, called Jgmb fa. | 
cer.and rhe {mell thereof proucketh fleepe, | 

G Thedecoftion ofthe roors of Baccharss,helperh ruptures & conumllionk;hole alſo them fal- | 
len froman highplace and thoſe tharare troubled with the ſhortnes of breath, | 

D  Ithelperhalfo the old cough, and difficultie to make warer. | 

E- Whenirtis boiledin wine, itis giueri with great profite againſt the birings of ſcorpions,or anie 
veriemous beaſt, being implaiſtered and applied thereto. | | 

F Abathmadethereof,andpurt.into aclole ſtocle , and receiued hot, mightily voideththe bir, | 
and furthereth thoſe that bauc extreme labourin their childing,cauſng | $99 ro hauc calie deliue- | 
Trance, | 


by i \ of 


Of Elecampane. Chap.266. 


%*T, fea 


Lecampanebringeth foorth oft 3M the roote great white tees ,ſharpe pointed, al- 
molt like thoſe © preat/Comfrey,but ſoft,and couered with a hairie down, of a whitiſh green 

J colour,and are more white vnderneath,ſlightly nicked inthe edges : the Ralke i isa yarde and | 
a halfe long, aboue a finger thicke,nor without e,diuided at the top into diuers branches, vF | 
on the top of cuery ſprig {tande great flowers broad &round , of whietince onely the! | 

| leanes that compaſſe rqund abou are yellow, bur alſothe middle ball ot circle , whichis filled w 
with an infinirenumber of rhreds , &ar length is turnedinto finedownezvnder which is flender& 
long ſeed:the roote is vneeuen, thicke,andas much as a man may pe,norlong, often 
kiſh withour hire within and fullof{ ceſweere of — oftaſte. 


_ ; 


Helenium | 


: HISTORTE"OF PUANTS. ||” pp 


' | | *&Theplece. | | 
{It groweth in med-+esthatare far and fruitfulls 
' it is alſo oftentim<-ounde vpon mountaines,ſha- = 
 dowieplaces,thart be notaltogither dry:ir | 
plenrifullyinthe fieldes on the left hande as you go 
from Dunſtable ro Puddle hill: alfo in an orcharde 
as yee go from Colbrook to Ditton ferriegwhich is 
the way to Windfore, and in fundrie other places, 
as at Lidde, and Folkeſtone, neere to Douer by the 
ſea fide, : | | 
Ss % The time. 
| Theflowers are in their braverie in Iune and Iu- 
> lie: theroores begathered in Aurumne, and often- 
'times in Aprill and Maie. | | 
k-1 *%* The names, © 

 Thatwhich the Grecians name ixirey, the La- 
tines call wa, and Enula: in fhops Entacunpan: 
in high Durch Alantwurtz } in lowe Dutch 4- 
1ande woztele t in lralian Exos, and Exola: in Spa- 
'niſh Raz del alla: in French Exalas Ca :inEn- 
'gliſh Elecampane,and Scabwoort,andhorſcheale: 
} an report that this plant rook the name Heleni- 
wn of Helena, wife to Menelams, who had hir hands 
full of it when Pariſtole hir awaic into Phrygia. 
| 3% The temperature. + 
| The roote of this Elecampane, is maruellous 

; | IJ good for many things,being of naturehot and drie 
Wl .1nthethird degree,eſpecially when iris drie: for be+ 
ing greene and as yet full of juice, it is full of ſuperfluous moiſture , which ſomewharabaterh the 
hot and dry qualitic thereof. F---. | | ; 
* The vertues. | 


Itis good for ſhortnes of breath,and an old cough, and for ſuch as cannot breath vnleſle they a 
hold their necks vpright. | 

Iris of great vertue both giuen in a looch,which is a medicine to be licked on, & likewiſe preſer- g 
ved.as alſo otherwiſe giuen to purge and voide out thicke, tough, and clammic humours , which 
ſticke in the cheſt and lungs. Sms 0 pe? 

The roote preſerued is good and holſome for the ſtomacke: being taken after ſupper it doth not 
onely helpe digeſtion, bur alſo keepeth the belly ſoluble, ; 

The ice of the ſame boiled ,driueth foorth all kinde of wormes oithe bellie,as P {inte teacherth; D 
"_ alſo writerh in his twentie booke and fift chapter, the ſame being chewed faſting, doth faſten 
theteeth, * "IA 

Theroot of Elecampanc is with good ſucceſſe mixed with counterpoiſons:itis a remedy againſt g 
thebitings of ſerpents : itrefiſteth poiſon: it is good for them that are burſten, and troubled with « 
cramps and conuulfions, = Ho | 

- Some alſo affirme, that the decoftion thereof, and likewiſe the fame beaten intopowder and F 
mixedwith honie in maner of an ointment,dothclenſe and heale vp old vicers. |] 
- Galenſaith,that heerwith the parts are tobe madered, which be vexed with long & cold greefes: G 
3 are divers paſſions ofthe hucklebones ,calledthe Sciatica, and lictle andcontinuall bunnies and 


looſenes of cerraine ioinrs,by reaſon of ouermuch moiſture. — | = 

* ThedecoQtion of Enula ken prouoketh vrinc , and is good for them that are grieued with H 

_ ——_— haue any member our of ioint, was a + | _ 4 
-Lerootraken with hony or ſugar,made in anicleuary,clenſeth the breſt,ripenerh tough flegm, 

and maketh neaketobeſper foorth, and preuaileth mightily againſt the cough and ſhortnefle, of "cut 
breath,comforteththe ſtomacke alſo,and helpeth digeſtion. | Th 
wel: ws | ” Wi 


A 


650 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
. *& Therootescondited after the maner of Eringos,ſeruerh for the purpoſes aforeſaide. | 
' 1, Therooteof Enula boiled very ſoft,and mixed in a morter with treſh butter, and the powder of 

'  Ginger,maketh an excellent ointment againſt the ircche,ſcabs,mangineſle And ſuch like, | | 


The rootes are to be gathered inthe end of September, and kept for kundrie vies, buritis eſpeci. | 
ally preſerued by rhoſe that make ſuccade and ſuch like, ' | 


Of Sauce alone,or Fack by the hedge. (hap. 267. 


 Alliaria. = N The 
_ = | F508 i Auce alone isioined with Garlickinname 
Df: OED, | Wal. norbicauſc it is like ynto it in forme, burjy 
MON eg [n/a | © ſmell: forifitbebruſed or ſtamped,ir ſrnel. 
Bn // ; | lethaltogither like Garlicke: the leaues heeregf | 
are broad,of a light green colour, nicked roung | 
about,and ſharpe poyy=s the ſtalkeis ſlender, | 
about a cubite high,abour rhe branches whege.. 
of growelittle white flowers , afterwhich come 
vpilender, ſmall, ndfing coddes, and in theſe 
black ſeede: the roote'is long,flender and ſome- 
thing harde, thewholeplant being bruſedſmel- 
leth of Gaclicke whereof ittooke his name, + 
Con etcatedes hy 
It growethof it ſelfe by gar | 
old willes, by highwgies 2s : anprnes. 04 | 
the borders of ficldes, '*-Y 
| *% Thetime. y | 
It flowreth chiefely in Iune and Tuly,the ſeede 
waxcth ripe in the meane ſeaſon. The leauesare 
vicd fora ſauce in Match or Aprtill, 
*% The names. | 
The later writers call it Maris and Aliarss, 
ot ſome Rima Maria : is not Scordiwn, orwa- 


Y 
ature. 


| lIackeofthehedge is hot and drie,but much leflethen Garlicke,that isto ſaic, inthe ende of the 
. feconddegree,or inthe beginning of the thirde, | | 
» | +1 | *Thewertaes. il | 
We know not whar vſe it hath in medicine : diuers care the ſtamped leaves heerof with ſalt fiſh, 

for a ſauce,as they do thole of Ramſons,  *' t 
 Somealſoboilethelcaues ingliſters which are vſed againſt thepaine of the collicke and ſtone, 

in — _— onely winde is notablic waſted, bur thepaine alſo of the ſtone mitigated, and vers 
mucheaſed. * mY by i | 


' 


4 
| 
*F 


4 
f 
k 

r y 

i 1 

£ 


HIST ORIE OF PLA Ns 
Of Dittanie. | Chap.268. _ 


bes) 


f 8.5 #4: R 
l, i £ A 4 > 
Ft , # #4 C/ 
- NG 
7| Wal 
— at =; 
TT * 
a5 1 g 
: WW { . 


N OF 


19/1. WIS$ 
#» AY 1 S\ . 


(| 


[ 
z 
£ 


% The deſeription. 


je | P 


8 JF \ lttanic of Crete now called Candie{as P ioſcerides ſaith) is a hot andſharpe herbe, much 
like vato Peniroiall,ſauing that his leaues be greater and ſomewhat hoatic,couered oucr 
| with a ſoft downe or white woolley cotton: at the top of the branches growe ſmall ſpikie 
eates or ſcaley aglets, hanging by little ſmall/ſtems,reſembling the ſpikie tufts of Maricrome, of 4 
white colour; among which ſcales there do come foorth ſnallflowers like the flowring of wheate, 
of a red ptfrple colour;which being paſt,the knop is founde full of ſmall ſeede,contrarie tothe ſay- 
ng of D;oſcorides, who ſaith, it neither beareth flower, nor ſcede ,but my ſelfe haueſecnc it beare 
th in my garden : the whole plantperiſhed in the winter following. kf 
2  Theſccond kinde called P/eudodiFamnumn,that is,baſtard Dirranie, is much like vntorhe firſt, 
gthat itis nor fivecte of imell, neither dothit, bite the toong, hauing rounde , Toft, woolley 
ſtalks with knots and ioints,and at cueric knot two leaues ſomewhat round,foft, woolley,and fom- 
what bitter: the lowers be of a light purple colour;compaſling the ſtalkes by certaine ſpaces like. 
Batlands or wharles , and like the: lowers of Peniroiall. The rooteis of a woodic ſubſtainee : rhe 
whole plant groweth tothe height ofa cubite and an halfe,and laſterh long. © | 
Thefirſt Dirtanie commeth from Crere,an rear which we call Candie where it growerhinatu- 
cally: lbaue ſowen it inmy gardengwhere it hath lowred andborne ſcede; bur it periſhed by rea- 
Þa ofthe iniic of our extraordinatie colde winter: that then hapued: nevertheleſſe Dieeorides 
vr +4 F. writech 


| I 


EY 


"_ 


* 


ow | - THE SECON D'BOOKE: 'OF'THE | 
+0: 2painſt alltrurh, that ir neitherbearerh flowers nor ſeeds: Fn | 
c d leriedothinp ones, in the 12.0f his AEneidos: hpi | 


Diftomnen genitri Cretes Carpit ab Ids, 
Puber/bus eauters folys,& five comantem 
; Pu pres. 
in Virgil. 
But / "e726 auch appald at this hir ſonnes vnwoorthie paine, 
Cicere Dittaniefrom Ida ſacred mountin Crerabrings, 
The italke with tender leaves, and bloſſome purple freſh thar ſprings. 
An herbe to Roc bucks wilde,and beaſts nor tame right well be knowne 
Their backs whenfull of darts do ſticke which hunters thicke throwne. 
uh Thetime. 
They flower and fourſh! in the ſommer monerhs,theirſedis ripe in September 
* The nones. Y 
Itis called i in Greeke PR Xl in Latine Diftammnun, of ſome Pulepy, ſplaefreprnitieBen, 
roiall: : the apothecariesfor Diilamnum with c in the firſt ſyllable, doread Dipt ammon withy: bur 
this eftour might be of ſmall imporrance,if in ſtead of the leaues of Dirranie , e heya not % the 
rootes of Frixinella for Dittanic,which they falſely call Diftammun : in En irtanie,and Die- 
ranie of Candie. 
The otheriscalled Þ ſeudodiiammwn , or baſtard Ditranie, of the likeneſſe irhath with Ditanie, 
it $killech not;though the ſhops knowir nor: : the reaſon why,letthe Reader __ 
% The temperature. 
Thele plants are hot and drie of nature, | 
% Thevertues. 
A Dittanfe being taken in drinke, or put yp inapeſlarie, orvſedin a HEY it bringerh ain 
children: it procureth the monerhly termes., and driueth foorth the ſecondine or after birth, 
B Theiuiceraken with winegis a remedy againſt the ſtingings ofſe | 
C Theſameis thoughttobeeof fo ſtrong an operation, that with the verieſinell alſoir drvech 
awaic venemous beaſts : and doth aſtoniſh them, 


D Iris reported likewiſe thatthe wilde gages and deere in Candie whehthey be woundedwithar. 
rowes,do ſhake themour by eating of this plant,and healeth their wounds. | 


E Icprevaileth _ againſt all wounds,and eſpeci cally thoſe made with innenomed weapons, at- 
rowes ſhotour py ,or ſuchlike andis very profitablefor Chirurgians that vſethe ſea andlande 


wars toCarrie with themand haue in readines 4 Fir draweth foorth allo pſacers of wood, bones, or 
{uch like. | 


E Thebaſtard Ditranie, or P ſendodiZtomnun, i is mentin like in vertues to the firſt, burnt of 6 
great force,yctit ſeruerh Rang well for thy pore aforelaid. | 


of Borage. Gp 269. 


* Thekindes. IE | 
Therei is ftoundat _—_ fower forts of Horqgeas ſhall be declared i in ih preſent Chapink | 


 % The ſerition 


Ocage hath brbad leans ough- ing fat v the ground ofa blacke or ſwart qreine coy. 


lour : among which riſeth v p a ſtalke two cubirs high, diuided 1 into diuers branches, where- 
upon do growe gallant blewe flowers,compoſed of fue leaues a peece,out of the middleof 
which growe foorth blacke threds ioined in the top,and pointed like a bipch or pyramide: : the root 
is threddie,and cannot away with the colde of winter. 
2 Borage with white flowers is like vnto theþrecedent bur differeth in the flowers, for thoſe of 
this plant are whice,andthe others of a pairey lewe colour wherein is the difference. - | 


x Bug 


47 HISTORIE OR PLANTS. | 


5 Zoraro 3&3 24 2992006 290 "2 Porago flottalbs. 
= * GardcnBorage. : mou! | 
= > 4 | | | 
« 7, I | 404 . YN m 
S i = &- BY : | = 


ME 


fa 
O97 


WL 
F-2 


On. 


Neuer dying Borage, | *Thede feription. 


'3 Neuer dying Borage hath many verie broade 
leaues,rough and hairic, of a blacke darke greene-* 
|. colour; among which riſe vp ſtifte hairie italkes, 
| - \whereupon do growe faire blew flowers,ripe ſeed, 
andbuds for newe flowers,allat once; whereurjon , 
 [Itwascalled Semper wirens,and that very propetly, 
|  |bicauſeirisnot tobe ſeenneither winter nor ſor 
,mer,, but alwaics at onetime, with grcenc leaues, 
faire flowers, buds,ripe and vnripe feed, wherby it 
greatly increaſerh. Lhe roote is vety durable. 
::\Thereis a fourth ſort of Boragegchathath leates 
like the precedent, but thinner & lefler, rough and 
Hairie,dwiding it ſe!fe into branches at thebotrom 
of theplant, whereupap are placed fairered flo- 
-wers, whercin is the chicfelt difterence berweene 
this and the laſt deſcribed. 
| \ 0... %Theplare, | 
Theſe grow inmy garden,andin others allo, | 
ny is * Thetime. | 
| | —Borage flowreth and flouriſheth moſt part of 
\—'allfommecr,and till Aucumne be far ſpent. 
bas) *% The names. 
 Borapeiscalled in ſhops Borago: of the old wri- 
ters &32way, which is calledin Latine _—_— 


654 THE SECOND |BOOKE OF THE 


bulx: Pliny calleth it E cron wg Ems which if 
olde verſe concerning doth teſtifies ay the 


Ego Boragogardia ſewer, ago. 
' InEngliſh, | 
I Borage bring alwaies courage. 


Iris called inhigh Ducch Burretſchzin lralian Boragine : in Spanh Hrs in low Durch mY 
-  nagle;inEngliſhBorage. | 
; %* The temperature. 


It is cuidently moiſt, and notinlkefore hot, bur ſeemeth tobe in amemnbemrc hot and | 
colde, ws | 


| 


\ 


TY Thivertaes. 


A Thoſeofour time do vie the flowers in ſallads,tocxhilarate and make FLOP glad. There he 


alſo many things made of them,vſed cuery where for the comfort of oa = the 
of ra pA increaſing the ioie of the minde. Wa and 


B Theleaucs boiled among other potherbs,do much prevaile in making 
heing boiled in honied water, be alſo good ag the roughnes of ther 
Galentcacheth. | | 

C Theleaues and flowers of Boragepur into wine,maketh men and women glad and merrie ad - 
driueth away all ſadneſle ,dulneſle,and melanc holie,as Disſcorides and Þlinie ke « 

D Sirrupe made of the flowers of Borage,comforte th the harr purgerh mflancholic quieteththe | 
phrenticke or lunaticke perſon, | 


E Theflowersof Borage ny) P with fi agar pc all the aforeſaid, with hone force and effe, 


od; in nediline the _— caten rawe ingendreth bloode choca 
thoſe chathact > licke, | (ol 


Of Pale Chpae. 


* The kindes. 


* Je asthere be Fs forts of Borags,fo arethere ſnd oy the P's notwithſtanding af- 

ter Dioſcorides,Bugloſſe is the true Borage; many are 0 Eopinion that the one is but a degenerate 
kinde from the ather,yet will we diuide OO _— taken moms the ancicntfathers, 
Dio Ten pag others. | 


* The dyfertion | 4 | | 
Har whichthe Apothecaries call Bugloſle, bringerh foorth Jeadb crabs | 
= Barage ſRaipe pointed,greater then the leaues of Beetes, rough and hainie. The ſtalke gro- | 
| yp to the height of two cubits,parted abouc into ſu ndrybrabhes z whereon are of- | 
dedlyps nd a bliſh flowers tending to a purple colour before they _ opened , and afrerwardes 
lewe, Theroote is long,thicke,; groſle, ang ſora hes 


2 Langde Beefeis a kinds, ecreof.alto TS lefler,bure leaucs ny ( we oy, lk the | 
rough Ky an Oxc or La name. {| 
b x YN | 


' 

| 
Fe 

« 


{HISTORIE, OR PLANTS 6.4! «659 


Ti. | 2 Bagloſſam ovens 
KOI ON ad \, Langde beete. 


* The place. 
Theſe do growe in gardens euery where. 
*& The time. 
They flower from Maie,or lune, cuen to the ende of Sommer. The lewns periſh in winter,and 
newecome vp in the ſpring, 
* The names. 


Ko Bugloſle is calledof the later Herbariſts Bugh/ſz, and Bugloſa pomefce or garden Bu. 
C 
Lange debeefe,is calledin Latine,Lingus bouirand Bughoſſum luteum, of ſome: Hierati Cornateen, | 
andalfo Buolu7a ſyineſtris, or wilde Buglofle. | | 
% The temperature and yertues. 
Theroote faith Diefcorides mixed with oile,cureth-greene wounds,and adding therto a little bar- A 
wh wealc,itis aremedie againſt Saint Anthonies fire. 


cory lweatin agues,as P/rniefaith,if the iuice be mixed with alictle, aqua 7 vite, and the body B 


therewith. 

ThePhiſitions of the later time vſe the leaves, flowers, and rootes,in ſteede of Borage, and put C 
Om both inco all kindes of medicines indifferently , which are of force and vertue to drive 
w2'cfortowe and penſivenefle of the minde, and to comfort and ſtrengthenthe hart. The leaues | 
Teotlike operation with choſe of  andare vied as pot herbes tor the purpoſes aforeſaid, 

a: ne) Bag ollegas Laig debecte,and all OT | 


of 


3 
© 


third without a name which we make to be One/me, And firlt of, 


655 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


0M Of eAlkanet or wilde Bugloſſe. Chap.271, 


Here be ſundrie plants dinerſly called, and yer cueric of them comprehended or conteined 

among the kindes of wildeBugloſles , whoſe figures to ſerfoorth particularly would bothre. 
quire coſt and alſo much labour,and yer to {mall purpole 3 ſo that it ſhal ſuffice ro ſer foorth thepie. | 
cures of ſome and the bare ay s of the reſt : whereof there be according to Djoſcorides ” a | 
kindes (beſides the common Buglofſe/and Landebeut) that is to fay, Onoulia,_Alcibiadjon,an ids 


— 


- 


2 Anchuſa lates. 


z Anchuſe Alcibiadion © 


| nr uh % The deſcription. if Ps; 

Heſe herbes comprehended vnder the name of Anchuſs were ſo called of the Greeke 

word Zeve:: #.[linere ſweco,vel pigmenti,that is to colour or paint any — rhele 

plants were called Jr's of that flouriſhing and bright red colour which is in the roots 

cuenas red as pure and cleere blood: for thatis the onely note or marke whereby to 

theſe hetbes fromthoſe which be called Echy, Lycopſis, and Bugleſſa, whereof they make a Frets 
ſemblance: Ihauc therefore expreſled fower differences of this plant Anchuſa or Alkaner from rhe 
 otherkinds,by the leaues,flowers,and bignefle. ' __ wy 
1 The firſt kinde of Alkanet hath many leaues like Echizm,or ſmall Buglofſe,couered over | 
a prickly hoarines, having commonly bur one ſtalk,which isround,rough,S&a cubite high. Teen! 
of the fowers are of 4 skie colour tending topurple,not vnlike the flowers of E chinm; the ſeegel 

' ſmall, ſomewhat long,and ofa palecolour: theroore is a finger thicke, the pith or inner part 4 


l | | : 
- |" "HISTOR!E OF. PLANTS.” - 657 
:- frootdlic ſubſtance, dying the hands or whatſoeyer coucheth the ſame, of abloodiecolour , or 
ofthe colour of faunders. | þ Y Hs OO | P 
> Theſecondinde ol Anchuſa or A kanet ts of greater beautie and eſtimation then the firſtzrhe | 
ranches are Iefle and OTC buthyc in the top : ithath alſo greater plentic of leaves, andrhofe more 
woolly or hairie :the ſtalke groweth to the height of wo cubits : at the top growe flowers ot a yel. 
lows colour, farre diffc rent trom the other: the roote is more ſhining, of an excellent delicate Pur- 
ſh colour,and more full of tuice then the firſt. | | | 
Thereis a ſmall kinde of Alkanet, whofe roote is greater and more full of juice and ſubſtaunce 
then the roores of he other kinds ; in all orher re{pects its lefle,for the lcaues arc narrower, ſmal- 
ler, tenderer , andin number more, very greene like vnto Borage, yeelding foorth many little ten- 
derſtalks: the Lowers arc lefle then of the (mall Bvglofle, and red of colour : the fecde is of an athe 
colgur ſomewhat long and ſlender hauwing the ralte of Buglofle, | 
There is alſo another kinde of Alkanet,which1is as the others before mentioned, a kind of wilde 
Bugloſſe,norwithſtanding for ciſtinCtion ſake,T haye ſeparated and ſeuered them. This laſt Anchuſz 
2th narrowe leaues,much lke vnto our common fommer Sauorie. The ſtalkes are two handiuls 
high,bearing very ſmall lowers,andofa blewiſh or skie colour : the roote is of a darke browniſh 
redcolout,dying the hands little or nothing ar all, and of a woodic ſubſtance, 
| | v% Theplare. | | 
Theſe plants do grow in the fieldes of Narbone,and about Montpelier,and many other parts of 
Fraunce : I found theſe plants growingin the Ile of Thanet neere vnto the ſea, berwixtthe hoiiſe 
ſ>merime belonging to Sir Here Criſpe,and Margate: where Ifounde ſomeintheir naturall ripe- 
nes, yet ſcarcely any that were come to that beautifull colour of Alkanet :but ſuch as is ſolde tor 
verygoodinour Apothecaries ſhops,[ found there in great plentie, 
VER | __w%Thetime. Ez 
The Alkaners flower and flouriſh in the former moneths : the rootes doycelde their bloody 
iuice in haruelt time,as Dzoſcorides writeth, | 
% The names. | | 
Alkanet is called in Greeke5y,0vz: in Latine alſo _Lachu/a, of diuers Fucu herba, and Onoctein, 
Bugloſa Hiſpanics, or Spaniſh Buglofſc: in Spanith Soagem: in French Orchanert : and in Engliſh 
likewiſe Orchaner,and Alkanert. | wal 


— 


% The temperature. | 
Therootes of Alkanetare cold and dric as G4/en writeth, and binding, and bicauſe it is bitter ir 
clenſeth awaie cholericke humours, the leaues benot ſo forceable , yer do they likewiſe binde and 
drie, Uſb. 
| % The wvertits. 
Dioſcorides (aith,cthat the roote being made vp intoa cerote, or erecloth with oile, is very good a 
for old vicerszthat with parched barley mealc it is good for the lepric,& tor tetters or ring wormes. 
Thatbcing viedas a peſlaric it bringeth foorth the dead birth. | | B 
Thedecoction being inwardly taken with meade or honied water, cureth theyellowe iaundiſe, 
diſcalesof the kidneies,the ſpleene and agues. | 
yu viedin ointments for womens paintings: and the leaues drunke in wine is good againſt the x 
aSKC, me | | | 
Divers of the later Phiſitions do boile with theroote of Alkaner and wine, {weete butter, ſuch x 
a5 hath in itnofalt atall, vntill ſuch time as it becommeth red,which they call red butter ,8& giue it 
notonely to thoſe that have fallen from ſome high place , but alſo reportit to bee good todriue 
foorth the meaſels and ſinall poxe,jif it be dcunke in;the beginning with hot becte. : 
Y boy wm of theſe plants are vied to colour firups, waters, gellies, and fuch hke confections, as F - 
umloieis, LD 
lebnof Arderne hath  downe,a compoſitipn called Sanguis venerts, which is moſt fingular in G 
punctures or wounds made with thruſts.as followeth: Take of oile Oliue a pint , therootes 
Ukanet two ounces,carth woormes purged,in number twentic,boile them togirher and keepe it 
tothe vſe aforeſaid. | L.--o 


The gentlewomen of Fraunce dopainc theirfaces with theſe rootes,as itis ſaid, = H 


* Mie <a, o | Of 


" 


i 


4 ! 


{ 


WW. | 


aw 


658. THE SECOND BOOKE OF, \THE 
of Bug  Chap2m2. | 


I Lycepſis AH ics 2 Onoſma. 
prog Bugloſleg wallBuglofle, ſt ou Buglofle. 


_ % rhe ie ription. 


reopſo Anghics, or wilde Buglofle ,  ſocalled for thatitdoth not owe ſo commonly ale 
_ where, hath rough and hairie leaues ,omewhar leſſer then the garden Buglofle: the flowers 
grow for the moſt part ypon one lide ofthe ſlender ſtalke,inf, ontoll hollow like a beele bel, | 
whereof ſome be blew,and others of a purplecolour. 
2 There is another kind of Echiwn that hath 1 rough &hairie leaues likewiſe ouch like vnto bebe. | 
mer : the ſtalke is rough, charged full o ke] Gun, which are laden. on euery ſide with divers | 
ſmall narrowe leaucs,tharpe pointed,and of abrowne colour, ſcattered or ſpred like little feathers: 
among which leaues growethe flowers,of a ſad blew or purple colour at the firſt, but when _—_— | 
: open they theweto beſof an azure colour, long,and hollow, hauing certaine ſmallblewe threds in 
. theqniddle: the feede is finall and blacke, faſhioned like the head of a ſnake or viper: the roote 1s 
long and red os a 
® The place. 11 
Lyeopſis groweth vpþn ſtone wals,and vpoy drie barren ſtonie grounds, 
Erhnon growet! where Alkanet doth growe,in great epimdance, 
&” *% The time. 
: They flouriſh when the otherkinds of Bugloſſes do flower, 
" *% Thenames. 


Itis called in Gree i172 , Echinm,.and dvfielter: Alcibiadion , of AMetbiades the finder & the *: | 
vertues thereof : of ſore thought to be Anchuſe ſpecies, or a kinde of Alkaner: in high Dutch wilde BY 
ove nUunghen ; in wor Terua de la Ano Chupamel: in Icalian Mach ſaluatiee: 1n _—_ | 

$1* 


| 4 
- 7 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ' 659 


Bavleſſe ſannage * in Engliſh vipers Bugloſle ) Snakes Bugloſle,and of ſome vipers herbe, and wilde 
| Buglofſethe leſſer. | [2] bo 1 
| * The temperature. 


'Thele herbes are colde and drie of complexion. 
| *% The vertaes. 
The roote drunke with wine is good for thoſe thatbe birten with ſerpents,, anditkeepethſich A — 
fombeing ſtung as haue drunke of itbcfore; the leaves and feedes Cothe fame, as D/oſcorrdes wri- 
teth : N jcander in his booke of Treacles, maketh vipers Buglofle to be one of thoſe plants, which 
cure the biting of ferpents,and eſpecially of the _—_—_— that driue {erpents away, I 
Ifir be drunke in wineor otherwiſc,it caulerh plentic of inilke in womens breſts. Þ 
The herbe chewed, and the iuice ſivallowed downe, is a moſt ſingular remedie againſt poiſon, (+ 
and the bitings of any venemausbecaſts,and the roote ſo chewed, and laide vpon the ſore worketh * * 
the ſame effect. | as p 


© Of Homndes toong. (Chap-273; 


Cynogloſum. | = 
Hounds toong, a %* The IE | 
2&2 Rt: an = He common Houndes toong hath long - - 
F = leaues,muchlike the garden Bugloſle,bur 
a5 | narrower,ſ{maller,andnotri ”. at al,but 


| yet ſome fine hoarinefle or ſoftneſle like veluer, 

| | Theſe leaves ſtinke very filthily , much like vnto 
the piſle of dogs : wherefore the Dutch men haue 
calledir Hounds pifſe, and not Hounds toong. 
The ſtalks are rough,hard,twocubits high,and of 

| abrownecolour,bearing atthe top many flowers, 
' | ofadarkepurplecolour: theſeedeis rough, clea- 

| uing to garments like Agrimonie ſecede: the root 

| blackeandthicke. Wl | 
| We haue recciued another fort heereoffrom 
| the parts of {ralie having leaues like woade,ſome- 
; what rough,and without any manifeſt ſme], wher- 
in it differeth from the common kinde, the ſcede 
whereof came vnder the title Cynogleſſim Creti- 
cum hounds toong of Candie | 

| We haue another ſorrof Hounds toong like 
vnto the common kinde, fauing it is altogither 
| lefſer:the leaues are of a ſhining greene colour, 
Fe: F.-—" Theplace. | 
| | Thegreat Hounds roong groweth almoſt euc- 
| riewhere,by high waies and vntoiled grounde: the 
ſmall Hounds toong groweth very plentifully by 
the waies fide, as you ride Colcheſter high way 


———————_— PR 


SA CBI ATES i AEL> "Hl POE" 140082 OY mt CAFES TEL BED 


Si 6: fant | from Londonward, berweene Efterford and Wit- 

a AS | ; taminEſlex, | | 

| | | * The tume. 

They flowerin Inne andIulic, | Y 
You | *% The names. 14 tat Poa 

Houndes toong is called in Grecke Kvriy2u57y:in Latine Lingua Canis, of Pliny Cynoglaſſor,and. 
ſhewerh wo kindes thereof: in Engliſh Hounds tongs ;but rather Hounds piſſe, for in the world 
lereisnot any thing ſinelleth ſolike ynto dogs pille, as the leaues of this plant do, 

7 In  . % The nature. | 

Hound; toong but eſpecially his roote,is colde and arie. 


Tr 2 : % The 


660 THE 'SECOND BOOKE' OF THE 
4:4 | Thewertms. | || 
A The rootes of Houndes toong roſtedin theembers and laide to the fundament, healeth the 
hemorrhoides,and the diſeaſe called Jens Sacer , or wilde fire. | | | 
B The iuice boiled with honic ofroſes and Turpentine,to the forme of an vnguent,is moſt lingular 
in wot\nds and deepe vicers. jt oo 
C Droſeorraes ſaith,thatthe leaues boiled in wine and drunke, do mollifie the bellie, and that the 


leanes ſtamped with old ſwinesgreale, are good againſt the falling away of the haire of the heade, 
which proceedeth of hot ſharpe humoutrs. #4 | | 


D Lilewiſetheyarcaremedic againſt ſcaldings ot burnings, and againſt the bitings of dogs, as the 
{ame author addcrh, | : 7 : e] WAYS 


Of Com rey, or the great Conſond. Chap.2' 4: 


1 Con/olids maior floje purpureo. , 2 C on olids major flore albo, 
. Comfrey with putple flowers, Ft Comfrey with white flowers, 


" - Þ 
a. _ - 4 4 £ L 
! , - ”" 0 : - — —— 1 | = A *, 
C; \yp»« . - - [ s , 74 F ? % F 
wg vv q 1 r4 - ; _— , ; JD . ; L 
. » % j , C g £ », : ; K 4 
> Q y 35 i” H = —=D i 
G - " * oo > 4 4 
Sls 7 4 = q . : ge. G "4 F 2 %. ” 
' - = \ Y - , \ | 
; AT : \ ; - QS w K - 
£ > # * - 7 / 
4 . J - $ , 3 VL 


>: 


Thedef 08508. [| 


Heſtalks ofthis Comfrey is cornered, thicke, and hollowe like that of Sowthiltle,it grow- 
va twocubirs or a yarde high:the leaves thar { pring from theroote,and thoſe that growe - 

vpon the ſtalks ate long,broade,rough,and pricking withall, ſom tthing hairie, and that 

being handled,makerhe hands itch, very like 1n colour and roughnes to thoſe of Borrage, butlon- 

ger and ſharpe pointed,asbe the leaves of Elecampane : from out the wings of the ſtalkes appeere 
the florwers,orderly placed,long, hollowe within, of a light redde colour: after them groweth the 
ſeed whichis blacke: the roote is long and thicke,blacke without, white within, hauing init a clam- 
mac inice, in which confiſteththe verrue. W Fak-y | o* | 
2 The great Comfrey hath rough hairie wo rough leaues,much like rhe garden Bugloſle, 
but greater and blacker:the flowers be round and n us like lictle bels,of a whire colour:the root 

is blacke withour,and white within and very ſlime, [OT £40 } hl 
| 1:1 j ere 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1. 663 


There is another kinde of Comfrey that hath leaues like the former, ſauing that they be lefler: 
he ſtalks are rough and tender : the flowers arc|like the former, butthatthey be of an ouetworne. 
icky colour : the rootesare thicke .ſhort,blacke without,and tuberous. | 


@hl * Theplace, | | F 
Comfreyioyeth in watric ditches,in fat and truitfull mecowes; they grow all in my garden, 
hey flower in Tune and July. A 8 
The) *% The names. . 


Ic is called in Greeke Sujupuror :in Latine Symphytiuon , and Solidaego: in ſhops Conſolida major, and 
eympſryt wn AI * of Scribonius Lar g t,1nula rugtica,and Alus Gallica, of others Oſteocolloy : in high 
Ducch THalwurts } in low Dutch Utaclwoztele tin Iralian Conſelida maggiore: in Spaniſh Sucids 
maiore,andConſutlda maar: in French Confire,and Oreille 'aſne: in Englith Confrey,Ched rey Con- 
ſound,of foe Knit backe,and Blackwoorr, | 

| Kot v The temperature. a 1 

The roote of Comfrey hath a colde qualitic;but yernotmuch: it is alſo of aclammie and gluing 
moiſture,it cauſerh no itch ar all,neither is it of a ſharpe oi biting taſte, vnſauorie, and withour anic 
qualirie tharmay be'taſted, ſo farre is the tough and gluin 2 moiſture from the ſharpe clammincſſe 
_ oftheſea Onion as thatthere is nocompariſon|beryeene tacm. The leaues may cauſe itching not 
thorow heator ſharpneſle,bur through rheir rupgednes.as we haue alreadie written, yetlefle then 
ofNettle. . | Fon 
| | | % Thevertnes. | 

The rootes of Comfrey ſtamped,and the tuice drunke with wine, helperh thoſe that ſpit bloude, A 
and healerh all inward wounds and burſtings. | | | | 

Thefatne bruſed and laide toin manner of a plaiſter , doth heale all freſh and greene woundes, B 
andare ſo glurinariye , that itwill fodder or glewe rogither meate that is chopt in peeces ſcerhing 


* 


in a por, and make it in one lumpe. =Y | = 

Ah cootes boiled and drunke,dorh cleale rhe brelt from flegme, and curerh the greefes of zhe C 
lungs;cſpecially if they be confect with ſugar inſyrupe, it preuaileth much againſt ruprures or bur- 

{tinges. | E ; $5 440K 

Theſlimie ſubſtance of the roote made ina poſſer of ale, and giuen to drinke againſt the paine in D 
thebacke,gotten byany violent motion,as wraſtling,or ouermuch vſe of women, dothin tower or = 
fivedaies perfedtly cure the ſame: although the. inuoluntarie owing of the ſeed in men be gotten 

thereby. || | Es | | | 

Therabics of Comfrey in number fower, Knotgraſſe,and the leaues of Claric,ofeche an hand- E 
- full being ſtamped altogither,and ſtrained,and a quart of Muſcadellput therero,the yolkes of three 
egges,and thepowder of three Nutmegs, drunke firſt and laſt,is a moſt excellent medicine againſt 
Gonorchza or running of the raines,and all paines and conſumptions ofthe backe. 

There is likewiſe/a fyrupe made heereof to be vied in this caſe, which ſtaieth voiding of bloude : F 
tempereth the heate of agues; allaieth the ſharpnefle of lowing humours: healerh vp vicers of the 
lunges, and helpeththe cough : the receit whereof is this : Take two ounces of the rootes of great 

amfrey,one ounce of Lyquorice z two handfuls of Fucfoot roores and ali; one ounce and a halfe 
_ of Pine apple kernels; rwentie iuiubes.3two drams ora quarter of an ounce of Mallowe ſecede zone 
dram of the heads of Poppie; boile all in a ſufficient quantitie of water, till one pint remaine, ſtraine 
It, andadde to the liquor {trained fixe ounces of very white ſugar,and as many of the beſt honie,and = 
make heereof a ſyrupe that muſt be throughly boiled, ke? #10 t 

The ſamefyrupe'cureth the vicers of the kidacies,though they haue been of long'continuance : G 


; 


and ſtopperth the bloud that commeth from thence. 
., Moreouer it ſtaierh the ouermuch flowing of the monerhly fickneſle raken euery day, for certain FH 


daies togither, | | 


». Iris highly commended for wounds or hurts of al thereſt alſo of the intrailes and inward parts, I 


and for burſtings of ruptures. 


The roores | amped and applied vnto them,cakerh away the inflammation ofthe tundament,and K | 
,Mrmuch lowing of the hemonthoides, | | | 


Tt 3 Fa Ws 


THE SECOND \BOOKE OP 


of Cowſlips of Feruſalem. Chap.2-75. 
+ Thekindes 41] 


T7 be diuers forts of Comwſlips of leruſalem, being thetrue Lungwoorrs , differing ab , 
colour of the flowers eſpecially,as ſhall be declared, | 
1 Pulmonaria waculoſa. | Will 2 Pulmonaria folys Echg, 
| Spotted Cowſlips of Teruſalem. ll. Bugloſſc Cowllips, 


I 
4: ” £ 
- 


I Omilips of Ierufalem orthe true and right Lungwoorrt, hath rough hairie, &large leaves, 
- , of a browne greene colour , confuſedly ſported with diners ſpots , or droppes of white: 
amongſt which ſpring vp certaine ſtalks,a ſpan long,bearingat the cop many fine flowers, 
growing togither in bunches like the flowers of Cowllips fauing that they be at the firſt red or put- | 
ple,and ſomtimes blewe;and oftentimes of all theſe colours at once. The flowers being fallen, rnere | 
come [mall buttons full of ſeed. 1 he roorte is blacke and threddie. { 


2 The ſecond kind of Lungwoort is like vnto the former, bur greater inech reſpe&:the leaues big- | 
ger then the former,referþbling wilde Buglofle,yer ſpotted with white ſpots like the former:theflo- | 
wers are like the other, bur of anexce ing ſhining red colour, i | » Ws 
3 CarolwCluſne terterh foortha thirde kinde of Lungwoort,which hath rough and hairic leaves, 
like vnto wilde Bagloſle,burtnarrower : among which nſeth vp a ftalke a fogte igh, bearing at the 
top abundle of blew flowers,in faſhion ke ynto Sopewoort, # 

4 Hens ſetteth foorth Ikewile a bodp of Lungwoort which naturally groweth in Fraunce.whoſe 
leaues are like vnto Endige; the lowers yellowe,and like vnto the Haukeweedes, both which haut 


li 


n0 vic Phiſicke, 


s FI 1 | 3 Pulmonarid 


HR FOTNNT OF PLANTS. © 7 664 


: Pulnonarid ants . Claſs, 1 4 PalmonariaGallorwns, 
? Narrow leaf —_ Enidalens, | French Cowflips of Ierufalem. 


& The place. 
F* wi Fame 6 growe in moiſt ſhadowie woods , and are planted almoſt every! where in gar: 


&* The time. 
They flower for the moſt part in March and April. 


% The names. te 
owllips of letufaters or Sage ues ray ng called of the Herbariſts of out time , Sy 
I and Pulmonals; of gFag 3. re, or wilde Comfrey : but ſeeing the ather is 
allo of nature wilde, it may aptly Rod” pls tw maculoſurs, or Maculatwmn: in high Dutch 
Lungmkraut : in lowDutch Dnſler vzouwen eerie ren Engliſh ſported Comm rey, Sage 
of Ieruſalem , Cowllip of Icruſalem, Woe of Bethlem, and of fomc Lange 
there is another Uno which we will intreat among the kindes of Moles. 


v% The temper ature HO racing 
Pubnonarig ſhould be of like temperature with the great Comfi if the roote of this were clam- 
mie: but Sega! it is hard and woodie,it i is of a more drying qua iric,and more bindin g 
*% Theweriues. | 
Theleaues are yſed among pot herbs. The roots are. alſo thought to be good again the infirmi- A 
ries andvicers of i lungs p.25 tobe of like force with the grear cures 4 


[1 
: 


T's 4 L "Of 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF! 
Of Clote Burre, or Burre Docke. Chap. 


I Bardana mater, 


- +, 


- i | 
'Wo- vs | 


— g 
os *\ === 


NNE 
=o —F NW ..L 
/ io 


F 

N 

N 
it w. 


+4 


2 0 Bd 0; 
Sz A 
& PF; 


d 


\ 
D 4a 
\ 


vv Va 
- [ k : fl 
L \ s LA 
® m4 
£>.4 - 
oO , - 
» 
». > * : 


VIYNS 


'C 

. ecolour, 
ſer with like leaues but f 
Les 
and this ſecede when the bu 
_ roote is lo thi 


[2 
(4.7 


ey are burlittle 


enc 
F] 


| 


+ 7 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 665 
faft vnto mens garments; they do nor openat all , but being kept cloſeſhur bring foorch long 
Cedes, The rooteis faſtned with very manic ſtrings, and growethi nor deepe. 

A "Oo Theplice,” AW) 

The firſt groweth cucric where: the ſeconde | ſoundein the high waie CY _ Drai- 
ron to Iucr , WO {wp from Colbfooke, fince whichrime I haue toundevirin- rh igh waic be. 
rweene Stanes and Eggham, Crab IP 
s. % Theftime. 


- Their ſeafon 1s in lulic and Auguſt, |. | 
it | ** The names. | | 
The grearBurrp1s calledin Grecke «41: in Latine Per ſonata, per ſonatia,and TAaremm: in ſhops 


Burdens, and Lappe mater : in high Dutch Gzolskletten: in lowe Durch Gzwte cliſſen ; in French 
Glouteran :in Engliſh Great Burre, Burre Docke,or Clot Burre : _Apnlezws belides theſe doth allo 
pe llowns ine other names belonging to Clor Burre, as Dardana, Batehion Elephants, Ne- 


PE lefler Dako idcalled of the Grzcians,=#«»: in Latine Xanthinm: in ſhops Lapps 


minor, inucr/a,and of diucrs Stramaria: Galen laith itis alſo called Phaſeanion, 8% Phaſoancn 
' or Ne bom bur baſtarde names, & therefore not properly ſo ſv in Engli Soug 
Burre, Ditch Burre,and leſſer Burre Docke ; it ſeemeth to be called Xanrb;wmn of the effeR, for the 
Bntre or fruite before it be fully withered being ſtamped and put intoan earthen veſſell, and after- 
wards when necd requireth the weight oftwo ounces thereof and ſomewhat more,being ſteeped in 
warme water and rubbed on,maketh the haires,of the head redz yet the head is firſt ro be drefled or 
rubbed with nicer,as Dzoſcorides writeth, | £8 
45: #7 | * The temperature. 
The leaues of Clor Burre are of temperature moderately drie and waſting; theroote is ſome- + 
hot. | - AR | 
The ſeedeof the lefler Burre as Ga/er faith, hath power to digeſt, therefore it is hot and drie. 
| | ' we Theventaes. 

Therootes being taken with the kernels of Pine apples, as Diſcorides wimneſleth, are good for a 

them that ſpit bloud and corruptmatter. SO | 

Apuleins faith,that the ſame being ſtamped with a little alc and applied to the biting of a madde B 

doggexcurerh the ſame,and ſo ſpeedily ſerteth free rhe ſicke man. | | 

+ Healſoteachech,that the iuice of the leaues giuen to drinke with honieprocurerh vrine, and ra- (; 
keth away the m_ of the bladder, and that the ſame drunke with olde wine doth woonderfully 
help: againſt the bitings of ſerpents, CE | 

Colinelladeclareth,thatthe herbe beaten with ſalt and laid'vpon the ſcarifying , which is made 
with the launce or raſor,drawerth outthe poiſon of the viper z and rhat alſo the roote being ſtamped 
ismoreauaileable againſt ſerpents ,& that the roote inlike maner is good again{t the kings cuil. 

| The talk of Clot Burre before the burs come foorth, the rinde pilled of, being caten rawe with E 
faltand pepper,or boiled in the broth of fat meate, is pleaſant to be caten :being rakenintharman- 
netgt increaſeth ſeed and ſtirreth vp luſt. | 1. 

Alſoitisa good nouriſhment, eſpecially boiled, if the kernell of the Pine apple be likewiſe ad- F 
deditisthe berter , and is nolcfle auailcable againſt the vicer of the lungs, and ſpitting of bloud 
then theroote is. | |. | os 

Theroote ſtamped and {trained with a good draught of ale, is a moſt approoued medicine for a G 
wincie and colde ſtomacke. Ys A 

Treacle of Andromachus,andthe whites of yge5,of eche alike quantitie, laboures ina leaden JH - 
mortar,and ſpred ypon theBurre leafe,and ſo applicd to the gout, haue beene prooued oftentimes 
moſt mirac yo appeaſe the paine theregf. | 

Dioſcortdes commendeth the decodtion of the rootes of Arcion with the ſeed , againſt theroorth- 1 
acheifirbe holden a while in the mouth: alſo that it is good to foment therewith both burnings & 
kibed heeles,and affirmech thatit may be drunk with wine againſt the ſtrangury,8 paine in the hip, 

Dioſeoridesreporteth,that the fruit is very good to be laid vnto hard ſwellmgs. K 

Therootecleane picked,waſhed, ſtamped and ſtrained with Malmſey, helpeth the running'of L 
- eraines the whites in womenanditrengthnerh the backe, if there be added thereto the yolkes of 

egges,the pouder of acornes,and nutmegs bruedor mixed togither,and drunk firſt andlaft, 


+ 


Of 


# 


\ 
\ 
} 


THE SECOND BOOKE. OF Th 
oF Ge fone, or Hot e foote. Chap. 277. 


| | %* The deſcription. | "7 
140 or Folefoote , hath many white and long rootes, ſomewhar fat: from 
hich riſe vp naked ſtalkes(in, the! beginning of Marchand into a ſpan long, bea- 
__ at the top yellow flowers which change intodowne,, andarecaried awaic with the 
winde ; when the ſtalke and ſeede is periſhed, tire eppeend ſpringing outof the 
broad [eaues,greene abouc,and next the groundof a hehoatis or oor toni 
an horſe foote,for which cauſeit was called Folefoote,and Horſchoote ; ſeldome orneuer ſhalyou 
 finde leaues and flowers at once, but the flowers arepaſt before rk oe of rhe ground, 
as may appecre by the firſt picture,which ſerreth foorththe naked ſtalkes and flowers: —_ 
cond which pourrraitech the leaues onely. _ 18 | 
* The 
This groweth of it ſelfe neere vnto Brief on thebrinkes ofrockd and rivers, inwet fur- 
rowes,by ditches fides,andin other moiſt and ; ray places neere vnto the ſea almoſteuerywhere. 
&-Theti 
The flowers which quickly fade , are to be ſeenc in the endof March ad aboutthe Ca/ends of 
Aprill,which ſpcedil 'y wither togither with the ſtems, after them growe foorch theleaves, mo 
remaine greenc all ſommer ea yh and heereupon it came thar Colrsfoote was t thought ro be 
—_— flowers, which thing allo Plinie hath in re: in tis fixe an Frente booke, and fre 
1aptcr, | 
o The 


” HISTORTB "OR 'PLANTS; | 


667 
| ** The names. NY 
Folefoote iscalled in Greeke Bizzer: of the Latines likewiſe Bechzon, and Twftage + in ſhops Far- 


fora, and Y ngula Caballina, of diners Pata equina: in Italian onghtia dj Canalo: in Spaniſh wphad' 
4/ma: in French p44 d"aſme : 10 Englih Folcfoote , Coltes foore, Horſchoofe,, and. Bulfoore, 
The fame is alſo Chamelence,which Plane in his 28.booke 15.chap.reporteth ro belikewiſe called 
Farfugiam,and Farr anion, (if there be not an errour in theco»ic) which ching alfo tAetine in his 
firſt booke affirmeth,pretermitting the name of Beehiwm,and attributing yntoirall che vertues and 
faculties of Bechium,or Colrsfoor,whoſe opinion Orzbaſacs {ceemerh to be of in his 15. booke of his 
medicinable colleQtions , making mention of Chamelexce: onely P:inre alfo agreeth with them, 
ſhewing that ſome thinke , that Bechzam is called by anothername Chamelence, in his 26, booke 
6.chap.and it may be that D#oſcorraes hath written of one and the ſ{eltefameheibe in ſundrie places, 
andby divers names. Bech um and Twſ#/go (which may alſo be Enghihed Coughwoort) ſo cal- 
led ofthe effe,/and Farfars, of the white poplar tree,to whoſeleanes it is like, which was named 
ofthe ancients Farfarme,as Pliutms writerh in his Comedie called Panxlas: | 
| ----viſcwn legion; dedi 
; fundaſque cos profterneban uf folia Farfart : 
Tothe company lI gane both lime buſh and fling, 
Thatto the ground as Poplar leaues I might he: Aing, | | | 
. The white Poplar tree 1s calledin Greeke Miu, and heereupon Bechionor Coltes foote, was alſo 
\ called Chamelenxce. | | 
*% The temperature andvertues. | | 

Theleaues of Coles foote,asyetfreſh and greenc,arc ſomicthing cold, and have withal! a dry; 
ingqualitic : they are good for vicersand inflammarions : butthe dried leaues are hot and res 
ſomwhat biting, | | 

A Hot made of the greene leaues and rootes,or elſe a {yrupetherofis good forthe cough, B 
tharproceedeth of athine rheume, _ Ls | | | 

The greene leaues of Folefoote pound with honie,docure and heale the hot inflammarioneal- C 
led Saint Anthonies fire,and all other inflammations. | 35 

The fume of the dried leaues taken through a funnell or tunnell, burned vpon coales, effefually D 
helpeth thoſe that are troubled with the ſhorrneſle of breath,and fetch their winde thicke and of- 
ten,and breaketh without perill the impoſtumes of the breſt, _ | 
— =_y taken in manner as they take Tabaco, it mighuly preuaileth againſt the diſeaſes afore- E 

= $5135 45 CIPRO EI 


Of Butter Burre. Chap.278. 
» ts ia Thad: Tots 


I TJ Vetter Burre doth in like maner bring foorth flowers before the leaues, 2s doth Coltesfoot, =-— 
but they are ſmall, moſſie, rending to apurple colour, which being made vp inroa big care, | 
, asitwere,doquicklytogither with the ſtemwhichisthicke , full'of ſfubſtannee ane brickle, 
wither and fall away : the leaues are verie great like to'a rounde cap or hat,called in Latine Pets ſws, 
offuch a wideneſle, as that of it ſelfe itis bigge and large inough to keepe amans head fromrame, 
andfrom the heate of the ſunne ; and therctore theybe greater thenche leaues oi the ClorBure, 
of colour ſomething white, yer whiter vaderneathzeuery ſtemme bearerh his leafe:the ttemineis of- 
tenumes a Cubite long, thicke, full of ſubſtauncez vpon which ſtandeth-the leafe inthe center or 
middlemoſt part of thecircumferenceor vericneere , lkeroone of the greareſt Muthroms (but 
thatir hath a cleftthar {tandeth aboutthe {tem , eſpecially when they arc in periſhing and wittie. 
"gaway:atthe firftthe, ypper ſuperficiall, or ourſideof the Muſhroms ſtarderh our, and when 
they Vein witherin Patt rp. in,andeuen ſorhe leafe ofBurter Burre hath on the ourfice a 
Eraine thallow hollownes : the roote is thicke,long, blacke without, white yithin, of ratte lome- 
Wat bitter,and is oftentimes woorme eaten, * | 
| 1 Pentaſucs 


” 


5 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 


1 Petaſites florens.. ; 2 Petaſitis folia, 
Som 8; 64 WB WA | TheleauesofBurter Burre, 


F 


Pl PET Pe MF 6 RS 


£& 


% T '' lace. 
oweth in moiſt places neere vnto riucrs lides, and Pop the brinks and bankes of lakes 
he ——_ $,almoſt cuery where, 
+T Ml Hime. 

The eare with the flowers flouriſhin Aprill; Fen come vp the leaues which continue T] win 
ter,with newe ones ſtill growing vp. 

.*% TT, he! Lines, 

Burter Burre iscalled in Greeke mm, of the hugeneſſe of the leafe the is like to hay; ora 
hat: the Latines do alſocall it Petaſres : in high Dutch Peſtilentzwurts t in low Dutch Dockt- 
bladeren: in Engliſh i it is named Butter Burre ; it is very manifeſt that this] is like to Coltes v1 
and of the ſame kinde. 


% The ; Lag fure. 


. i 
' 


W 


HISTORIE /OF/:/PLANTS. | 


Of ſmall Celandine,or Pilewoort. | Chap .279. 


I % The kindes, 


ki is of Celandine,according to the olde writers, much differing in Forme and 
'Þ NE eatie ogg Jhe other lefler, which I intende to deuide into two diltin@ chapters, 
"ſl live them as ncerc as may bewith their like,in forme and figure , and firſt of the ſmall Ce- 


landine. 


—_— 


chelidontinn Mins. | "I 
Pile woorr, | f | & The deſeription. 


TI He leſſer Celandine hath greene —_— 
leaues,ſmoorh, ſlipperie, and ſhining, le 
then the leaues of hy luie : the ſtalkes are 
ſlender, ſhorr, and for the moſt part creeping vp- 
on the ground: uy bring foorth little yellowe 
flowers like to thoſe of Crowfoote, and after 
the flowers there ſpringeth vp a lirtle fine knop or 
head fullof ſeede: the roote confiſteth of ſlender | 
ſtrings, on which do hang as it were certaine .=Y 
proper , of the bigneſſe ot Wheate cornes, or 
digger, | 
% Theprace: 

It groweth in medowes, by common waies, by 
ditches and trenches, & is common cuery where, 
in moiſt and dankiſh places, | 

| * The time. | 

| It commeth foorth about the Calends of 
March,and flowreth a little after : irbeginneth ro 
fade away in Aprill, it is quite gone in May, after- 
wards it is harde to be founde, yea ſcarkcly the 
rote, | 

* T he names. x: 
Tris called in Greeke a#%% wv: of the Latines' 
Chelidoniam minus, and Hirundinaria minor , of 
divers Scrophnlaria minor ,Ficaria minor : of Sera- 
pi» Memiyen : in Italian Fawoſcelo:in high Dutch = 
| | | Feigwurtzenkraut ; in French Eſclere, and Pere 
_ Bſdner: Engliſh littic Celandine,Figgewoorr,and Pile woort. | 

| * The temperature. . 5 

Iris bot and drie,al{o moxe biting and hotter then the greater: it commerhneexeſt in facultic to 
the Eowloote, 4 wel | 


It preſently as Gatexwand Disſcorrdes affirme , exulcerateth or bliſtereth the skinne : irmaketh A 
rough and cotruptaailes to fall awaie. | | | | 
The iuice of the xoots mixed with honie, and (drawne vp into the noſthrils, purgeth the head of g 
foule and filth;e humours. | | | | 
The later age vie the rootes and graines for the piles, which being often bathed with the jvice C 
— wit wine, or with the ſickmans vrine, are drawne togither and dried vp,and the paine quite 
[| Naway, | | et} o : {nr} | 
There bealſo who thinke,thar if the herbe be but caricd about one that hath the piles, the paine D 
forthwith ceaſeth, Be 1 ; | | 
| Pp |; h 0 f 2 


670 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
Of marſheMarigolde. Chap.280. 


T Here be founde atthis daic three ſorts of marſh Marigolds ; the auncients have deſcribed bur 
one. | j | 


= 


47 
5 
- 


I Caithapaluſtris maior. \ | 2 Caltha palaſtris miner: 
The great marſh Marigolde, j The ſmall marſh Marigold, 


WA / 
be 

22 |: 
* x 


*%* Thetemperatare. 


I * Arſh Marigold hath great broad leaues ſomewhat round, ſmooth,of a gallantgreene co- 
lour,{lightly indented or purlde about the edges, among which riſe vp thicke tat ſtakes, 
likewiſe greenezwherupon do growe goodly yellow flowers, glittering like gold, and like 

to thoſe of Crowfoote, bur greater: the rootexs ſmall,compoſed of verie manic ſtrings. '— | 

2 The ſmaller marſh Marigold hath manie rounde leaues ſpred vpon the grounde , of 3 darke 
greene colour : among which riſe vp diuers braunches, charged with the like leaues :the fiowers 
growe at the top of the braunches, of a maſt ſhining yellowe colour : the roote is like the for- 
mer, | : | : | | 

} 3- Thegreat marſh Marigolde with double flowers is aſtrangerin England, his native countrey | 

ſhould ſeeme to be in the furtheſt parts of Gegmanic , by the relation of a wan of thoſe countries 

« that hauc had conference withal! , the which he thus deſcribed: it hath faith he, leaues, rootes, 

| andſtalkes,hke thoſe of our common fort, and hath double flowers like thoſe of the garden Marn- 
gold, wherein conſfiſteth the difference. | | | 


2 Calths 


, 


ft 


4 Lo, pl 
\INA 


_ 


n £ _ 
od 
"% 


' Morſua Rana. Frogge bit. 


HISTORTE 


| Calths euftri multiplex. 
p art flowred marſh Marigold. 


> JJ 
8 
TR. J 


| | yeere, 


OF/PLANTS."' | 621 
% The place. 
They ioy in moiſt and mariſh groundes, andin 


watery medowes, 


TC % The time. 


They flowerin the ſpring when the Crowfoots 
do,but ſomewhat later,oftentimes in ſommer; the 


| leaueskeepetheirgreeneneſſt all the winter long. 


% T he names. 


m— 


Marſh Marigold is called of Falerivs Cord, 
Caltha paluſtris; of T aber Montanu,Populago,biut 


| nor properly: in Engliſh Marſh Marigoldes , in 
| Cheſhire and thoſe parts it is called Bootes, 


$ The temperature and vertnes. 


Touching the faculties of theſe plants, we haue 


' nothing to ſaie,eitherout of other mens writings, 


Or Our OWNe CXPpericnce. 


Of Frogge bit. (hap.2$1. 


+ The deſcription. | | 
I Here flotethor twimmeth vpon the vp- 
per parts of the water a ſmall plant, 
which we vſually cal Frogge bit,hauing 
litle round leaues,thick & ful of mice,very like to 
theleaues of wall Peniwoort: the flowers g:ow 
vpon long {temmes among the leaues of a white 
colour, with acertaine yellow thrum in the mid- 
dle, conſiſting of three ha : in ſtead of rootes 
ithath(lEder ſtrings, which grow outof a ſhort 
& {mall head.as it were, from whence the leaues 
ſpring, inthe bottomof the water : from which 
head alſo come forth ſlopewiſe cerraine {MMgs, 
by which growing coond;h multipheth irſcltec. 
| * Theplace. 
\ . Jt is founde ſwimming or floting almoſt in 
every ditch, pond,poole,orſtanding water, in all 
the ditches abour Saint George his fieldes, and 
| intheditches by the Thames ſide neere to Lam- 


| | beth marſh, where any that is diſpoled may 
| | ſeeir. ' % Thetime, _ 


It fdouriſheth and flowreth moſt part ofal the 


% The names. | 


| | Iris calledof ſome Rane mY (us, and Mor ſus 
 Reneand N,ymphea parua. | 


% The 


592 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| | *%* Thetemperature andvertnes, ; Sales. 8] 
Itisthoughtto be Species fonte/is, or Potamogeitonis, a kinde of Pondeweede , and to have the. 
Gee laden that bebe = it. "NT : =] rhe-ohes 


Of water Lillie, Chap.282. 


| * The kindes. | 
There be diuers ſorts of water Lillies,ſome ercater and others leſſer, | | 


x Nymphas alba. al 2 Nymphes lurea. 
+ od watcr Lillic. | Yellowwarter Lillie. 


> 


- dy DP — IR 26- OP > em MP OI" VE. or PEO 9 arena 1,4 
Q 


Wo FO apr (tre Og +1 + 4969 et 


""_ ayes: 


Wn, SIE | Y 
/—adnr @ Caf 4 Nt #4 
V \\ — 
CSS 


——JOAYNMQ 
| — NEAL S 


, 
o 
k 
< —— =Y 
Nw fo 
=—S my 


* The deſeription. 


I (He white water Lillie or Nezuphar,hath great round leaues,in ſhape of a buckler, thicke, 
fat,and full of iuice, ſtanding vpon long round and ſmoorh footeſtalks, full of a {pungious 
TINT ſubſtance, which lcaues do ſwim or flote vypon the top of the water : ypon the endof eche 
italke growerh one flower onely,of colour white , conſiſting of many little, long , ſharpe po 
leaue s,in the middeſt whereof be many yellow threds :after the flower ir bringeth foorth a rounde 
head,in which lieth blackiſh glirering ſecede. The rootes be thicke, full of knors, blacke without 


| = T andpungie within,out of which growerh a multitude of ſtrings, by which iris faſtnedinthe 
VIC, q | | 
| | || 2 The 


ET. | .HISTORIE (OF PLANTS. 57 673 

The leaues of the yellow water Lillie be like ro the other, yer are they ailietle longer. The ſtalkes 
; frhe flowers and leaues be like: the flowers be yellowe,confiſting onely of fiuelttle thor leaucs 
©.meching round; in the middeſt of which growerh a ſimall round head,or button, ſharpe towards 
thepoint compaſſed abour with many yellowethreds, it whichgphengus ripe, liealſo glitrering 
Tedes, greacerthenthoſcofthe orher,and leflezthen VWheat.cornes, The roots bethick Jonp fc: 
ae "ane dents,aSiewerewhite both within and withour,of a ſpungious —_— 


S N hes ulba minor by 
The imall) hice y;ater Lillie. 


m_— 0/1 
' FT. >Y, # 
A MANN Baen-/. 


' —> = ; : ' 
a. \ (<9 , « | 


I: 
\y 


*W 
| Y) s 
|; 8/4 
SD A 
ap} 
= 24 , 
MO 


Q 
, 


8 
F'# 


* The dcſer:3 tiow: 


3 Thefmall whitewater Lillie floteth likewiſe ypon the water, hauinga ſingle roote , with ſome 
tewe fibres faltned thereto:from which rieth vp manylong, rounde,ſmooth;and ſoft fooreſtaikes, 
ſome of which do bring foorth arth* ende faire broad rounde buckler leaues like ynto the prece- 
dent, bur lefſer: on the other fooreſtalkes ſtandeprerie white flowers , conſiſting of five ſma!l 
leaues apeccc,hauinga little yellowe ivrthe middle thereof, 
4 Theiſmall ye!lowe water Lillic, hath a little threddie roote,creeping in the bottome of the wa- 
ter,and difperting it felfe farre abroad;zfrom which riſe ſmall render ſtalkes,ſmooth and foft,where- 
ondogrow lictle buckler leaues like the laſt deſcribed; likewiſe on the other {mall ſtalke ſtandeth a 
tuktotmany flowers,contrarie to all the reſt ofhis kinde,of a ſhining yellow colour: the leaues and 
flowers likewiſe tote vponthe water as the others do. 
5 Ihisdwarte water Lillie,differeth not from the other ſmall yellowe water Lillie , ſaving thar, 
On kinde hath ſharper pointed leaues, andthe whole plant is altogirher leſſer, wherem liech 
ce elierence, | 
Vu 1 5 Nympbes 


674 THE SECOND | BOOKEIOF! THE 


N'} 46 lutea minima. wh , is; 
on_—_ watcr Lillie, | 219 4 | #The places. | | 
ur bt ff fr {8 Theſe herbes do growe in ſennes, (1 
+ waters,broad ditches, andit brooks acme 
"I + flovrly,and omeimenio greaaiuens,. | 
They flower and flouriſh molt of the fom- 
mer moneths, 
+ The names. 


ery © bom writer 0 Dt 
as Hereuli : m French gg. 


Plompen: in Engliſh water Lille, wa- 
b * The temperature. | 
We a9 660 l frat bg 


Bur water Lillie wk | Kath the white "ay 
ers 15 of greater rad omuch as it ſtaieththe 
whilis] :but both this ha theother that hath the blacke roote are drunkein red wine : they have = 
alſo a ſcouring qualirie ; therefore they both clenſe away the — hewe,, ).an be alſo good againſt 
the pilling away of the haire of the head; againſt the morphew they are din water, and for 
the pilling away of the haire in Tarrezbut for theſe things thatis _/ whigh, ath the blacke Foote, 
and for the other that which hath the whireroote. 
C a Thos faith, thar being ſtamped and laide ypon the wounde, itis reported roftai the 
cedin 
The Phiſitions of our age do commende the! flowers of white xymphes againſt the inficnites 
of the head which come ofa hotcaule : and do certainly affirme, that thexoote of the yellowecu- 
reth hot diſcaſes of the kidncies and bladder, and is fingular good gn the running of the 
raines, - 

E Theroote and ſeedeofthe orear water Liftliey i is verie good againſt venerie or fleſhly deſire, if 
one do drinke the decoCtion jen vie the ſeede or roote in powder in his meates, br it drieth 
vp the ſeede of generation,and ſo cauſerh a manto be chaſte eſpecially vſedin brorh with fleſh, | 

E 7 conſerue of the flowers is good for che dilcaſes aforcſaid,andi is gogd alſo againſt hot bum- 
ing feauers, 

The flowers being made into oile,as yee do makeoile of roſes,doth coole8& &rſrigerae cn 
ſweat and quiet dcepe,and purreth away all venereous dreames: the temples oats | 
of the hands and feete,and the breſt being anointed for the aha chegenieor mor 1 
_ themforthe other. 

H Thegreencleaues of the great water Lillie,cicher the white or the yellow laid _ 
of the backs i intheſmall, Et ceaſerh the inuoluntarie flowing of the Ge. 

norrhes,or running of the reines, being wh 7 won ror. elandfreſh appt 


To, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | | 
Of Pondweede, or water Spike. Chap.283\ 


| Potamoge3zon Latifolinms 2 Potamogeiton anguſtifolim. 
Broadlcafed Pondweed. | | Narrow jeafed Pondweed. m, 


La 4 
k # 


. 
A *S 
' - 


- 


SD % r 


k \ & ay \W » 4* 


&* The deſeription. 


Ondweed hath little ſtalks,flender,fpreading like thoſe of the vine, andiointed: the leaues 

” belong,ſmallerthen the leaues of Plantine, and harder, which ſtanding vpon ſlender and 

| longſtemg or foote ſtalks, ſhewe themſelues aboue the water , and lie flat along vpon the 

ſuperficiall or vpper part thereof, as do theleaues of the water Lillie : the lowers growe in ſhort 
eares,andare of a lightred purple colour, like thoſe of Redſhankes : the ſeede is hard, — 

2 There!s another Pondweed deſcribed thus; irſhooteth foorrh into many flender and rounde 

ſtems, which are diſtributed into ſundric branches: his leaues are broad, long, and ſharpe pointed, 

yet much lefſe then the firſtkinde: our of the boſomes of the branches and leaues there ſpring cer- 

tine little ſtalkes, which beare ſundrie ſmall white moſſie lowers, which do turne into plaine and 

round ſeeds. like the common Tare or Verch: his rooteis fibrous, throughly faſtnedin the ground. 


% Theplace, 
Theſe herbes dogrowin ſtanding waters, podles ponds,and ditches,almoſt euery where. 
*% Thetime, 
They do lowerin Iune and Luly. | 
| *% The nones. 


; Itis called of the Grecians zmzwyerr: in Latin Fontati,, and Spiertarin high Dutch Jamkraut : | 


inlow Duch Fonteyncrupt ; in French Eſt a cane: in Engliſh Pondweed,and water Spike. 

% The temnerature. 

Pondweed faith Ge/en doth binde and coole, like as dothKnotgraſſe, but his eſſence is thicker 
enthat of Knorgraſle, | | | 

. Vyv 2 *% The 


— 


% 


676 THE SECOND->BOOKE OF THE 

ff | | & The vertues, 

A Irisgood againſtthe itch,and conſunnii 3 or eating vicers,as Dzoſcorides writerh, 
'B Alfvitis good being applied to the inflatimation of the legges, whetein 7gmis [acer hath = 


Of water $ aligot water Caltrops,or water Nuts. Chap.284. 


' Tribulus LQNAHICME. 


Water Caltrops. * Thede ferigtion, | 


TT 7 Ater Caltrops hath lon ſlender 
\ V ſtalkes, growing vp and ri Ing from 
the bottome of the water , & moun. 


ting aboue the ſame, weake, and lender, havin 
heere and there vnder the water certaine aſſo; 

- fullof ſmall firings and threddic haires: theftem 
rowards the top of the water is veric greatin re. 
ſpect of that which is lJower:the leaues large and 
ſomewhat round, not vnlike thoſe of the Poplar 
or Elme tree leaues,a little creuiſed and notched 

about the edges : amongſtand vnder theleaues 
groweth the fruit,which 1s triangled, hard, ſharp 
pointedand prickly, in ſhapelike hurtfull enging 
in the wars, caſt in the paſſage of the enimic tg 
annoy the feete of tlieir horles,called Caltrops, 
whereof it tooke his name; with'n which is con- 
teined a white kernel}, in taſte almoſt like the 

| Cheſhut, which is reported robe caten greene, 

|. andbeingdricdand grounde to ſerue in iteadof 
bread. | | 

uh Theplae. 

Cordw ſaith, that it groweth in Germanic in 
miriec lakes, and in citie ditches which haue mud 
inthem; in Brabant and in other places of the 
low countries, itis found oftentimes in ſtanding 
waters, and ſprings. Mathiolws writeth, that it 

| growethnotonely inlakes of ſweere water, but 
| - alſo incertaineditches bythe ſea neer vnto Ve- 
nice, 


| % The time. 
It ouriſheth in Tune, Tuly, and Auguſt. : 
is * The names. _. | | 
The Grzcians cal] it 7% ir-446 : the Latines Tribulms aquatitis, and anwaticus, and Tribulw la 
cutrs: the Apothecaries 7 ribaluws marinus: in high Dutch UNaſſer nut3 ; the Brabenders UK 
ter noten + and of thelikeneſle of iron nailes F1ncktifcrs: the French men Afacres: in Engliſh it 
is named Water Caltrops, Saligot,and water Nuts,moſt do call the fruite of this Calcrops, Caſts: 
res 45uatiles or water Cheſnuts, : bt | i; 
|\W4 | * The temperature, | 
Water Caltrops is of a colde nature, it confitteth of a moiſt eſſence, which in this 1s More wa: 
eerie then in the land Caltrops,whetcin a carthie coldeis predominant, as Galen faith. 
| | 1 % The wertues. 1A ; 
A Theherbe ved inmaner of apultis,as D;sſeorides teacheth,is goodagainſt all inflammations 
hotfvellings: boiled with honie and water, it perlcRtly healeth cankers/in the mouth, fore gum33 
and the almonds of the throre, 5 | The 


HISTORIE OF/ PLANTS.” :. 


ligot, and 
the bel 


7 iff 


which are troubled with the ſtone andgravell; '/ 17 ty potions 00 00 Peng bf tu 


any venemous beaſt,and refiſteth all venome and poiſon, 


the Thracians faith Plinie that dwell in Strymona, do fatten their horſes with the leaues of Sa- B 
. andrhey themſclues do feede of thekernels, ttiaking very ſweere bread therof,which binceth 
BY $3 5 ERAP {1} $0 hg OR 9 Os RT | 


677 


Ts 7 234%, i $9119 | }.| IT WO ' ; | 
be nuts or fruitof Tr:bulus aquatices, or Saligot, being drunke in wino,is good for them C 
mr bigthag 1 tiers This: inal oo 
The amedrunke in like maner,or laidoutwardlie to the place,helpeth thoſe that are bitten with D 


# Thelcaues of Saligot be giuen againſt all inflammartions and vicers of the mourh : the putrifac- E 


_ nandcorruption of the iawes,andaguinlt the iggoetill 0 rotge I) 
\wowder made of the nurs,are giuen to ſuch as pille 
do binde the belly very much, 
| | _ pA JY | 7 | WITT & *:\xx% 
| Y 127! oli} ge) 


ater Se er. 285. 
Of w4 mgreene,or freſh water Soldier. Chap.285 


1 Militars Aizoides. 
' Freſh water Soldier, 


*% Thedeſcription. 
TD Reſh water Soldieror water Houſlecke hath 
leaues like thoſe of herbe Aloc, or Semper” 
" *. viummn,but (honer &leſler, fer round abour 
the edges with certain ſtiffe and (hot prickles: a- 
' mong which come foorth ditiers caſes or huskes, 
| very like to crabs clawes:out of which when they 
© open growe white flowers , confiiting of three 
leaues,alcogither like thoſe of Frog bic, hauing 
inthe middle little yellowiſh threds ; in {teade of 
rootes there'be long ſtrings,rounde,white, veric 
like rogreatharpe ſtrings , or tolong woormes, 
which falling downe from a ſhort head 'thar 
brought foorth theleaues, go to the bottome-of 
the water, and yet be they ſeldome there faſtned: 
there alſo growe from the ſame other ſtrings 
aflope,by which the plantis multiplicd after the 
maner of Frogs bir. Kos 
* Theplace. 
This is founde inlakes or ſtanding waters,and 
-dicches, in veriemanie riuers in the lowe coun- 
tries,the greateſt partof the leaues togither with 
the flowers ſtanderh aboue the water : the other 
parts of the plant are vnder the water. 
| *% The time. 
Ire flowreth in lune, and ſomtimes in Auguſt: 
* The names, 
It may becalied Sedwr aquatzle, or water Sen- 
__ | -greene, tharisto ſaie ,of the likenefle 0; herbe 
& If _ .,._ + Aloe, whichs allo called in Latine Sedup:; of 
lome Cencr; chels,or ws cy re in Engliſhwater Houſlecke Knights Pondwoort,and of ome 
Knights water Sengreene, water Soldier,or wading Pondweed: ir ſeemeth to be Stratieres 4- 
quatilis,or Stratiotes pot amzios,or Knights water VVoundwoort,which may likewiſe be named in La- 
une Murtaris aquatica, and Mileteris Aizoidesor Soldiers Yarrow ; tor irgroweth in the warer,and 
hk. ypon 1r,and if thoſe {trings whichir ſendethto the botrome of the watex be no roots, it alſo 
live a without rootes, | | 
| | we Thetemperature, 
Thisherbe is of a cooling nature and WE 5 


Vv3 | * The 


—_ 


bloud, andare troubled with grauel!, and F 


698 THE' SECOND'BOOKE/ OF THE 

A This Houflecke ſtajeth the bloud ary 7 wee from the kidneies, it keepeth greenwounde, 
from being inflawed,andit is good againſt Saint Antoniesfre and bor fwellings beingapplied 11. 
to them = is equall inthe vertues aforeſaid with the former, | | "TY ey 


7d $ $# * ; 
* : d Hee 


o : 
3 
” 


. 

_ ifs 
1 

{ 


Of water Yarrow,and water Gilloflower. Chap.286. 


1 Yiols pelaprs. | | 2 Millefolium aquaticun. 
_ Water Vioker. |  WaterYartow. 


2 a 3 b 
s [4 
© 


* The deſeription. 


\ A . 
1-3 Ater Violethath long and great iagged leaues, veric finelycur or rent like Yarrowe, 
| vw but ſmaller: among which come yp {mall ſtalkes a cubite and a halfe high, bay at 
|  thetopſmall white flowers like ynto ſtocke Gilloflowers , with ſome yellownefle in 
the middle. The rootes are longand ſmall like blacke threds,and at the ende whereby they are falt- 
ned tothe ground they are white,and ſhining like ChryſtalL ; IEEE | 
2 Water Milfoile,or water Yarrow, bath long and large leaues deepelycur, with many diuifions 
like Fennell, but finelicr iagged, ſwimming onthe water. The roote is ſingle, long,androun 
which bringeth vp a right, itraight,and tender ſtalke,ſer in ſundrie places with the like leaues, but 
ſmaller. The flowers growe at the toppe of the ſtalke ruft faſhion , and like vnto the lande Yat- 


ToOWe, | 


HISTORIE of BPUANTS. 679 


Millefoliuwn fue Mayatr iphylion fl. re & ſemine Ranunculi aquatict, Hepttice facte. ; 
Crowtfootc,or water Miltoile, | at *%T be acſcr 1p! iow. 

# | 3 This water Milfoi'c, diticterit from all the kinds 
aforclaid, having a roote in the bottome of the wa- 
ter made of many hairie ſtrings , which yeeldeth 

- vpanakedflenderſtallewithmn the water, andthe 
xelt of the ſtalke which foteth vpon the water di- 
videth it {elfe into ſundry other branches & wings, 
which ate be-daſht with fine ſmall tagged leaucs 
like vato Cammomill, or rather reſembling hairie 
Taſlels or fringe, then leaues: from the boſomes 
whereof come toorth ſmalland tender braunches, 
enery braunch bearing one floiver like vnto water 
Crowfoorewhite of colour,with a little yellowein 
the mid({t;the whole plant reſemibleth water Crow- 
foote in allthings ſaue in thebroadeleaues. 

There is another kind of water Violet very like \ 
the former, ſauing that hisleaues are thicker and 
fatter, ſomewhat reſembling the leanes of Lonchi- 
tis, bur as ſmall as Fennell, faſhioned like vnto | 
wings,and the flowers ſomewhat ſmaller, : 

There is likewiſe another kind of water Milfoile 
which hath leaves very like vnto water Violet, 
ſwaller, and not fo manyin number : the ſtalke is 
ſmall and tender, bearing yellowe gaping flowers 

faſhioned like a hood, or the ſmall Snapdragon, 
which cauſed Pezeto pur vnto his name this addi- 
tainent Galericulatum that is, hooded, The rootes 
are ſmall and threddie, with ſome few knobs hang- 

t- .ingrhercat,like the ſounds of fiſh, 

| | | %Theplice. ; = 

They be found in lakes and ſtanding waters,or in waters thatrunſlowly, Ihave not founde ſuch 

pas ie of it-in any one place asin the water ditches adioining to Saint George his ficlde necre 


*, . 
- # 
W.2 / 
Ct Zn tt 
— Y he p is 1 k 
YL , 
 Þ; 
| JT . "ru. 
ml 
% : 


It 


Wy 
\ 


> \ % RI; 
> NAS.) ak - 


Fs, 


"4 V7 JF 
OW 
0 


y : N "I % 
L To SS XX x » 
—_ . = k ” %. 
*A\ " by - 
bo - " } > C 
4 F i . *% La 
%. 1 pe - 
\ to 426 ; * 
4 17Y Y ” 
b 


1F-48 


" 


* Oo ps ” l\ 7 
399 a <'Fe I G/H i 4 
E | q & \ 
= = / CEED oy 


_ 
”: 


JJSV._-/ 


dun. ' 

| + The time. 
They flower forthe molt part in Maic and une. 

| 4 The names. 


The firſt is called in Dutch water Ciolicren;thart is to faic,jo/a aqueritis: in Engliſh water Gil- , 
loflower,or water Violet :in French Gyroflees d' cane + Mathiolus maketh this to be alſo Myr jophylls 
'p ora kinde of Yarrow,although it doth not agree with rhe deſcription thereof: for nexther 

ath it one ſtalke onely,nor one ſingle roote as Afyriophyllon or Yarrow is deſcribed to haue:for the 
rootes are full of ſtrings, and it bringeth foorth many ſtalks. 


The ſecond is named in Greeke wet99997 :in Larine Adlefoliwrmr, and Myr ropylianm , and alſo Su- 


percilin Veneris :in ſhops itis vnknowne :this Yarrowe differeth from rhat of the land: the thirde 
is ſufficiently ſpoken of in his title. 


*% The temperature and erties. 5 | 
Water Yarrow as Doſcoridesfaith,is of a dric facultie: and by reaſon that itraketh away hot in- a 
flanmations and ſivellings,it ſcemeth to be of a colde nature, for Dioſcorides affirmeth, that water 
Yarrow 1s aremedie againſt inflanumations in greene wounds, if with vineger it beapplicd greene 
or drie,and js giuen inwardly with vincger and ſalt to thoſe that haue fallen from an high place. 
Mage Gillolower , or water Violet, is thought to be colde and drie , yer hath it no vic in Phi- 3 
at all, | | 


— 


——_ 


V v4 Of 


699 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of Duckes meate,and other ſwimming herbes. (hap.28 Js: 


Lens Part +4 | 
Duckes meate, 


& The de ſtription. 

'Vckes meare is as it were a certaine greer, 
D moſſe,with very little round leaues of the 
bignes of Lencils: outof the middlewher. 

of on the neather ſide growe downe verie fine 
|  threds likehaires, which are tothem in ſteede of 

NES '- rootes:it hath neither ſtalke,flower nor fruite, 

a RE- 1] _  *%*Theplace, C1Y 
AT IRE SOA © Iris found in ponds, "2 


? 

4 Fr 
7* 
+ 
*» 
»x 

3 
© 
- 
” 
F 


FA inother ſtanding waters euery where, 
The time of Duckes meate is knownets all. 
| _ %*Thenames, | 

'  Duckesmeatis _— wars Lens licaftric 

' Lens aquatilia, 8 Lens paluſtris: of the Apathecz- 

| # nies —_ aque Lenziculacin high DutchGeer, 

1  linſen: inlowe Dutch UWaterlinſen, & more 

- vſuallyEnden gruen, that is tolay Anatum her. 
b4,Ducks herbe,bicauſe Ducks do feede thereof: 


Ga/enſheweth that it is cold and moilt after a 
cond degree, 
| | | "'** Thevertues, Ke 
A Droſeoridesfaiththaritis a remedie againſt all manner of inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire 
and hot agues,ifthey be either applied alone,or elſe vicd with parched barly male : It alſo knicterh 
ruptures in yoong children, i. 5FY | ; 
B Duckes meate mingled with fine wheaten flower and applied, preuaileth much againſt hot ſwel- 
/ lings,as Phlegmons.Erifipelas,and the paines of the joints. 1 8 
C Theſamedothhelpe the fundament gutte fallen downe in yoong children. 


Lo 


oak 


| Of water Cronfoote. Chap.288 | 


+ The deſcription. 


I Aret Crowfoote hath ſlender braunchestrailing farre abroade, whereupon do er 

vw leaues vnder the warer moſt finelycurt and iagged like thoſe of Cammomill, 1 le 

 * - abouethewaterare ſomwhat round, indented about the edges in forme not walke the 

ſinall tender leaues of the mallow,burlefler : among which do grow the flowers ſmall and white of 

colour,madeof fine littleleaues with ſome yellowneſle in the middle like che flowers of the Strabe- 

ric,and of a ſweerte ſmell; after which there come rounde, roughand prickly knaps like thoſe of the 
field Crowfoote, The rootes be veric ſmall hairie ſtrings. #7 { 

2 Thercis another plant growing inthe waterof ſmall moment, yet nos amiſle ro be remembred, 

called Hederuls aquatica or water Iuic,the which is verie rare to finde ;neuerthelefleI found it wie 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |” 681. 
Os rmondſey houſe neer to London, and neuer elſe where : it hath ſmal threddie ſtrings 
£ — and ſtalkes xiling from the bottome of the water to the top, whereunto are faſte- 
Ja ſnallleaues ſwimming or floting ypon the water triangled or three cornered like vnto thoſe 
of barraine Tuic,or rather noble Liuerwoort: barraing of flowers and feeds. Fu | 
There is likewiſe another herbe of ſmall reckomng thar floreth vpon the warer called Sre{zris 
jca or water Starwoort , which hath many ſmall graffie ſtems like threds,comming from the 
oye of che water vnto the vpper face of the ſame : whereupon dogrow ſmal double flowers of 
agreenith or herbie colour, | | | | | 


1 Rannnculus aquati(s by 5 2 Haleruls 4quitics. | 
Warer Crowfoote. | | Waterluie. 


IN) p 
, © F] MF \ 9 * | » 


TT Lad 


=8 - 
= 
j _ ;Fe 
KS | 


|  *% Theplace. | | : 
==- Crowfoote' groweth by ditches nl ſhallow ſprings , and in other moilt and plaſhic 
_ gf | 
f- *+ The time. 
TefloWerhin Aprill and May,and ſometimes in Tune, 
— * The names. 

Water Crowfooteis called in Latine Ranunculice aquatilis , and Polyanthemun aquztile : in En- 
gliſh water Crowfoote, and white water Crowfoote : moſt Apothecaries and-Herbariſts doe 
erronioully name it Hepatics aquatica,and Hepatcea alba,and with greater ercor they mixe it in medi- 
cines inſtcede of Hepatica albr or grafle of Pariiaſſus, 


; % The temperature and vertues. 
Water Crowfoote is hot and like to common Crowfoote, | A 


, Dragons. Lhap.289. 


% Thekindes. 
Þ Here be two ſorts of Dragons , the greater and the leſſer : and beſides theſe a third one which 


' groweth in waters, | | 
- * Thedeſcription. | | "" 
I "TT Hegreat Dragonriſerh vp with a ſtraight ſtalke a cubitand a halfe high or higher, thicke, 
'round,fmooth,ſprinckled with ſpots of diuers colors like thoſe of the adder or ſnakes. The 
+] leaues are great and wide coniſting of ſeauen or more ioined togither in order : cueric one 
of which is long and narrow much like ro the leaues of Docke, ſmooth and ſlipperie :out ofthe to 
of theſtalke groweth a long hoſe or huske greater then thar of the Cockow pintle, ofa greeni 


colour, 


6832 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE | 
colour withour,and withincrimſon,with his peſtell which is blackiſh,long, rhicke, and pointeq ls 
a horne: the skin or filme whereof when the ſecede waxeth bigge being ſtretched and brokenin fin. 
der there appecreth the fruite,like to a bunch or cluſter of grapes: the berries whereof ar the firſt be 
preene,afterwards red and full of ivice ,in which is conteined ſeece that isfomewhathard: the root 
continueth freſh;thick,like ro a knob,white,couered with a thinne pilling,oftcntimes of the bignes 
of a meane apple,full ofwhite licrle chreds appenden tthereto. | 
2 Theleſſer Dragon is like Aron, or wake-Robin in leaucs, hoſe, or huske, peſtell and berries yer 
arenot the leaues ſprinckled with blacke, but with whitiſh ſpots which periſh not fo ſoone as thoſe 
of wake-Robin,but endure rogither with the berxies,cuen vnrill winter : theſe berries alſo be notof 
a deepe red, but of acolour inclining to ſaffron, The roote is not vnlike to the Cuckowpint, ha. 
uing the forme of a bulbe,full of ſtrings,with diuers rude ſhapes ofnewe plants, wheceby ic greatly 
increaſcth, l at 
: I Dr acort ia? mais. 
Great Dragons. ' 


| * Thedeſeription. 
3 Tlherooreot Warer Dragon is not round like a bulb, but very long,creeping and jointed, and 
ofmeane bignes : out of the ioints whereof ariſe the ſtalkes of the leaues which are round, ſmooth, 
and ſpungie within,and there grow downwards certaine white and ſlender ſtrings: rhe fruit ſpring- 
eth forth atthe rop vpon a ſhort ſtalke rogither with one of the leaues, being at the beginning co- 
ucred with little white threds , which are in ſteedeof the flowers ; after that ir growerh into 2 
- bunchorcluſter,at the firſt greene, and whenitis ripe, red,lefler then that of Cuckowpint, but not 
!eſſe biting: the leaues are broad, greeniſh, glib and ſmooth,jn faſhion like thoſe of Tuic, yet leſſer 
then thoſe of Cuckowpint,but thar thing whereunts the cluſtered fruite groweth is alſo leſſer, and 
in thatpart which is cowards the fruite,charis to ſay, the vpper part is white, p* 
| j ; | # 4 


— , 


\/{HISTORIE OF. PLANTS, - | 68; 
_ Thegrear Dragon of cMethiolms deſcription is a ſtranger, not onelyin England, but elſewhere 


SA, 

bd ” 
4 : 
Fa 


y thing chat we can learn of the ancient writers,orthoſe liuing in my time : my ſelfe haue dili- 

-nkly inquiredof moſt ſtrangers skilfull in plans that haue reſorted vnto me for conference ſake, 
[JJIK man can gine me any certaintie thereof : and therefore I rhinke it not amiſle to giue you his 
46 bet Co Eheialbn , referring what might be ſaid to a further conſideration ; for 
4s yer I rake it for a fained picture, | te. + ad | 


V 
wg + 


i > y Water Dragons. " q SPikie Dragons. | 


* 


wb 
_— _ 
- 


Tabs, } = = 
eB; EINE = 0 


The greater and the leſſer Dragons are planted in Gardens. The water Dragons grow in wa- 

tery and marriſh places , for the moſt part in Fennie and ſtanding waters. 
Be rply. *% Thetime. ; 

The berries of theſe plants are ripe in Aurumne. 
| | t The names. 

The Dragon is called in Greekt 4e2:imer: in Latine Dracunculus. The greater is named , Ser- 
peniar ia mazor, of ome Biſaria, and Colubrina: Cordus calleth it Dracuncnlas Polyphyllos, and Laph 
Cripwn: in high Dutch Schlangenkraut : in lowe Durch Speerwoztelet in French Serpen- 
tare; m[ralian Dragontea : in Spaniſh Taragontra:in Engliſh Dragons, and Dragon woort. Any 
leixscalleth Dragon Dracontes, and ſerteth downe many ſtrange names thereof, which whether 
they agree with the greater or the lefler, or both ofthemhe doth not expound : as Pythonion, An- 

ments, Sauchrimaton, Therion, Schanos, Dorcadion , Typhonion , Theriophozan , and Eminion. 
here ſhewerth that Dragon is alfo called Aronzz,bicauſc it is like to Aron, 


L 


| % The temperature. ' = 
% iagon 35 Galen faith, hath a certainelikenes with Aron or wake Robin, both in leanes and al- 


tote, yer more biting,and more bitter then it, and therefore hotter and of thinner parts: it is 
alſo 


684 THE $ECOND: BOOKE OF THE 
alſoſomhing binding, which by reaſon that it is adioined with the rwo former 


{aie,biting and birtex,tis made 1 gearetficac 


becialiynll 
IN | 


? 


they 


qualitie then is conuenient for wounds, 


ts inthe cies. | 


root 
re vnto him tharbeareth Dragons abour kin /ans 


hath made mention of Dragon in his booke ofthe faculties of nouriſhments, 
he ſaichy#har the roote of Dragon being rwiſe orthciſe ſod, to the ende it mayloſe all his acrimo- 
nic or ſharpeneſle , is ſomerimes giuen as Aron or wake-Robin is , when itis necdfull roexvell the 
 moreforccably thicke and clammie humours that are troubleſome ro the cheſt andlungs. 

H And Dieſcorides writeth that the roote of the lefſer Dragon being both ſodde Ph, roſte with 
honie, or taken of itſelfe in meare , cauſerh the humours which ſticke faſt in the cheſt to be eafilic 
voided, | LN , | $4 | 

I Theiuiceof the garden Dragons, as faith De/corides, bein 2 dropped intothe cies, doth'clenſc 
them, and greatly on the dimneſle of the bets. 6 jo HA: : | 

K Thediſtilledwater hath vette againſtrhe peſtilence or anypeſtentiall feuer or poiſon, being 
drunke blood warme with the beſt Treacle or michridate, | [ | Os 

L Theſinell of the flowers is hurtfullco women newly conceiued with child, Bias 


Of Gockowpint, or wake Robin. (hap.290. - 
| *% The kindes. | Pan, 


| F: = be diuers ſorts of wake Robin or Cockow pint differing in names, titles, and alſoin forme | 
and figure, © | | | ! 


vi t% Thede ſcription, [| | | 
' rwmor Cockow pinthath great,large, ſmooth, ſhining, ſharpe pointed leaues, beſpotted | 
heere and there with blackiſh ſpors, mixed with ſome hewnele : among which riſethvp3 
ſtalke nine inches long , beſpecked in manyplaces with cercaine| purple ſpots. Itbeareth - 
alſo a certaine long hoſe or hood , in proportion like the eare of an hare: in the middle of which | 
hood commeth foortha peſtell or clapper of adarke mvrrie or palepurple cclour: which being 
paſt,there ſucceedeth in place therof a bunch or cluſter of berries in manner of a bunch we xt 
greene at the firſt , burafter they be ripe of a yellowiſh red like corall and full of pith , with ic 
threddie additaments annexed thereto. ? ; [ | | 
2 Fs 19g is in Aegypta kind of Aru», which alſois to be ſcene in Africa, and in certaine places of | 
Luſirania, abour rivers and floods,which differeth from that which groweth in Boggs andother 
parts of Europe, This plant is large and great, and the leaues thereof are greater then thoſe of the 
water Lillie: the roote is thicke and tuberous, and toward the lower end thicker and broader , and 
may be cazen. Iris reportedto be withour flower and ſeede, bur the increaſe tharir hath is bythe 


fibres which runne and ſpread fromthe rootes.. The. 


% 


© HISTORIE- OF PLANTS." 


1 CA WMA 


; » | ; & 
| TY | ff # ; . , % ” 
3 : 14% 4 & 4 þ4 | : | 2 | nf 
: , ho 4 * * #4 + » $ : Oo ; | j | 
. = on & - | . 


»4.5 &# A 4 


4 


if 
ww 
. 


R444 © bp 


nh 


4 
VIA 


a 
wn 


IT 
WH! 


 *%Theplace, Fg: 
| Cockow pint groweth in woods neere vnto ditches vnder hedges , euerſe where in ſhadowie 
aces, | | | | | 
n ; ___ ** Thetime. | 
| Theleaves appeere preſently after winter : the peſtell ſheweth it ſelfe our of his huske or ſheath 
nIune whileſt the leaues are in withering; and whe they are gone, the bunch or cluſter of berries 
becommerh ripe which is in Iuly and Auguſt, A 
.| | + The names. | 1 | 
| Theregrowethin Aegypta kinde of Aron or Cockow pint which is found alſo in Africa, and 
likewiſe in certaine places of Portingall neere vnto riuers and ſtreames , thar diffeterh from thoſe 
of out countries growing, which the people of Caſtile call Aanta de nueitre ſenora : moſt would 
_ it be called Cofocaſir, but Dzoſeorides ſaith that Colocaſia is the roote of Fabe Aegyptiz, or the 
ane of Aegypr, 7 | 
The PnaEsuns Cockow pintis called in Latin Arwn: in Greek Z-5» : in ſhops Jarws,& Barba-Aron:of 
others Peswvitu(;: of the Syrians Luphe: of the men of Cyprus Colocaſia, as we finde among the ba- 
ſtard names.P/izre in his 24. booke 16.chaptet doth witneſle that there is grear difference berween 
Aron  Dracontiam.although there hath bin ſome controuerſic about the fame among the old wri- 
ters, affirming them to beall one: in high Duecch ir is called JIaffen pint t in Iralian Grzaro: in Spa- 
niſh Tay: in low Dutch C alf8uort tin French Piedde wears: in Engliſh Cockow pint, and Coc- 
kow pintle, wake Robin,Prieſtspintle, Aron,Caltes foote,and Rampe,and of ſome Starch woort. 
| | & The temperature. | | | 
The faculties of Cockow pint doe differ according ro the varieticof countries: for theroote 
heereof as. Galen inhis booke of the facultics of nouriſhments doth affirme, is ſharper or more 
biting in ſome countries then in others almoſt as much as Dragons, contratiwiſe in Cyren a 
tie Africke,yetis it generally in all places hot anddric,atthe leaſt in the firſt degree. 


%* The 


686 THE, $ECONDiGOORB/OF! THE 
| "= + , he Yahbab ; | 

A Ifany man a well ae le and tough humours which are wihered the-cheſt and 
- be tary and voided ontby couphing,then that Cuckowpint i eſt dhe molt, ngoto | 

B Iriseaten being fodden in two or three w atets,and freſh put ro , whereby. it nay loſe his 2etj. 
monic, which being fo eaten they cutthicke humours meanly, bur Dragopsi is better for the lame 
pu 

GC Dioſcorides ſheweth "mY the leaues alſoare. picſeruct! to becaten! - and ſhewerh that 
be after they be dried andboiled, and. vrirerh alſo, that the how hath a [par | 
againſt the gonrbeing laide of amped with Cowes dung. 

D © Beares after they have lien mtheic dens forty daies withoutany maner of ſuſtenance (burwha © 
they get with licking and ſacking their owne feete)do affoone as they come foorth, eatethe herhe | 
Cuckowpintz through the windie nature whereof the hungrie gu ened and made fit apuine * 
to receive ſuſtenaunce3for by abſteiningffrom foode ſo longatime, the: guti isfhrunke or drawen 
ſocloſe togither,thatina mangriri is gue ſhut yp, as Ariftott, AElianae, Paterch, Plinie, my 
others do write. | 

E Themoſtpure and white archi js madeof the rootes of Cuckowpintz bur moſt hurefull "AFG 
hands of che ſaunidreſſe that hach thehandling of it, foritchopperh , bliſtererh z and makerh the 
hands rough and ruggef,and frithall ragrrings, ; Sa + : | 


hg AS Friers Gal, or hooded Cuckonpint. Chap 91. 


&* *« kinaes. 
Fo Riers hood is of two TAE the one broad leafed, the other os; "FR waked, as our later Herbatifts 
have obſcrued : notwithſtanding Methiolu hath ſet foorth he ran] of a thirde fort, as ſhallbe 
_ declared, 


{FILE ® PLE R |... tara tfoltws, 
Broad leafed Friers coule. { __ Narrow leafed Friets coule, 


+HISTORTE OF. PLANTS 685. 


% The de{criviiow. 


CE Ine 
| of berrics, 


| $. / 4 
, F # % 
: 
: 


+ The deſeription. 
[ach tracer divers fmal 
. ſtrings: fromwhich riſeth vp ſundric weake and 
render fooreſtalks,wheron do grow broad leaues 
ſharpe poi of aperfec greene colour, not 
vnlike ell; the hood and peſtell grow- 
eth attheends ofthe like fooreſtalks, which rurn 
into a bunchorcluſter of redde berries like the 


Theſe plants de Englande 
"Theſe plants are ſtrangers in E: : but 
common in ltaly , & eſpecially in Tuſcane abour 
Rome , andin Dalmatia, as © Moiſius Anguiller s 
witneſleth z notwithſtanding I haue two of the 
firſt in my garden, | 
_** The time. ; 
The flowers and fruit of theſe come to perfec- 
. tion when thoſe of Cuckowpint & Dragons do, 


__% Thenames, _ 
Friers hoode is called-of Dioſcorides di2125r tin Þ 
Latine Ariſarws: bur >liny It N#«,0r Aris, 
for in his 24.booke 16.chaprer, he faith that 4ris 
which groweth in AEgypt is like Aron or Cuc- 
kowpint: it may be called in Engliſh after the La- 
[gn h tinename Haro, but inmine opinion it may 
ts Fe | be more fily ſhed Friers hood, or Friers 
coule, towhichthe flowers ſcemerh to be like, whereupon the Spaniards name it Fraz/rlos,as Date- 
I%4 '* The temperature. | 
w—_ coule is like in power andfacultic to the Cuckowpint, yer isit more biting as Galen 


|  * Thewertnes. | | | 

There is no grear-vſe of theſe plants in Phiſickezbur it is reportedthar they ſtaie running or A 
my nap vicers zand likewle thatthere is made of the — — — called 

orccxc Colria, good again filtulacs, and being pur intothe ſecrer part of any lining thing, ir 
rorterh the ſame,as Djoſcorides writerh., f ” 


ay 


- TY of 
> ho? | 
_ \% Ss 


SECOND BOOKE OF FHE 


of *Afirabaeea. (hap 292- 


1 Aſarws. [: 2 Afarina M«thiale. 
Aſarabacca, | {ith | lealian Afarabacca, 


i 


*/% 4 
UF * 


'%T be deſcription. + - 

HeTeaues of Aſtrabacea,arc ſmooth,of a dee greene colour,rounder,broader,and ten- 
derer then thoſe of Inic,andnot cornered at all,not vnlike tothoſe of Yowe bread: the flo- 
 wecs lie cloſe to the rootes, hid yndet the leaues, ſtanding vpon ſlender footeſtalks, of anill 
fauoured purple colour like to the lowers and huskes of Henbete, bad lefſer herein is. conteined | 
{mall ſeedes,corneredand fomewhatrongh: the rootes are many,final,andflender,growing aflope 
vnder the vpper cruſt of the earth,one folded within another;ofan vnpleaſantraſte: but of amoſt 
{wecreand pleaſing fineil hating withall a kinde of biting qualitie. | 

_ 2 } This ſtrangekind of Alarabacca which Marhioizs oF ſer foorth creepeth.ypon rhe grounde, 
in maner ot our common Aftrabacca: the leanes are ſomewhar rounder and rougher , {lightlyin- 
dented about the edges, and ſer vponlong flender footſtalks: the lowers growe harde vnto the 
crount like vnto thote of Cammomill, but much lefſer,of a mealic or duſtigc olour, and not with- 
out {mel}. The rootesare long and flender,creepingvnder the vppercruſt of theearth, of a ſhape 

raſte,and birrepwithall, | | [ - .. F8 , PE WT 

% The ol are. 


Ir delighter1 to growe in ſhadowie places andis very common in moſt gardens. 
Wy ES : * Thetime. | 
The hetbe is alwaics greene,yet dothir inthe ſpring brin 


g foorth newe leaues and flowers, 

1: 1 7 *% The names. 1 | _ 

Itiscalledin Greck imer, Aſarum: in Laing Nardus Ruſtica of divers Perpenſa: Per penſa ow 
| | I | Pacchers 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


pachurigin Pinie it his 21.booke,21.chapter, Afzcey faith ,that CAſarwn is Yulcage, 


$64+#43 


Whereas the Latines Y#/g2eo cleyerhe ſame. 


It is found among the baſtard names that it wascalledofrhe great learned Philoſophers -5:«z <;i;, 
that is Marti ſangwis , or the bloud of Mars : and of the French men Baccay , and thereupon it ſec- 
meth that the word Aſarabacca came, hich the apothecaries vſe,and likewiſe the common people: 
hut there is another Baccharis differing from <AMſaram, yet notwithitanding Crateradorh allo call 


by of both the names hath been the cauſe,that moſt could not ſufficiently expound 


themſelues concerning _Afarwn 8 Baccharis: & that many thimgs haue been written amifle in many 
copiesof Dioſcorides , m the chapter of Afarwm: for when it is ſet downein the Greeke copies a 
ſveete ſmelling garland herbe, it belongeth nor to the deſcription of this CAfarwm, but to that of 
Bacchatis: for Aſerw (as Pliny faith) is fo called bicaulc it is not put into garlands; and ſo by that 
meanes it came to paſſe,that oftentimes the deſcriptions of the old writers were founde corTupted 
and confuſed : which thing, as itis in this place manifeſt, ſo oftentimes it cannot ſo eaſily be mar- 
ked in other places. Furthermore 4ſaram is called in French Cabaret: in high Dutch Hafetwurts ; 
in lowe Dutch Bans ooz2en: in Engliſh Afſarabacca, Folefoote,and Haſell woort. | 

£.j } 8g *% The temperature. | 

Theleaues of Afarabacca archotand drie, with a purging qualitic 'ioined thereunto: yet not 

 withouta certaine kinde of aſtrition or binding, The rootes are alſo hot and drie : yetmore then 
the leaues: they are of thinne and ſubrill parts: they procuce vrine , bring downe the deſired fick- 
neſle, andare like in facultic, as Galesſaith , tothe rootes of Acorms, but yet more forceable : and 
the rootes of Acorws are alſo of a thinne efſence,heating, attenuating, drying and pronoking vrine, 
25he aſfirmeth: which things are happely performed by taking of the rootes of Afarabacca, ci- 
therby themſclues,or mixed with other things. = 

| | wu Thewertnes. | 


The leaues draw foorth by vomit thicke, phlegmaticke , and cholericke humours, and withall A 


moquethe belly,and in this they are more forceable, and of greater effe&t then the rootes them- 
ſelues, 
They are thought tokeepe in hard ſwelling cankers that they increaſe not, or cometo exulcera- B 
tion,or creepe any farther if they be outwardly applied vpon the ſame. | 
Therootes are good againſt the ſtoppings of the liucr,gall,and ſpleene, againſt wens and harde C 
ſvellings,and agues of long continuance: bh being taken in the greater quantitic, they purge 
x = chojernÞt much lefle then the leaues (though Gale ſaich nog)by vomite efpecially,and 
by liege, | 
One (948 of the powder of the rootes giuen todrinke in ale or wine,groflely beaten, prouoketh oy 
voruite for the purpoſes atorefaide, But being beaten into fine powder,and o giuen, purgeth verie 
lictle by vomite, but workerh moſt by procuring much vrine ; therefore the grofler the powder is, fo 
much the better, | 
Butifthe rootesþeinfuſed or elſe boiled, then muſt there be two , three, or fower drams put to 
theinfuſion ; and of the leaues eight or nine be ſufficient: the iuice of which ſtamped with ſome 
liquidching,is robe giuen, The rootes may be ſteeped in wine, but more effeually in Whaic or 
honjed water,as Meſwesteacherh. | 
The fameis good for them that are tormented with the Sciarica,or gout inthe hucklebones, for F 
ethat haue the dropſic,and for ſuch allo that are vexed with a quartaine ague , who are cured | 
andmade whole by vomiting, | 


Ax 1 4 wa 


? 


650 THE SECOND; BO@KE+@BjTHE 
Of Sea Bindweede, (hap.295, | 


Soldanella Marina. | 15 ; 
Sea Bindweede. Wo, % The deſcription. 


Oldanella or Sea Bindweedeghath many final | 
I braunches, ſomewhat red, trailing v»on the 
ground, beſer with finall round leaves not 
much vnlike Afarabacca,or the leaues of Ariſta: 
lochia,but ſmaller; betwixt which leaves and he 
ſtalks come fyorth flowers formed like bel}, of 
a bright red incarnate coloucyneucry relpe& nd 
ſwering the ſmall Bindweed, whercof it isa kind? 
albeit I haue heere placed rhe fame for therea- 


ſons rendred in my Proeme. The ſeede js black, 
and groweth ih round hysks:the roote is long & . 
ſmal,chruſting it ſelfe farreabroad, and into the 
carth like the 'orher Bindweeds, 
Soldaneclia or mountaine Binidweed hath ma- 
ny round leaues ſpred'vponthe ground not much 
vnlike the former , burrounder and more full gf 
veines,greenef,of a bitter raſt like Sca Bindweed: 
among which commeth foorth a ſmall & tender 
| ftalke a handfull high, bearing at che top little 
' flowers like the ſmall Geatienells, of a 5hic eolour: 
- the roote is ſmall and threddie. 


| *% Theplace. 
'  Thefirft growethplentifullyby the ſea ſhore 
 inmoſtplaces vf Englange,cſpecially neere vnto 
| : LeeinEſſex, ar Merſey in the fame countie, in 
moſt places of the Ile of Thanet,and Shepic,and in many places along tlic northren coaſt. 
The ſecond groweth vpon the mountaines of Germanie, andthe Alpes; it growerhypoa the 
mountaines of Vales.,not farre from Cowmers Meare in Northwales, | | 
RT \* Thetome. F 7 12448 
Theſe herbes do flower in Tune,and are gathered in Auguſt tobe kept for medicine, 
be: te Thenanes. | | | 
The firſt called Soldznelitis of the Apothecarics and others called Aarina Brafics , tlitis to 
ſay,Sea Colewoort ; but what reaſon harhmooucd them foto do cannot conceiue, vnleſle it be. 
penurie andſearſitie of names,and bicauſe they know nor otherwiſe howto terme it: of this Tam 
ture, that this plant & Braſ£ca areno more alike then things which are moſt valike;for Brafics Ha- 
r/nais the Sea Colewoorr,which doth much reſemble the garden Cabbage or Cole, both in ſhape 
and in nature,as I haue in his due place expreſſed, A preat fault and onerfighr therfore it hath been 
of the old writers and their ſuccetlors which have continued the cuſtomebfthis error , not taking 
the paines to diſtinguiſh a Bindweed from a Colewoorr. Burt to avoid controuerfies, the rrurh 1s as 
I have before ſhewed.that this Sc/dancl; 1s a Bigdweed.& cannot be eſteemed fora Braſacathat 152 
Colcwoorr. The later Herbariſts call it So/4a94, and So/denclle : in Durch 3fewind, that is to ſaie, 
Conus/unlus Mar inus: Of Dieſecridesnccifn Yaaygir,and Braficamerima:in Englith Sea Withwinde, | 
Sea Bindweed,Sea bels,Sea Coale.of ſome Sea Folefoote,and Scortiſh Seuruie grafle. 
The fecond i3 called $/41nefl: montana :in Engliſh Mountaine Bindweed, 


% The nttere. 4 


. ScaBindweed is hot and dtic in the ſecond degrees the ſecond isbitter and verie aftringent, 
| \% The vertnes. : 


A - Soidanellapurgeth downe mightily allkinde of watrith humours:,, and opcnech the ſtoppiagedh 


7 


$2 OBPLANTS. | @ 


profiy agaiolt che dropſie mm—hatettatitctalontet 
3 drunke oo woes 4 2 ere 


— IR 7 Romackeanduoublththeneake and delicate bodies nhich dorceve B 

won Engr.nc i gar prin ee do correc his maligniie., 

mPraRitoners about urge & Rauiſpurge(citics of Genianieydo hy boaſt that they have C 

ihe] abe Salletuihamcraihy faying , that the leaues raken andemplaiſtred 
<a oh ; na god ſomewhart lower, drawerth foorth waterfrom their bellies tharare hydroprike, 

pe thwaret'or the diopfiexthis effeetiryworketh in other parts withouthearing, 

| ARA: rm woumnds and healeththem. - 
i; | cherbeisan enimicro theſtomacke; biting andextremely 
rhe = taken with meate ) and bringerh troubleſome gripings r—_ and 
Fatemnines moxe hurt then good, 


2000 the va Tſo Chap.294- 


2 Gramen P 


arnaſiimins. 
"The ler Graco Proalls 


«" 19 


J \ 7 $ 
\ \ k 
> p \ \ W > 
- 4 , % \ , WW oz 
YISRY WER —NN 
, d / Pg »., 7 
1 4 / Pg W Tv\ 
i nw \\\ l 
a y \ 


*He Grafſeof Para hath heereroforebeene deſcribe blindemen, I do not meane 
72am wares — ages. if this plant be a kinde of | 
Graſſe,chen may che Burter Burre,or Cokes foote be reckonedfor gralles,,s alſoal ocher 
— 6 | Pic el _" 

X 3 


andexced theretty | 
2 Theſecond arwrh ee nc A7 fo > nero Fe Mk | 
why tors 0. Te PO IN e "1 


Theſe herbes vo foneringb endof lu ndtheeede ripened deda Auguſt. 


%* The names. 
Y aler iu Cordes hath among many that haue written of theſe herbes fade of them is 
; prodpiapaliicaling thembychename of Hepatica a/ba (wherteot without omg f= 
is s$ inE white Liuerwoort; although there is anotherplane called Hepatics ae Ar 
for diſtinRtion ſake I haue thoughr good to Engliſh, Noble white Liuerwoort. 
_ Theſecondmaybecalled Noble white Liuerwoorr, ER! 


 *% Thenatare. | 
The hede of Parnaſlus Graſſe;or white Liyerwoorr,is drie and ib parts. 


 % Thevertwes, _ 
A Thedecotin ofthe lavs of Paſt Gr dren, doch die ltengiten he blew 
moiſt ſtomacke,ſtopperh the bellie,and my away the on" 6 ee 
B Theſameboiledin wine of water, and drunken, ela y the thereof, provokerh vine, 
breaketh the RIS Forrh. KF 


Of* ahi vj and gen Sexifiuge,) On 295. 


%X The deſcription. 


He white Saxifrage hath rounde leaves ſpread vpon the ſomewhati 
abour the edges,not much valike the leaues of ground Iuie,bur ſofter and ſmaller,andofa 
more faint yellowiſh greene : among which riferh vp a rounde hairie ſtalke a cubice high, 
bearing at the top ſmallwhire lowers, almoſt like Stockgilloflowers : the roote is comnpeRen of 2 
number ofblacke ſtrings, whereunto are faſtned very many ſinall reddiſh graines or roun 
as bigge as pepper cornes, which arc viedin medicine, and are called Semen Sexifrage os 
that is, the ſecede of white Saxifrage , or Stonebreake , althoug h (beſide theſe foreſaide ad 
knobs ir hath alſo {mall ſeede contained in little huskes following his flower as other herbes 
haue. 
2 Golden Saxifra hath rounde WES. 7; IN , bluntly indented about the borders like 
the former,among which riſe vp ſtalks an handfull high, atthe top pan three lit- 
tle leaues togither, oorofeburciddle ofthenfpring inallfovters.of Y colour,after 
come little huskes, wherein is contained the red ſecede, notynlikethe former theroote is 


creeping in gromdem bell Ty ; | 4 


: HISTORIE. OF! PLANTS: 


The white Saxifrage groweth Mena inſundrie Fs of England , and eſpecallyi ina wil 
onthe lefr hand ofthe hig <5 way,as you go from the place of execution called Saint Thomas Wa- 
tenngs ynto Dedford by > zan ng Ic groweth alſo in the great fielde by HMflingron called the Man- 
tels; alſo inthe greene places by the ſea fide at Leen Eflex,among the ruſhes, andi in ſundrie other 

. places thereabout and elſe where, 

The Golden Saxifragegroweth in the moiſt and marriſh grounds about Barh and Wels; alſoin 

the Moores by Boſton and Wisbich in Lincolnſhire, | 
*% The time. 

-Thewhite Saxifrage flowreth in Maie and lung :che wb with his lower aren no more {een Vi 

llthenext yeere, 

 Thegolden Saxiftage flowreth in March and Aprill, 

* The names, 
- The fiſt is called in Latine Saxifags a/ba tin Engliſhwhite Saxifrage, or white « Sronchreake 7; 
The fecond is called golden Saxifrage,or golden Stonebreake. 2, 
*% The nature. 
The firſt oftheſe eſpecially the roote and ſecede thereof,is of a warme orhotcomplexion:. 
Golden Saxifrage is ofacold nature,as thetaſte doth manifeſtly declare, 19 
*% Thewvertues, | 

Atlemon ofwhite Saxifrage boiled in wine and drunken, prouockerh vrine, clenſerhthe kidaeis, A 
andbladder;breaketh theſtone,and driueth it foorth,andis Feukar againſt the ſtranguric and-all- 
othergriefrs and imperſeQions inthe raincs. ..-  - | 

The verrues of golden Saxifrage arc yet ito vs enknowne notwithſtanding Tamof chismind, B 
thati £15 a fingular wound herbe,cquall wich Sancle, x | | / 

x 3 O 


THE SECOND BOOKE' OF THE 
| Of Sowbreade. Chap.296. | 
FI. |  *T, he kindes. | 


T Herebediuers forrs orkindes of Sowbreade, differing very notably aswellin forme orfigue, 
as in their time of Eowring,flouriſhing tading,and appropriate vertues, | 


1 Cyclonen biealate ; | i 2 Cyclamen folio Heder e. 
Round rout ear} (fg | Juic Sowbread. 


VIS N71 


| W TT? k ' , oP / 
\o* M4) Faw 4 vo NJ | 


PN 
iy 


ow > 4 | * The ae ſcription qi | 
I He firſt being the common kinde of Sowbread,called in ſhops Þank porcinus, 2nd Arthi- 
#4, hath many greene and roundleaues like vnto Afarabaccafauing that the vpper pat 
.  oftheleauesaremixcd heere andthereconfuſedly with white ſpots, and vnder thelcaues 
next the ground of a purple colour: among which riſe vp little ſtems like vnto the ſtaikes of violets, 
bearing acthe top ſinall purple flowers which turne themſelues backward (being full blowen)like a 
Turkes cap,or Tolepan, of a ſmall ſent or ſauout, ornoneartall; which being paſt there ſucceede 

little counde knoppes or heades which conteine ſlender browne ſeedes t theſe knops are w! 
after a fewe daics in the {mall ſtalkes, as thredde abour a bottome, where it remaineth ſodefended 
from the inturie of winter cloſe vpon the ground,coueredalſo with the greene leaues aforcſaide, by 
which meanes it is kept from the froſt, cuen from the time of his ſeeding which is in Seprember, 

. yntill Junezarwhar time the leaues do fade awaie, the ſtalkes and ſeede remaining bare and naked 

whereby it enioieth the ſunne(whereof it was long depriued) the ſooner to bring them vnto matte 
ritie: theroote is rounds like a Turnep, bla ckewithourand white within, with many ſiall ſtirngs 
anncxcd thereto, 1-1 [rl | | BR | The 


| 247 HISTORIS OB BLANTS. | Vsz 
> Theſecond kinde of Sowbreadzharh broad leaues ſpred vpon the ground,ſharpe pointed, ſom- 
| W ndentced about the edges,ofadarkergreene colourwith ſome lietle lines or ſtrakes of white on 
the vpper fide, & of adarke reddiſh colour onthat fidenextthe ground : among which riſe vw len- 
Ur footeſtaiks of two or three inches long; ar the rops wherof ſtand ſuch flowers as the precedent, 
but ofa Fiveerer {mel and more pleaſant colour. The fceedis alſo wrapped vp in the ſtalke for his fur. 
ther defence againſt the iniurie of winter. Therooris ſomwhar greater and of more verrue, as ſhall 
| lated. BUT £30 ÞIPORDd - Shi FLEE I DO THO Y 
gar an athirde kind of Sowbread that hath round leaves without peaked corners, as the laſt 
before mentioned 4, yer: fomewhar-ſnipr abour the edges and ſpeckled with white about the 
brims of the leaues , and of a blackiſh colour inthe middle: tlie flowers arelike vntothereſt, bur 
of a dceper purple: the roote alſo like, bur ſmaller, >>» | | n 
There isa plant which I haue {(erfoorthin this place that may very wel be called into queſtion, $: 
|his placealſo,confidering that there hath beene great contemtion/abourthe ſawie;andnottully de- 
_ rerinedwh either pare; which hathmooued me to placehim withithoſe plants'that moſt doe re- 
{mble.oneanorher;both in ſhapeandname: this plant hath greene corneredleaues like vato Ivie, 
longandfmall gaping flowers like rhe finall Snapdragon: more hath nor beene ſaidof this plant, 
eiher of ſtalke orroote, but-is left vnto the conſiderationoftheleatned,” + 


* The place, 


| Sowbreadgroeth pony about Artois,& Vezmandois in Fraunce,& inthe forreſt of Arden, 
andinBrabant: burthe ſecond groweth plentifully in manie places of Iralic,being the beſt of all. 

Iris reported vnto me by men of good credite, that Cye/amemn or. Sowbread growerh ypon the 

mou praines of. Wales; on the bils of Lincolnſhire, and in Somerſerſhite by the houſe of a gen- 
7K) | 


$d6p4 D 


ed Maſter Hales 3vpon afoxc burrough alſo nor farre from Maſtcr Bawfields neere ro a 
dHardingron. The firſt two kinds do grow in my garden,where they proſper well,” 

| % The time, | 

Sowbread flowreth in September when the plant is without leafe , which do afterwards ſpring 
| \p, continuing greene all the winter , couering and keeping warme the ſeede varill midfommer 
next,at what time the {cede is ripe as aforeſaid, The third lowreth in the ſpring, for which cauſc i 
was Called Cyclamen vernwn. . %Thenames. | Yona] 

Sowbreadis called in Greeke wares: in Latine Tyber terreand Terr e repum: of Marcellus Or- 
bicalarir; of Apaleine Palalia, repum Porcimuon, and Terre malum :in ſhops Cyclamen, Pants Poress 
nu,and Arthentta in Ttalian Par Porcine : in Spaniſh Mazan de Puerco: in high Dutch Schweins 
b!07: in lowe Dutch Werckins bzoot t in French Pam de Porceas: in Englit]  Sowbread, - Plinie 
calleththecolourof this lower in Latine Co/ofinxe color : in Engliſh Murrey colour, Lo 

} 1g ___ % Thenature. | gh 

Spwbread is hot and dric in the third degree, | oO CIS” 

*%T hevertnes. ; 

The roote of Sowbread dried into powder, and taken inwardly in the quantitie of a dramand a A 
: alfevith meade or honicd water;purgerth downwarde tough and groſſe flegme, andother ſharpe 

umoutrs, 

Thefame taken in wine as aforefaid,is very profitable againſt al poiſon,and the bitings of vene- B 
' mousbealts,and ro be outwardly applied vnto the hurt place; wy 

The powderzaken as aforc{aide,cureth the iaundies and ſtoppings of the liver, taketh away the C 
yellow colour of the bodice, if the patient after the taking thevdetbe cauſed ro {weat. | 


Theleaues ſtamped with honie,and the iuice put into theeies,cleererh the fightctaketh away all D - 


Þots and webs,pearle or hawe,and all impediments in the ſighr,andis put into that excellent oint- 
ment called Yngnentun Arthanita. Fra?! 


The roote hanged about women in theirextreme trauell with childez cauſerh them tobe deliue- Ev 


redincontinent,and taketh away much of their paine, 
+ The leaves pur into the place hath the like effec, as my wife hath prooued ſundrie times vpon F 
*Wrwoincn, by my aduiſe and commandement,with good ſucceſle. | B46: 

by ___ = —_ dothopen the hemorrhoides, and cauſerh them to flowe being applicd G 
ichwoollor Gocks, > Fe 

- Eismixed wich medicines thatconſume orwaſte awayknots,the kings euill,& other hard Gvel- H 
lingsmorcouer itclenſeth the head by the noſtrils,ir purgeth the belly beiag annoinredrherewith, 
KT; " XX 4 *. and 


695 THE SECOND) BOOKE! on: THE 


and ki!leth the clulde, Ir is a ſtrong medicinera; | E 
It icoureth the skin,and taketh away ſinncb ſhes oftheface; pulling 
haire,and markes alſothat remame after te ſmall pokes and mefcls: i gwen ro BS 
it maketh a man.drunke. + _ | p 
The decoRtion thereof ſeruech as a good and effetuall bath for members our ofioine;the 
andkibedheeles. | 12 290RptTO 1125 gaur, 
L Theropre being made toliiwe ol Glledwith oile, cloſed with 2 little waxe and rotedincke 
hot or) x" rage of 09 0 SIP TAY TS roche lays 
Being beaten and made vp into troſthies, or lice IRE tis —_— be 2 
gone © mat CET a ia: mage 2 c0h good uno 
| %* The (ain 
Ie isnot good for women with childe to touch cerake this herbe, ox tocomenecremtoirg 
ſtride ouer the ſame where it groweth, for the yaturall artradtine vertue therein contained is ſuch, 
that without controuerſic theythat attempt itin maner aboucſaid, ſhall be deliuercd beforetheir 
time : which danger and inconuenience to aucide, I have (about the place where it groweth in my 
garden) faſtened ſticks in the ground, and forme: other ſtickesI have faſtnegalſo crofſewaies oucr 
cthem,leaſt any woman ſhould by Iamentable cperiment findemy woury co berrue, by thei why) 


ping ouer the ſame, 
Rn? Of Birthwoorts. Chap. 297-| 


| -1 % The kindes, 
B Irthwoort. 2s Dio aferil Gdith';e of three forrs,long, rounde, <atheeibes; SEW dikes 
ded a fourth kinde called Pi#o/ochia, or lirtle Birch woord, The larer yriter haue joined mato 
them a fift named Saracens Birthwoorr, | © 


1 HiHolochis hes. [48 | | 2 Avibolochis rotunds. 
Long Birthwoort. ii! : "RAbtipnore 


SY 
* 


%. — = 
I ? 
* . 


tt 'Y 


Wh 


7 TE | 

med WW ==> 
Ya DIY EY 
7 Op 


_— l 


:: THISTORIE OF PLANTS: |” 697 


| Ong Birthwoort hath many ſmall,long jlender ſtalks creeping pon the ground, ing 
one within another very intricately,beſerwithiround leaves not much vnlike Sowbread or 

— Iujc,but larger,of a light or QUerworne greene colour, & of a greeuous orlothſom fmeland 

Cnonrt among which come foorr! long hollow flowers , not much vnlikethe flowers of Aron,bit' 

without any peſtell or clapperin the ſame z within of adarke putple colour, and withour 6f agree 


vw" 18 water whichdo follow fall fruite like varolicele peares, containing triangled 
[20 blackiſh colour. The zooteis long, thicke;of the colourot boxe,of a ftroug ſauour and 
' biureaaſtes, 307 Þ, 4} + pion ce) «fag oo ckns; 


: Therounde Birthwoort in ſtalkes.and leauesislike the firſt; bur his leaves are rounder': thefig- 
wers Ciffer onely in this;rhat they be ſomewhat longerandnarrower, and of a faint yellowiſh co- 
Jour. bur the ſimall fap or point of ;the flower-chat turnech backe againeis of a darke'or black&pur- 

lecolour. The fruite is formed like a peare, ſharpe towarde thetop, more ribbed and fuller rhen 
be former : the roote is round like vnto Sowbxcad,intaſteand fauour like the former. 


_ *Climing Buchwoore. 


CHEERS + The ; 43 624314 
..'3: Clining Sietony ar. 4 of anything 
. thatiis next 'ynto it , with his long and claſping 
ſtalkes which be oftentimes branched, & windeth 
*., tt ſelfe about; like Bindweede : the talker of the 
leaves are longer, whoſe leaues be ſmooth; broad, 
| ſharpe | Aa 3rnr be thoſe of the others » the flo- 
wer 5 likewiſe hollow, long,yellow,or of a blackith 
purple colour; the ſruir ireth not from:thar of 
= EDS . theothers; butche roots be flender,and very long , 
NL ſometimes creeping on thetop of theearth, and 
AC ay.\ _ ſometimes growing deeper;, being of like colour 
| with the former ones, | 4 . 
"Lhereis afowrh kind of Birthwoort reſembling 
the reſt in leaues and branched talks, yer higher, 
and longerthen citherthe Jong or the ronnde: the 
leaues thereof be greater then thoſe of Folefoote: 
the flowers hollowe,Jong, and in one fide hanging 
ouer,of ayellowiſh colour: the fruite is round and 
lohg like a peate,in which the ſeedes lie ſeuered,of 
forme three ſquare,of an ill fauoured blackiſh co- 
1 Joue: the roote is ſomewhat long, oftentimes of a 
| meanethickneſle , yellowe like vnto the colour of 
Boxe, notinferjor in bitrernes either to-the long 
. ortotherounde Birthwoorr, and ſomerimes theic 
- are foundrs beſmall andflender, and that iswhen 
= ' they were burlately digged vp and gathered: for 
| | by che little-parcels of the rootes which arc lefr, 
poagplang bring foorth at the beginningtender and branchedrootes, © = 
Birthwoort 1s like to the long and round Birthwoort,/both in ſtalkes and leaues, yer is it 
leſſer and renderer : the leaues cheroods are broad, and like thoſe of Tuie : the lower is long, hollowe 
inthe ypper part,and on the outſide blackiſh : the fruite ſomthing rounde like thefruite of rounde 
Birthwoort: in ſteed of rootes there growe 10 ofilender ſtrings, 
| | FM! e. MA | 
FN ow ſheweth, that the Birthwoarts grow rand championplaces, the fields of Spaine are 
of theſe three long and round Birthwoorszthey are alſo found in Iralie and in Narboneor Lan- 
Suedock, a countrey in Fraunce, Petra Belbniwwriteth,that he found branched Birthwoort vP- 
on Ida,amountaine in Candie: CerolmClaſas faith, that he found this fame abour Hiſpalis, and in 
many other places of Granadoin Þpaine,amdhg buſhes and brambles:they grow allinwy garden. 
OY. * The 


q L- 


>» 


Ps 
þ WY - i l 
N f , 
- wt > 


693 THE SECOND BOOKE'OF THE 

They dowerin Maie June and Jul, A IEA | POnLUant 

wh %7k aye. MIT 

Birthw rt is called in Greeke ferro ein Laine likewifd: Arafobehia bicwle it is chem Ie gens 
that is to faie, good for women newly broughta bed, woman med ej RcBagiy Birth. 
| ern nes 4A wh of ſome Ariſtolochia. 20/301 
\ ord pays" bia tongs, or lon 2 Birthwoorre;ofihe onheo 

cBirthwoort : the bed is yy 


tliecarth: yer _"_. is alfo called hee Myutlun, ot reheape of che - 
+ T temperature > 4d ; 1421 ſ:? } 
Allrheſe Birthworrs arcfeemperarure hor and dric, and that inthe Dt, thang be. 
ſides apowertoclenſe,” | 
[M141 '* Th vierrace. _ { 

A Dioſeorides arighbichur! 2 dram waight of long Birthwoortdrunke with wine my af applied, 
is good againſt ſerpents and deadly things; andthat being drunk with myrrhe and Pet irexpel- 
lech ws left in the marrix after the childe is deliuered, rhe flowers atfo & de adthildren: 
and'that being pur vpin a peſlarie,ir wen the ſame. 

B « Round Birthwoorte ſerueth for alltheſe things , and alſo for the reſt of theother poiſons; itis 
likewiſe auaileable againſt the ſtuffing of the lungs, the hicker,the ſhakings or ſhi s of a 
hardnes ofthemilr or ſpleene,burſtings cramps, and conwullions,paines of the ſides, if itbc 
with water. 

C- Irepluckerhour thornes : {plincers, and ſhiters,an being mixed in olkiſles, or pulteſes, ir draw. 
cthfootth ſcalesor bones,remooueth rorrennefle andcorruprion, mundifieth and ſcourerh foule 
and filthievicers, andfilleth chem vp with newefleſh,if it be mixed with Ireos and h | 

D _ Gi/enſaith, tharbranched Birthwoort'is of a more ſivcete and pleaſanſime!l: and therefor is 
vicd in gintmenrs; but it is weaker in operation then the formerones., | 

,E Birthwoortas Plnye writeth being divinke with water is a moſt excellent retnedivfor _ 
and conuulſions,bruſes,and forſich as have fallen from high places. | 

F Irisgoodfor them thatare ſhort winded,and troubled with the falling ficknes. 


G Therounde Ar;fowehis doth beautific, clenſe, and faſtenthe teeth, if they be o_en troted or 
carry Mrrrors.'s ade dem wa 1 My 


[1 Violets Chap 298. 


Y * T. rhe hindes 


of cond: 
of hong, 


bk ® + 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 699 


452 certaine wiſe man faith for him, thatdoth looke ypon and iandle faire and beautifull things» 
- andwho frequenteth and is conuerfanc in faire and beauritull places, to hauc his minde nor faire, 
but filchie and deformed. | 


: Fiolawigrs five purpures. 2 Viola flore albs. 
Thepurple garden Violer. The te xtden Violet. 


* The deſcription. 


1 3 Heblacke or purple Violetdoth foorthwith bring from the roote many leaues, broade, 
T ightly indented in the edges, rounder then the leaues of Iuie : among the middeſt wher... 


_ _  ?* offſpring vp fineflender ſtemmes, and yppon eueric one abeauritull lower ſweerely ſmel- 
ling.of ablev darliſhpurple, conſiſting of fiuc little leaues, the loweſt whereof is the greateſt; and 
atterthem do appeere little hanging cups or knaps, which, when they be ripe, do open and diuide 

theniſelues intothreeparres. The ſeede is ſmall, long,and ſomewhat round withall, The roote con- 
liſteh of many threddie ſtrings. | | | 

2 Thewhitc garden Violethath many milke white flowers,in forme and figure like the precedent, 
Thecolour of whoſe flowers eſpecially ſerteth foorth the difference. | 

M The double garden Violet hath leaues, creeping branches, and rootes like the garden fingle 

"oietzdiffering in that,thar this ſort of Violer bringeth foorth moſt beautifull ſweere double flow- 
ers,andthe other ſingle. | £9 [\ 
4. Thewhice double Violet likewiſe agreeth with the other of his kinde, and onely differethinthe 
cologr, For as the laſt deſcribed bringeth double blew orpurple flowers: contrarwriſe, thisplanc 
bearcth doub!e white flowers, which makerh the difference. #4 
| 3” 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
> Viola martia purpurea muttiplex. | 4 Yiots martig alba multiplex, 
b The double Lo ad ice ihe double white Violet. 


AS 


5 Violamartis lutea. WI. 6 Viola canina ſineftris. 2 
Yellow Violets. | | Dogs Violets,or wilde Violets, 


HISTORIE/OF PLANTS, | 


; w Violet is by nature one of the wilde Violers, for it groweth ſeldome any where bur 
ypon mo oft highand craggic mountaines, from whence it hath beene diuers times broughtintothe 
| Carden uti ircan hafdly brought to culture,or owe inthe garden without great | ie. And. 
byzhe relation of a Gentleman often remembred, called Maſter 7 homas Hesketh, "iv foundir 
goning"pondehil in Licaſhire,neer vnto a villa ecalled Latham , &thoughheb rought ther 
garden,yerthey withered and pined away. The wholeplant is deſeribedto be like nto the 

= gy 0 —_ ;5 rhecan it, in that chat this plant bringeth foorth yellow flowers, yerlike in 


GE Violet Violet lon ong leaves, rifeth foorthof the ground from a fibrous roote, with 
bo « evre branches,whereupon growe ag {moorh leaues, The flowers growe atthe top of 
the italkes,of a -_ o——_— colour. 

"my which kinde I haue found another fort growing wilde neere vnto Blackeheath by Greene- 
v ichaat Eltham patke,with flowers of a bright reddiſh porrhs colour, 

* Thereis foundin Germanic about Noremberg and Strasbotough, akinde of Violet which is 
alrogither a ſtranger in theſe parts. It hathſaith wy author, athicke and tough roote, of a woodie 
ſubſtance,from which riſeth vp a ſtalke dividing it {elfe into divers branches,of a woody ſubſtance, 
whereupon do erowe Tong iagged leaues, like thoſe of the re The flowers growe at the rop 
comparhol five leaues apeccc,ofa give 1 er 

* 

The Violer growerh i in gardens almoſt cuery Gdog ;the others which are ſtrange ns haue beene 

rouched in their oatkriptions. 


*% The time. 
The flowers for the moſt part appeere in Marchatthe furtheſt in Aprill, 
*% The names, | 
The Violetis calledin Greekeiir,of Theophra#tus both iis ubar &euoaries, inLatine Ni 
blackVioler,of the blackiſh purple colour of the flowers. The Aporhecaries keepe the | $9 name - 
Fiolaþut they callit Herba Violaria, & mater Violarum: in high Dutch Blith Utel tinlowe Dutch 
Cloletent in French Y zolerte de mers: 'in Iralian Yiola manmmoels: in Spaniſh/F joler : :in Engliſh Vio- 
let, N icandey in his ickes belecuerh (as|\Hermolam ſheweth) that the Grzcians did call it - 
«2, bicauſe certaine Nimphes of Ionia gaue thar flower firſt to Jupreey; others ſay it was calledior, bi- 
cauſewhen upriter had turned the —_ Damlſell 7» whom he tenderly loued into a Cow, the 
carth brought foorth this flower for hir Dode which being made for hir ſake, receiued thename 
fromhir : and thereupon it is thought, thatthe Latines ag called it YVjv/z, as though they ſhould 
lay Yitwla, by blotting ourthe letter z, Seruiwreporteth, that for the fone cauſe, he Latines do 
lkewiſename it —— he place of Yzrgilin his Bucolicks: | 
| lrgnitre |= 9, ances ra leguntuar. 
White Pikes —— to ground do fall.tade and oftrimes ſterue, 
When purple Violets are kepr for vices good to ſerue, 


Notwithſtanding Firgillin his r10.Eclog ſheweth that Yaceinium and jel do differ. 
Et nigr a viole ſunt, Vaccinianigrs. | 
Fitraviasalſo in his ſeauench booke of Architedure or building,doth diſtinguiſh Viola from V acc#- 
nin, For he ſhewerh that the colour of yellow Oker of Athens is madeex ror Violer, and the 
gallant purple ex Yaceinio or of Priver. The diers ſaith he when they would counterfeit yellow Oker 
of Arhens,they putthe dried Violets intoa far, kettle or Cawdcon & boile them with water, after- 
w2rdes when itis tempered they powre it into alinnen ſtrainer and wringing itwith their handes, 
receive into a mortar liquor coloured with the Violets, and ſteeping bole of Erethria in it,and rub- 
bing the ſame, do make the colour of yellow Okerof Athens. Afﬀer the ſame manner they temper 
Facinium or Priuer berries , and putting milke vnto ir doe make a gallant purple colour, But what 

Fuceinig ate we will elſe wheredeclare,andthat in their proper place. 

*% The temperature. 
The flowers and leaues of the Violets are cold and moiſt, 
* Thevertues. 

tn efovers are good for all inflammations eſpecially of thefides and lungs , they take awaythe A 
aleneſſe of the c tk the ruggedneſle of the winde pipe and iawes, alaieth the extreme heare rs 


702 *THE/SECOND/ BOOKE OF THE 
the liver, kidncies, and bladder, mitigaterh thefiric heate of burning agues, tempererh' 
neſle of choler,and takerth away thirſt, |. "ores PT heſhay. 
B Thereisanoile madeof Violets, whichis likewiſe coldeand moiſt. Theſame being annointed 
vpon the teſticles, doth gently prouoke ſleep, which js hindered by a hot and drie diſtemper: mixes 
- orlaboured togither in awooden diſh ww04-15, (age ofancg, wn, 6 the paine ofthe ſugg:. 
mentarid hemorrhoides: it is likewiſe good to be purinto cooling cliſters , andinto pultifes thar | 


coole and eaſe paine, _ . : p24: Karel vc 
C Butler the oile in which the Violers are ſteeped, be cither of vnripe olives, called Omphecine, or 
of ſweerealmonds,as Meſaes faith, and the Violets themſclues muſt be freſh and moiſt: For beir 
dric and having loſt their moiſtute,they donot coole,but ſeeme ro haue gotren akinde ofheate, 
D Thelarter phiſitions do thinke ir good to mixe drie Violets with medicines, that ate tocomfort 
E Thelcaues of Violets ny taken do coole, moiſten,and make thebodie ſoluble, Being out 
wardly applicd, they mitigate allkinde of hot inflammations, both aken by themſclues, andalſo 
applicd with barly Lower tied at thefire, after it hath lien ſoking in water. 'They are likewiſe laide 
ypon ahotſtomacke, and on burning cies, as Ga/en witneſleth, Djoſtorides wrieth, chatthey be 
Ee he ty ne I is fallen our. - - - IX | 
ay 


: 
3 
- 
/ 


do puta Htrle quantitie of the iuice of Limons ip the bciling , that doth greatly increaſethebeau- 
tie thereof, bur nothing atall the verrue. | 

There is likewiſe made of Violers and ſugar,certaine plates called Sugar Violer,or Violetrables, 

or x"% omg is moſt pleafantand aboleyaablotcially itcomforterh the harr, and the other in» 
ward parts. | | Ea 

The decoGtion of Violers is good againſt hot feuers, andthe inflammation of the liver, andall 

other inward partes ; the like propertic hath the juice,firupe or conſerue of the ſame. | 
Sirupe of Violets is good againſt the inflammarion of the lungs and breſt, againſt the pleurific 
 andcough,againſt feuers and agues in yong EI if you put Yntoan ounce of 

- * cightorninedrops of oile of Vitrioll, andmixceit rogither, and giue vntothe childeaf| at 
Once. ors by | 

M Theſamegiueninmanner aforeſaid,is of grearefficacie in burning feuets,andpeſtilent diſeaſes, 

grootnognng the inward parts : and itmayſeeme ſtrange to ſome thar ſoſharpe i corroſive, as 

oile of Vitriol, thould be given into the bodie,yet being dclaied and giuen as aforeſaid,ſuckingchil- 

dren may take it withoutany perill, Fore! 4 | 

The ſame taken as aforeſaid,cureth all inflammarions of che throte, mouth, vuula,ſquinancic,and 

the uns, "ar in children, _ | 411] yah?” 6 


+4 ; 
£ 


| 0 © Sugar Violethath power toceaſe indammations,roughneſſe of the throte, and comforteth he 


| hart,aſſwagerh che paines of the head,and cauſeth fleepe. & jan Le 
. Þ Theleaugsof Violersare viedin cooling plaiſters,oules, & comfortable cataplaſmes or pulriſes, 
and are of greaterefficacie among mlackebl © Mercuric and Mallowes andfach like, in cliftets, 

' forthepwpoles aforeſaid. | Gro Art DL ESR ES 


of 


HIST ORIE. OF /PEANTS. 75; 
Of Harts eaſe,or Paunſies.  (h1p.299. 


*% The bindes. | 
Ashere be divers fortes of March Violers,{o are there likewiſe ſundcic kindes of Paunſics p 


| 1 Viola tr icolor. | 2 Y. tain aſſur gens tricolor. 
' Hartescaſe. Vpright Hartesealc, 


% The deſeription. 


L; oF He Hartes cafe or Paunſie, hath many round leauits at rhe firſt comming vp; afterwardes 
| they growe ſomewharlonger, ſlightly cut abautthe edges, trailing or creeping vponthe 
.*. ground, The ſtalkes are weake and tender, whereupon do growe flowers in forme and f1- 
gure ike the Violer,and for che. moſt part of the fame bigneſle, of three ſundrie colours (whereof it 
toke the ſurname Tricolor )that is toſay,purple;yellow,and white or blew : by reaſon ofthe benatie 
Cdraverie of which colours, they are very plcaſing ro the cie; for ſmell they haue little, or nonear 
all. The ſeede is contained inlittieknaps,of the bipneſle of a rare, which come foorth after the fl0- 
wersbe tallen,and doopen of themſclues when the ſeede 1s ripe. The roore isnothin g elſe, but as 
twerea bundle of threddic ſtrings. | | | 
2 Theypright Paunſie bi foorth long leaues deepely cut in the edges, ſharpe pointed, of 
| ableake ar pale greenc colour, {et vpon ſlender vpright ftalkes, cornered, iomted, or kneed, a toote 
 highorhigher z whereupon do grow very 1aire flowers of three colours, that is,of purple, blew and 
yelow., infhape like the common Hartes cafe, bur greater and fairer z which colours ate foexcel- 
Icorly and orderly placed, thattheybring great dele@arion to the beholders, though they have 
lg 9.30 \lmellatall, For oftentumes it lIrappencth;thar the vppermoſt lowers are differing from 
viewatroweypon che middicatthe planr;and thoſe varie from the lowermoſt,as nature liſt ro 
Callie wh things of ſug beatitic, The ſecede is like the precedent, 
W- 


« F 
2 V i045 » 
i 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 
3 Viela tricolor ſylue#ris. ; 4 Vielatritolar perr ea. 
Wilde Paunſies, | | 14| Stonic Hattes caſe, 


o 
T KY ” 
1 p "Es 
\ 7 : 7 
P_ | 
£u5 : 
© ; E i —_— ; *& $% « > 
VE I. / Y 
- ” ——— pol y g s 
o % —_ _ « Iz, $5 ” _ E 
. m , 
Q _ \© 2 _— = 
2 5 IS 4 F UE 
_s 4. N . . 7 4 
" » —_— f 4 
—_ ” 4 b = 
. * "yy 5 - 4 © 
; ' 5 %. 
Fi F [x 


> MN) 


AY. S 
IG -—_— 


4 


21 w% Thedeſeription.” LO $ 
3 ThewildePaunfie differeth from that of the garden in leanes, rootes , and render braunches. 
The flowers of this wilde one are of a bleake ang pale colour, farre inferior in beautie to that ofthe 
garden,wherein conſiſterh the difference. . | = 
4 Stonic Harrs eaſe is a baſe or low plant. The leanes arerounder , arid not ſo muchcut about 
the edges asthe others: the braunches are weake and feeble trailing vpon the ground: the flowers 
are likewiſe of three colours, that is to ſay, white, blew,and yellow,voide of ſincll. The roote peri- 
ſherh when it hathperfe&ed his ſeede. - = { | 
There is found in ſundrie places of England a wilde kinde hereof bringing flowers of one yeliow 
colour without mixture of any other colour, wherein it differcth from the other wilde kinde,whuch 
hath beene taken of ſome yoong Herbariſts to be the yellowe Violet, 
FF 14 % The place. ] | ; 
The Harts wont 66107 in fieldes in many places, and in gardens alſo, and that oftrentimesofit 
ſelfe : it ismore gallant and beautifull then anyof the wilde ones, | 
Mathrelus reporteth that the vpright Paunfic is founde on Mount Baldus in Italie. L'Obeliw 
faich that it groweth in Langudocke1n Fraunce, and on the tops of ſorhe hils in England, butas 
yet T have notſeene the ſame. Po OE. | #5 
Thoſe with yellow flowers have beene f9und by a village in Lancaſhire called Latham, fower 
miles from Kyrckam by Maſter Thomas Hesketh before remembred, _ 
WI igE i * The time. Si 
They flower not onely in the ſpring, but for the moſt part all ſommer thorowe, even vail Au- 
money.” 21 4+ |; | * 7 he names. ane | 
Hartseaſc is nained in Latine Y;els tricolor or the three coloured Violet, and of divers Jeces: yet 
there is another /acea ſurnamed Ngra: in Engliſh Knapweede , Bull weede , and Marfellon, of 
others Herba Trinitatis or Herbe lrinitie, by reaſon of the triple colour of the flowers, of othets 
| ſome HeybaClaneliata: in French Pexſeesz by which name they became knowen tothe Br Wh 


} 


andthoſc of the Lowe countries that are next adioining, It ſeemerhto be 7 jols a, 


Peet Thophnſe 


Fd 


— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 595 


Thephraſtus calleth 2243a, which is alſocalled 8x54: in Engliſh Harrs eaſe, Panſie:, Liue in Idlenes, 
Cullme to you,and three faces in a hood. FF J 

The vpright Pancie 1s called not vnproperly Viola aſſurgens, or Surrefta, and Witha!l Trjcofor, 
thatisto ſay Straight,or vpright Violer three coloured; ot ſame Viola arboreſerns, of waxing to a 


cree,but wichour any reaſon;for as much as it hath nor acrained tothe height or hkenes,nonorof a” 
ſhrubgmuch lefle ofa tree. : 


| *% The temperature. At 
Itisof temperature obſcurely cold, bur more euidently moiſt, of a rough and ſlimie inice, as that 
of the Mallowesfor which caule it moiſtneth and ſupplerh;bur nor ſo much as the Mallow doth. 
4 betlins Phones; 6. chi ene tc 
{tis goodas the later Phiſitions write, for ſuch as are fi an agewe, eſpecially children and A 
_ os conuulſions and firs of the falling ſicknes itis > ey 199 <g f | 
ris commended againſt inflammartions of the lungs and cheſt,and againit ſcabs and itchings of B 
' thewhole body,and healeth vicers, | | 
The diſtilled water of the herbe and flowers giuen to drinke,for ten or more daies togither, three C 
ounces in the morning, and the like quantitie atnight, doth woonderfully eaſe rhe paineg of the 
French diſcaſe,and curcth the ſameit the patient be cauſed ro fiveare ſundrie times , as reporterh 
Coſtewin his booke De natara vniner/. ſtirp. 


_ Of ground \Fuie,or A leboofe. Chap.zo0. 


Hedera terreffris, 
Alchoofe. % The deſcription. 


Round Iuie is a low or baſe herbe ,,iecree- 
peth and ſpreadeth ypon the grounde hi- 
ther and thicther all about , with manic 
 Ntalkes, of an vncertaine length, ſlender,and like 
thoſe of the vine, ſomthing cornered; and ſome» 
' times reddiſh : whereupon do grow leaues ſome- 
| thing broad and round, wrinckled, hairie,nicked 
inthe edges, forthe molt part two our of cucrie 
| loint: among which come foorth the flowers 
ping like little hoods, not vnlike to thoſe of 
ermander,of a purpliſh blew colour : the roocs 
- areverythreddic, The whole plant is of a ſtrong 

ſmell ,and bitrer rafte. 
. m*Theplace. 
Iris founde as wellin tilled, as in vntilledpla- 
| ces,butmoſt commonly in obſcure baſe & darke 
places,vpon dunghils,andby the fides of houles, 
where the cues dodrop. | 
we Thetime. 

It remaineth greenenot onely in fommer, bur 
alſoin winter at any tine of the yeeretit ow- f 
reth from April till fornemer be farre ſpent, 

SP *% The names. | 
. It is commonly called Hed-ra terreftris , in 
Grecke anions: allo Corona terre i 1 high 
rad | Dutch Gundelreb: in low Dutch @Ondcrhauc 2 
p.. French Lierreterreſtre;, Heders humilis of (ome , and Chamacrſum: in Engliſh ground luic, Ale- 
haof,Gill cr by ground, Tunchoofe,and Cars foote. 
. Moſtotthe "Herbarifts will not ſuffer it tobe Chameciſas vererwm: or the olde Herbariſts | 


Yy 1 ground 


" 
a> 


| F 


706 THE SECOND BOOKE O F THE 
ground Tuie:for the faſhion of the leaues the length of the ſtalkes, the ſotme of the flowers, 21g 41. 
lo the talte are repugnant. For Chamaeciſ]iss ( asthe copies hauc that are Query where extant) has 
the leaues of Tuie,bur thinner &longer ; the ſtalks of a ſpan long, & flowers like thoſe of the 
| Gilloflowers,bur whiter and flenderer , in taſte yery birter, Bur che leaves of this Inte are rgunge; 
and not {ſmooth at all,as be thole of common lute: the ſtalks be long and ereepe all abour; che gg. 
ers differ from ſtocke Gilloflawers , and much lcfic the leaues : which deſcription of Dicket wi 
may be corrupted,and the words falſely read,as pfttentimes fich an erroras this may cafly happen 
by miſtaking one letter for another, and certaine wordes allo altered by thoſe that write foorth the 
copies, hy this is prooued,bicauſe Dioſcoriaes commendeth the leauey to be good for the Cciati« 
ca,& writeth that they ſcoure away the yellow igundiſc tor if the lowersbe birterer, then are theſe 
of greater force then the leaues,eſpecially to ſequre away the yellow 1aundiſe, as we read thatG gen 
&id, who might hauc beene deceiued by Dzoſcorades his corrupt rext: it the deſcription would haye 
ſuffered this correction,the common ground Luie might be Yererun Chamectſſus or the old Herbs. 
riſts ground Tuie, The leaucs will be anſwerable being lefler then thoſe'of Tue, thinner, and yeris 
bitter. The ſtalks arc full of leaues, which ſtaiks though chey leeme long,yer are they ſcant aboye x 
ſpan long, for that they ſo faſten themſelues in; rheir rrailing or runningat cuery joint with news 
rootes,as that from the very roots indeed they are not aboue a ſpan long. The flowers likewiſe, al. 
though valike in forme to ſtocke Gilloflowers,may notwithſtanding allo be compared vntothen: 
For . A 1 or the beaurie of the flower offexcth ar the firſt ſhew , accaſton of compariſon; al- 
though beheld with iudgemer, no more like;then thoſe things that are moſt ynlike, which maner of 
compariſon among the ancients hath been a fault hereditary or taken by'tradition,as forexample. 
The flower of Calues ſnout, or Snapdragon, ſaith Dizſcortdes,is like to ſtocke Gilloflowers, theyel. 
low flower of Spaniſh Broome is as that of ſtock Gillotowers, The white flower of ſmooth With. 
winde is not, vulike tothe Lillie.as 7/epe writerh :therc is a flower(ſaith Iig)in his 2 r,booke 5, chap- 
rer, not vnlike tothe Lillie , which they call Conuelaulme or Withwinde,] growing among ſhrubs, 
withour ſmell, without yellowechiues within, onely PrTng a white.colour , andas itwere a 
rude ſhape of nature,as no going abour ro lcatn howto make Lillics. Theſe & fuch like haye cau-. 
ſed much corruption anderrours among writers, If the curious pleaſe to.read the 15.chap.of Plinies 
24.booke,he ſha!! there finde ſuch a defcriprion.of grounde Iuie(as alſdinhis 25. booke 3.chapter) 
that he ſhall haneno iuſt cauſe ro blaine me for thete fewe aduertiſements which do offer matter 
diſputable for fchollers , wanting iudgewent in Herbariſine , but nor woorth the ſpeaking of a- 
mong thoſe that have but the leaſt taſte in the knowicdg of plants,leauing the reit vnto the curious 
Reader. is | 7 | 


bath 
ocke 


/ 


Y The temperature. 


Ground luic is hot and drie, and bicauſc itis bitter it {coureth , and remooueth ſtoppings out of 


« theentrailes, F 
| * Thewertues. 


A Ground luic is commended againſt the humming noiſe and ringing ſounde of the eares, being 
. putinto them,and for them that are hard ofhearing. : F 
B | Mathilwwriteth,that the juice being tergtited with Verdigreace,is good againſt fſtulaesand | 


hollow vicers. | {2A | | Wl. a | 
C Dioſeoridesteacheth, that halfe a dram of theleaues being drunke in fower ounces anda halſeof | 
faire water for fortie or fiftic daies togither, is aremedie againſt the Sciatica or ache in the huckle | 
bone. . THEE EE 6 | " | 
| D Theſametakenin like fortfixe or ſeauen daies, doth alſo cure the yellqwe iaunders, Gees hath 
attribured(aswe haue ſaid)all the vertue vnto the flowers: ſecing the flowers of grounde Iuic, faith 
he, is verie birrer,it remoouecth ſtoppings out of the liuer, and is giuen to them that are vexcd with 
the Sciaricd FE Pf. B || | 
E Ground luie, Celandine,and Daifies,of eche a like quantitie, ſtamped and ſtrained, anda little 
ſugar and roſewater put thereto,and dropped with a feather into the eics,takerh away all manner of 
| inflammation, ſpots, webs, itch, ſmarcing, oranygriefe wharſoeuerin the cies, yea althoughthe 
fight were nigh hand gone ,it is prooued ro be rhe A medicine in the world. TER | 
| F Theherbes ſtamped as aforefaid and mixed with a little ale aydhonie, and ſtrained,taketh muy 


& , 
©» 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 707 


the pinne and web, or any griefe out of the cies of horſe or cowe,or any other beaſt, heing ſquirred 

into the ſame with firing,or I might haue ſaid the liquor inieCed into the cies with afiring:but I liſt 

«ot to be-ouer cloquent among gentlewomen, vnto whom eſpecially my works are moſt neceſſary. 
The women of our northcen parts,eſfpecially about Wales and Chethire, do tun the herbe Ale. H 

hoougfnto their ale,butthe reaſon thereof I know not , notwithſtanding without all controuetſic 

+ is moſt fingular againſt the grieſes aforeſaid ; being tunned vp inale anddrunke, it alfopurgeth 

the head from rheumaticke humours flowing fromthe braine. | | 

- Hederaterreſiris boiled in water ſtaieth the termes ; and boiledin mutton broth helpeth weake I 

ing backs- | | | 

—_ avs viedto put it into ointments againſt burning with oe POO ,orfuchlike, K 

Hedera terreftri being bound in a bundell , or chopt as hetbes for the pot, and eaten or drunke L 


5 thinne broth,ſtaierh the fAluxe in women, 
Of Iuie Chap.zo1. 


* The kindes. 


Herebe two kindes of Iuic as 7 heophreFws witnefleth, reckoned amongthe number of thoſe 
plants,which haue neede to be propped vp:for they ſtandenor of thewſc'ues, but are faſtned ro 
ſtone wals,trees,and ſuch like,and yer notwithſtanding both of a woodie ſubſtance, and yer not to 
beplaced among the trees,ſhrubs,or buſhes,bicauſe of the affinitic they haue with climing herbes, 
as alſo agreeing with many other herbes in forme and figure that clime,and are indeed ſimply ro be 
reck$ned amongſt the herbes that clamber vp.Bur if any will cauill or charge me with my promiſe 
atthe beginning ofthis Hiſtorie,where we made our deuifion, promiſing to place echeplant 
a3eere 25 may be in kindred and neighbourhood: the which promiſe T haue tulblled , ifche curt- 
ous eie can be contentto view without ralhnes thoſe plants folowing in order, and nor onely rhis 
climing luic that lifteth hirſelfe vntothe tops oftrees , but allo the other Iuie that creepeth vpon 
theground,80ÞÞ "] | 
Gfthe preater or the climing Iuie there are alſo many ſorts, but eſpecially three,the white, the 
blacke,and chatwhich is called Heders Helix, or Hedera fteraiss. | 


* The deſcription. 


I He greater Tuie climeth on trees, olde buildings and wals: the ſtalkes thereof are woodie, 
F and now and then ſogreat as it ſeemeth to become a tree, from which ic ſendeth a multi- 
de of lirtle bowes or branches euery waie,whereby as it were with armes it cr-epeth and 
wandreth farre about: it alſo bringeth foorth continually fine little rootes, by which ir faſtnerh ir 
{elte and cleauerh woonderfull hard vpontrees, and ypon the imootheſt ſtone wals. 'ſhe leaues 
ae [mooth, ſhining eſpecially on the vpper ſide, cornered with ſharpe pointed corners. The flo- 
wers are verie ſmall and moſlic, after which ſucceede bundels of blacke berries , eueryone ha- 
ung aiwall ſharpe pointle. | | | 
There is another ſort of grear Iuie that bringeth foorth white fruite , which ſome call {#charni- 


, 


6 ir7:gxen : and alſo another leſſer, the which hath blacke berries. This Plnre calleth Se/n 


Weallo finde mentioned another ſort heereof ſpread abroad with fruite of a ycllow ſaffron co- 
lour,called of divers Dijony/ce as Droſcorides writeth : others Bacchica, which the Pocts vied to make 
gulands of, as Plzny teſtifieth in his 16.booke 34.chaprer. 'S 
2 Barren Juic is not much vnlike vnto the common fuic aforeſaid, ſauing that his braunches are 
both knaller and tenderer,not lifting or bearing it lelfe ypward, bur creeping along by the grounde 
vnder mo:{t and ſhadowie ditch bancks, The leauesare moſt commonly three ſquare, cornered, of 
2 blackiſh greene colour,which at the ende of ſummer become browniſh red vpon the lower fide. 
the whole plant beareth neither Rowers nor fruite,bur is altogither barren and fruiclefle, A 

| Yy 2 11 eders 


\ 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF FHE 
I Hedera cormbeſa.. bn | [ F | 2 He: 78 hietrs. 
Climing or berried Juic, Þ Barrep grcreeping Tuic, 


dg 


% Theplace. 


Tuic groweth commonly about wale and trees: the white Juice growethin Greece; and the har- 
ren Iuic growerh vpon the ground,in ditch bankes and ſhadowic woods. | | 
1 | i+ | *% The time. [ 
Juice flouriſherh in Autumnez the berries are npe after thewinter Solſtice. 
Inie is calledin Larine Hedere + in Grecke xiv, and ww: in high Durch Ephrut inlow Dutch 
Gevictin Spanith Tedrr:in French Lazyre, | FIERY Lav © of: J 
The grearer luie is called of Theephra ſtar 3ber nizes: in Latin Hedera attollens, or Heder 1uſſargens: 
G24 interpreth it Heder excelfe. The later Herborifts would have ir tobe Hedera arbores,'or wee 
Ine, bicauleit growerh vpon trees,and Heders mwr afis which hangeth vpon wals, 
Creepingor barten luie is calledin Greeke wc; »/z7%; :in Engliſh ground Luiczyer doth irmuch 
difterfrom Hedera terreftyis, or ground uic before deſcribed:of ſome itis called Clanicwia, Heders 
Helix, and Heaters ſterifivzand is that hetbe wherein the Boare dclighreth,according to Johann 
KEuen INE, | 20147 oh Theremperatare. ''* = w 
- Juice as Gatemſaith.is compoundedof contratie faculties: forit hath a cerraine binding, earthic 
andcold ſubſtance, andalfo a ſubſtance ſomewhat biting, which cuen the very taſte dothſhewto 
be hot. Neitheris it without athird facultie,as being of a cerraine warme warterie ſubſtance, and 
that1s1f it be greene. Forwhileſt it is in drying, this wateric fabſtance being earrhie, colde, and 
binding,conſumeth awayzand that which is hot and biring remaineth. | | 
= . j5] #1 *% Thewertnes. | 
A The leaves of Iuie freſh and/greene, boiled in wine, do heale olde vicers , and perfeRtly cure 
thoſe that have a venewous and malitious qualitie ioined with them :\aadare a remedie likewile 
againſt burnir.gsand ſcaldings, | [5 51 4 y 
B Mogoucrthe leaues boiled with vineger,are good for ſuch as have badſplecnes: but the flowers 


or 


HISTORIE /OF' PLANTS.- 70g 


or fruit are of more force, being very finely beaten and tempered with vineger, ofpecially fo vicd 
they are commended againſt burnings. | AM | 

The inice drawne or fnift vp into the noſe,doth effeQually Purge the head, ſtaieth the running C 
of the cares that hath been of long conciriuance,and healeth old yicets both intheeares, and alſo 
in che noſthrils :butifit be roo ſharpe,it is roo be mixed with oile.of Roſes,or ſallad cile, 

The gurtharis found vpon the trmike or body ofthe old ſtocke of Iuiegkillerhnits,and lice,and D 

| eaketh away baire: it is offo hota qualitie, as that ic doth obſcurely burne z iris as it were acertaine 
wateriſh liquor,congealed of thoſe gummie drops. Thus fatre _—_—-t; 

The very ſame almoſt hath Dyoſcorides, but yer alſo ſomewhar more : for ouet and beſides, he E 
Md ho of the berries bearen ſmall and made hot in a Pomegranate rinde with oile of Roſes, 
anddropped into the contrarie eate,doth eaſe the roothach, and thar the cluſter berries make the 

ireblacke.. | 
wm in our time is very ſeldome ved , ſaue that the leaues are laide vpon little vicers made inthe F 
thighes, legs,or other part of the bodie(rhey are called iſſues) for they draw humours and wareriſh 

ſubſtanceto thoſe parts, and remooue out of them hor ſwellings or inflammations, that is to faic, 
the leanes newly gathered, and not as yet withered or dried. 
| Somelikewile affirme, thar the cluſter berrics arc cffeRuall to procure vrine : and are given to G 
thoſe that be troubled with che ſtone,and diſcaſes of the kidaceies. | 

The leaues laide to ſteepe in warer for a day and a nights ſpace, helpeth fore and ſmarting H 
watcriſh cies,if they bebathed and waſhed with the water,whererin they haue beene infuſed. 


Of rough Bindweed. (;hap.302. 


| | + The kindes. 
Here be diuers ſorts of Bindweeds, ſome rough z and others ſmooth ; ſome greater,and others 
lefſe,differing in countrey and climate, wherot there is one called Zarſe,as itis deemed of ſame 
new writers: the which we intend tocomprehend vnderone chapter, 


1 Smilax Perunia _—_ parilia. | 2 Smilax 4ſpere. ' 
Rough Bindweed of Peru, Common rough Bindweed. 


* —_ 


[ 


{E / The 
” 4 \ / wn k . 4 / — 
- p _ * 
Wi WW INTER 
| F A 
. i ? - I 


DLAI <4 
4 | V 
P 


oh 


719 '/THE SECON D\BOOKE- OF THE 
'\ The iption. 


I Lrhoug!h we hane great lengic of.the rooces of this Bindweed of Peru, which we \ Guy 
call Zerz4,01 Sar : PUR: , herewith divers griefes and maladies are cured, ang __ 
theſe rootes are very well nowneto wil ; yer fuch hathbgenc the careleſlenes ang fna 

prouidence of fuchas havie trauelled into the Ind ics.that hitherto not any haue given vs inſtugs. 

on ſutficient,cicher concerning the leaues,flowers , or fruite,onely Monardrs faith,that ithah "a 

roores deepe thruſt int the ground, which 1s Ek ifa greatlearned man ſhould tell then)? 

ple,chatour common carrion Crowe were of aþlacke colour : for who is fo blinde that ſecth the 
root it ſelf,but can eaſily affirme the roots to be yery long? notwithſtiding zthere is inthe reports of 
ſuch as ſaie they have ſcene rhe plant it ſelfe growing, ſome contraciCtion ar contrarietie; lome te. 
port thatir is a kindof Bindweed.and efpectallyone of theſe rough Bindweeds ; others, as one ma- 
iter //hie an excellent painter, who caried very'many people into Virginia (or after ſome Norem- 
bega) there to inhabite, at which timehe did ſec thereof great plentie, as himſelfc reported ynto 
me,with this bare deſcription ; Ir isfgith he,theroote of a {mal{hrubbie tree,or hedge tree, fiich a; 


are thoſe of our countreycalled Hawthornes,hauing leaves reſeryblingrhoſe of Tuie: bur the flow. 
ers or fruite he remembreth not, i | 


2 Thecommon rough Bindweede hath many branches ſer full of little ſharpe prickles, withcer. 
raine claſping tendrels wherewith ittaketh hold vpon hedges, ſhrubs, and whartſoeuer ſtandeth 
next vntoit,winding & claſping it ſelfe abour from the bottom tothe ro heron are placedateue- 
ric ioint one leafe like that of Iute, without corners,ſharpe pointed, leflerand harder then thoſe of 
fmooth Bindweed; oftentimes marked with little white ſpots, and garded or bordered abour the 
edges with crooked prickles. The flowers grow at therop of crooked ſtalkes of a white colour, and 
ſweet of ſmell : afrer commeth the fruite like thoſe of the wild Vineygreen at the firſt, andred when 
they be ripe,and of a biting raſte wherein is contcined blackiſh leece, in ] pe like thoſe of hempe, 
The roote is long,fomewhar hard,and parted mto verymany brariches, | ' | 


% 


3 Smilaxaſjera L:ſtanice. | | . 4- Smilax fpeva Germanics, 
Rough Bindweed of Portugall. : . Germanicrough Bindweed, | 


\ :, : : i 
; G * » v4 
IQ | | Ithhaa yeeb>f4 T | 
"8 N , v : i . F 
" (4 F % uu 
- kk £25 + 35> | Mt jt LI" 
. FF : _ : : &E k » ; 
F. / , : ; 1+) "3s '< f 3 1 
- - > Y , 3 : | 
q $&\ p A, : : - : 3 \Y "xr 
% , - 
- = 2 £ « ” # 8 % 42% ". 
- - - - - p = I 
- i ' 
7 ; z P.M 4 
” * _- - : 
” p "1 ; 
& ' 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS ” qu 


| * The deſcription. 
> This rough Bindwced found tor the moſt partin the barren mountains of Portingale, differeth 
1or from the precedent,in talkes, leaues,flowers or fruite, The roote heereof is one ingle roote 
of 2 wopdie ſubſtance,with ſome fibres annexed thereto, wherein conſiſterh the difference. 
4, This Bindweed of Germanie hath many rough, prickly ſtalks, garniſhed and ſet rounde abour 
with diners thorns, like thoſe of the brier or bramble, winding and wrapping it ſelfe with his ten-: 
drels about thoſe things that do ſtande neecre vnto it, like the common Bindweed, whereof this is a 
Linde, The leaues are like thoſe of the Tuie : bur (harper at the point, vpon the middle zibbe whereof 
do ſtand diuers ſha1pe prickles of a black green colour: the flowers grow at the tops of the ſtalks in 
rufts,of a white colour;after commeth the fruite incluſters like thoſe of the red ſmall raiſons, called 
Rides,and ofthe ſame bignes, The roote is like the former, | | 
* The place. | | | 

Zuarz4 parilla,or the prickley Bindweede of America,groweth in Peru,a pronince of America,in 
Virginia,and diuers other places both in the eaſt and welt Indies, 

Theothers growe in rou hand vntilled places , about the hedges and borders of fieldes, on 
mountaines and vallies,in Italie,Languedock in Fraunce, Spaine,and Germanie, 

*% The time. | 

They flower and flouriſh in che ſpring,rheir fruit is ripe in Aurumne, ora little before, f 

: | % The names. 
| [risnamedin Greeke Swat Texxrie. Gaze Theophratus his tranſlator namerh it Heders Cilicie, 

_ as likewiſe Plinje, who writethin his 24.booke 10.chaprer,thar itis alſo ſurnamed 2 zcophoron. OF , 
the Herruſcians Hedera ſprnoſa, and Rubms ceruinus: of the Caſtilians in Spaine, as Lacuna ſaith, 
Zarzaperiliaas though they ſhould ſay, Kubas 1:ticu/a, or Bramble little vine. Parra as Matthiolws 
interprereth ir,doth ſignific a vine, and Par/{s,a (mall vine,or little vine, 

Divers affirme,that the roote(broughrout of Peru a province in America) which'the latter her- + 
bariſts do call Zarze,is the roote of this Bindweede. Garcia Loprus Luſitanu granteth itto be like 
therunto, but yet he doth nor affirme char ic is the ſame.Plants are oftentimes tound to be like one 
another,which notwithſtanding are prooued nor to be the ſame, by ſome lictle difference, The di- 
vers conſtitution of the weather and of the ſoile,maketh the difference, BE 

Zarza parilla of Peruis a ſtrange plant, and is broughtvnro vs from the countries of the new 
world,called America, and ſuch things as are brought Dev thence, although they alſo ſceme and 
are like to thoſe that growe in Europe, notwithſtanding they do often differ in vertue and opera- 
tion, For thediucrſitic of the ſoile and of the weather, doth not onely breede an altcration in the 
forme, but doth moſt of all preuaile in making he qualities and vertues greater or lefler. Such 
things as do growe in hot places be of more force and greater ſmell ;and in cold, of lefler, Some 
things that are deadly and pernitious, being remoued waxe milde, andare made wholeſome: foin 
like manner, alchough Zarzs pear:aof Peru belike ro rough Bindweede, or to Spaniſh Zarzs 14- 
r:1k, notwithſtanding by reaſon of the temperature of the weather, and alſo through the nature of 
the ſoile,t is of a great deale more force than rhat which groweth either in Spaine, or in Atrike. 

Theroores of Zarzaparilla of Peru (which are brought alone without the plant) be long and 
ſlender, like ro the leſler rootes of common Liquorice, very many oftentimes] anging from one 
head,in whichrootes the middle ſtring is hardeſt. They hauc little taſte and ſo ſmall a ſmell, as it is 
notto be perceiued, Theſe are reported to growe in Honduras,a province of Peru. They had their | 
name of the likeneſle of rough Bindweede, which among the inhabicanes ickeepeth, ſignifying in 
Lainealfoarough or prickley vine,as Garcias Lopims doth witnefle, 24 FI0ES 


; 


| | 3% The ws yer | VS IS FAG ASST A 
The rootes are of temperature hot and drie, and of thin and {ubtill partes, inſomuch as theirde- 
coctiondoth veryealily procure fweate. | | EE Rs EY 
| _ *% Thevertues. 4. 39G ©] 
 Therootes are a remedie againſt long continuallpaine of the ioints and head, and againſt colde A 
Ciſcaſes, They ate good for all manner of infirmities, wherein there is hope of cureby tweating, ſo 
thatthere be no ague ioined, £571 Pep þ Fe 
 Thecure is perfected in few dais, if the diſcaſe be not oldor grearzbur if ir be,it requireth alonger B 
um: of cure,mening,as I take it, the roots of Z4rz« parills,wherof this Smilax aſpera,orrough _ 
| AF'4 4 Sa 


mz THE SECOND BOOKE OF 'THE 
weede is holden for a kinde ; notwithſtanding this of Spaine,though it becomned lefſe woos has 
iris commended of Dioſcoridesand Plinie againſt poiſons, The leaues hereof, faith Dieſeorides axe , 


, 


cotinterpoiſon againſt deadly medicines, whether they be drunke before or atter, 

Of ſmoothor gentle Bindweede. Chap.304. 

ge FI i # The kindes, | 

Here be diuers ſorts of Bindweedes,diffcring as well in countrie,asin forme and figure 

be declarcd in this preſent Chapter. ; | MO 


I Snuiax ents ſie Lewis major. | | A 2 Smiltx lewis nor. 
Great linooth Bindweede, = gentle Bingweede, 


/J 


S; 
4 


J ; | 
Bd =. 
Sb | 1 


oo. 


> 
\ 
- 


tl gt 11 "i The deſeription. l | 
T is a ſtrange thing ynto me ; that thz:nameof Smilax ſhould ſo largely be extended, asthat ie 
ſhould be affignedrto thoſe plants,that comenothi ng necre the nature/and ſcarſly vntoanypart 
of the'forme of Smilex indeede, Butwe will leaue controverſies to the further conſideration 
of ſuchasloue rodaunce in-quagmires, and to come to this our common ſmooth Smilsx; 
and knowenby that name among vs, or rather more truly by the name of Conno/uulur maiortVols- 
bilis mater : It beareth the long branches of a vine, but tenderer, and for the len grhand great ſprea- 
ding thereof, very fit to make ſhadowes in arhors. 'The leaues are ſmooth like Tuie, but fomewhat 
bigger,and being broken full ofmilke; amongſt which come foorth grear; white and bollow-flow- 
ers like bels. The ſeede is three cornered, growing. ir {fnall husks,couered with a thin skin. The toore 
15 ſmallwhite and lang, like the great Dogs grafle. TURES [22797 a 
2 Smilaxleniaminor,is much hke vnto the farmer,in ſtalkes, leaues, towers, ſeede androores; 
uing hatin allreſpe&s iris mich ſmaller, and erceperh vpon the ground, The branches arclmal | 
and imooth: the lirtle Jeaues render and ſofr: the flowers like voto lirtle bels, of a purple colout, 
The feedethree cotneredlike vmtothe others, \ ES þ4 £68 01% 4064.07 of 


| 


 HISTORIE”OF(PLANTS. 217. 


w Ofnhich ſinall Bindweede there are founde other forts which onely vatic in the colour ofthe 
3 Conmolumus minimu ſþice foltts. 4 Yelabils xigra. 


Laucnder leafed Bindweed, Blacke Bindweed, 


EE” I 


% The deſcription, 


2 -This thirdekinde of Bindeweede, Pex: faith heneuer ſawe but inthe brinks of quickſers ; and 
Oliuers in Provence, Sauoy,and Narbone, notwithſtanding I foundthe ſame growingin the corn 
helds about great Dunmow in Eſſex in ſuch abundaunce, fa it doth very great hurt vnto their 
corne.This kinde of Bindweed or Yolubilys is like vnto the ſmall Bindweed before menrioned,bur it 
hath a more dclicate flower , plaited or foulded in the compaſle of the bell, very orderly , eſpe- 
ciallybefore the ſunne riſe(for after it openeth ir ſelfe, thewelts arg not ſo much perceived ) andis 
ofa darke purplecolour. The ſecede is not vnlike thereſt,cornered and flat, Eonng oof of {lendes 
braunches,which ſtande vpright and thicke togither,proceeding out of a woodie white roote, The 
are long and narrow,reſembling Ljnaria,bothin colour and hairineſle, in taſte drying, and 
 lomewhar heating, | | | - ma 
4 The fourth kind of Bindweed callcd Helxine ofthe Greek word iaxy, which {ignifieth to draw, 
tocleaue,or to pullto him ; being conferred with the forcſaide kindes of Bindweeges togither with 
hisnature and effe& of purging ,, may yeelde manifeſt reaſons why Ci/campetos ſhould be alſo of 
the kindes of Comnelunias which Dedonewm calleth Connoluuum nigram. Burfor as much as there be 
fower dj to: be conſidered in the herbe Connoluwlas, or as the common people tearine it 
Polabilis, whoſe vertues hauc nor as yer by any one beene ſer foorth : I haverherefore thought ir 
$00d to account this-Yolwbilis for the right Ciſſempeles , which agreeth moſt with himas wellin 
Place asal{ inhis euident propertie ofpurging, which is the onely qualitic thaz Dieſ+ 
&r1%;notcth and applieth vato-bimywyhich che Rudencs of Paduacall Broeggioand of Pliny Seam 
Medio, and doth thinke irto be a kinde of the true Scammonie, This Compile, or nevy 
| indweed; 


714 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 

Bindweed hath ſmoothred branches, and verie ſmall, like the rendrels of avine, wherewith ir 
wrappeth and windeth it ſelfe about trees and hedges,and whatſocuer thing elſe, wher it ta. 
keth holde: the leaues are ſmall and tender, reſembling the leaues of the lictle Bindweede , Or ta. 
therthe Jeaues of Spinach : the flowers are ſmall, and of agreeniſh or;herbie colour, Certaine 
decceiueable drugmaſters,or medicine makers, dwelling neere the ſca cgalts where this here gro. 
weth in great quantitie,do minglethe iuice of the ſea Tirbymale, Colophonie, Rofin, andthe juice 
of this He/xine, and ſell it for the beſt Scammonie,to the great hurt and detriment of thoſe that te. 
cciuc it,andlander tothe Phiſition which miniſtreth it. ; I 

There is a kind of Bindweed that hath a rough root full of threddie ſtrings, fromwhichriſe 

immediately diucrs trailing branches, wherupon do grow leaues like the common field Bindweed, 


of a blacke greene colour, whereofir rooke his name. The whole plant is nor onely a hurtful 
weede, butofan cuill ſmell alſo, ; [1 
| [457 % Theplice. | 
A!l theſe Kinds of Bindweeds do grow very plentifully in moſt parts of England. 
; | *% Thetime. | 
They do all lower from Maie to the end of Auguſt. | 
| UE 14] * 7 he names. 13 | 
The great Bindweede is calledin Greeke 9wine >cia: in Latine Lewis Smilex, of Galenand Pauly 
CAEginers whe >4e: it js furnamed Lewis or ſmooth , bicauſe the ſtalkes and the branches x 
hauenopricklesar all. Do/ichas called alſo Smilax hortenſis,orkidney nm differ from this: 
and likewiſe Smilax the tree, which the Latines call Taxws , in Engliſh the Yewe tree. Thelater 
Herbariſts do call this Bindweed Yolubz/is mazor, Campanella, funis ar borwn, Connoluulus albus, and 
Smilax Lexis mator : in like maner lene in his 21. booke 5.chaptr, doth alſo name it Conyolualuy, 
Itis thought to be Ziguftrum, notthe ſhrubbe priuer, bur that which Aferriad in his firſtbooke 
of Epigrams ſpeaketh of, writing againſt ProciÞþus. q |: | 
 Theſmall Bindweede is called Connoluules minor , and Smilex lents minor, Volubilis miner : in 
high Durch TMindkraut t in low Dutch UUzange t in French LT : in Icalian Ylacchio; in 
Spaniſh Campanilis Terya:in Engliſh Wirchwinde, Bindweede, and Hedge Bels. 2 
oe # LEF:: *% The nature. 
'Thele herbes arc of an hot and drie temperature. | 


* The vertues. | 


The leaues of blacke Bindweedecalled Helxine C:ſ[umpeles, ſtamped and ſtrained, andthe iuice 
A drunken,doth looſe and open the belle exceedingly. | 


* 


Theleaues pounde and laid to the greeucd place diſſolueth,waſterh and conſumeth hard lumps 
B and ſwelling, as Galen ſaith. ! ! * 
Thereſt of the Bindwceedes are not ft for medicine , bur vnprofitable weedes and hurtful to 


Cechething that groweth nextynto them, =} 


| Of Blew Bindweed. (hap-304- 


Lewe Bindweedbringeth foorth long,render,and winding branc 
things that ſtand ncere ynto it,and fouldeth it ſelfe about them with 


azure colour ending to 
pom ine long lackiſh 
gne 
periſheth arrhe firſt approch of winter, 


\. HISTORIE)OF/PLANTS. |.” _ 
| Conmolunlus Carnlens. 0 | | | 
Blew Bindwecd. SP  %Theplace. | 
> 44.6 | The ſecdeofthisrare planc was firſt brovghe -. 
 frontSyriaandother remote parts of the world, 
' andis a ſtranger in theſe northren parts, yee 
haue I brought vp andnouriſheqitinmy gar- 
den vnto flowring, but thewhole planeperithed 
before it couldperfect his ſeed, 29 
| *% Thetime. FP 
The ſcede muſt be ſowenas Melons ard Cn- 
cumbers are, and at the fame time: it flowred 
with mc in theend of Auguſt, 
__ weThenames. © 
It is called Campanas Lazulz, and Lazure , of 
the latet Herbariſts Camps Cerulca, atid allo 
Conwluntum Cerutenm: itts thought tobe Ligu- 
ſtrum nigrian;(but not truely) of which Colume ls 
in his 10,booke hath made mention: 
| gx 


| | | 
Fer calathicviolam,es nie viſta lizuſtro 
Balſama cum Ca oa IR | ” iſ F 
In baskets bring thou Violers 
Andblew Bindweed withallz 

But mixed with pleafancBaulme 
And Caſha medicinall. ns 


For if the greater ſmooth VWirhwinde, or Bind- 
weede be Liguſtrum, then may this be not vn- 
| properly called Liguſfrum nigrum': for a blewe 
% © | purplecolourisotrentimes called black, as hath 
beene ſaide in the blacke Violer. But there be ſome that would hauc this Bindeweed'to be Granmr: 
Nil Awcenng, ofwhich he writeth in the 306.chapter; the which differcth fromthar N7/that is de- 
{ribedin the 5 12.chapter. For this is 7/ats Gr ecorum,or the Grecian VVoadezbur thar is a ſtrange 
plant,andis brought from India,as both _ſuicenne and Serapiodo teſtific : daicennein this man- 
ner;whatis granawm Nil ? itis Chartamun Indum: and Serapio this; Habal Nil, is granum Tndicwn, 
inthe 283.chapter,where the ſame is deſcribed in thete words: the plant therof is like tothe plant 
of Lebleh,chat is to ſaic of Czyolunas,or bindweed,taking hold on trees with his tender ſtalks:it hath 
| bathgreene branches & leaues,and there commetrh our by cuery leafe a purple flower, in faſhion of 
the Bell lowers :and when the lower doth fallaway,ityceldeth a ſecede in ſmall coddes(Iread little 
heads) in which are three graines, lefler then the ſeedes of Staueſaker, to which deſcriptionthis 
blew Bindweed is Aonax', 2 | 


4 


There be alſoother ſorts of Bindweeds,which be referred to 5! Auicenne which no doubt may 
be kinds of 92/3 fornothing gainfaicth ic why theyſhoulde not be ſo. Therefore roconclude, this 
beautifull Bindweed,which we call Canwolanlus Cerulew, is called of the Arabians Ni/ : of Serapio 
Heb a/ nil: about Alepoand Tripolis in Syriazthe inhabirants callit Haſmiſen: the Italians Compan 
_ the beautifull zzured lowers,and alſo F ior de wette , bicauſe his beautic appecreth.mait 


-. 4. The remperatare. 


ry Wind oA | 21013 £12445 22121000; 
F Conuoluulau C eruleus,or XN ul as CAnicenne faith,is hot and dricin the firſt degree, but Serepiomasr. 
kethittobchorand drie in the third degree. | \ ln $ro mit overs 


Reand voideth foorth rawe,thicke, fiegmaricke and melancholicke humours :1t drigerch,A 
oMtWikinde of wormes, but it troubleth the belly and cauſeth a readines to vomite, as Auzcenſaithz 
Fr; watketh flow ly as Serapiowriteth,in whom morc-hecrof maybe'found, but to licle purpoſe whet-: 

jote we thinke good topaſle it ouer, | on; -:Agr abit; 


of 


=) 


_ 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Of Scammomie,or purging Binaweed. Chap.; 05. 


4 


Oe Thedferiptios 


1 { Cammonie of Syria hath many ſtalkes riſing from one roote, which are long, {lender, 
and like the chioing tendrels of the vine , by which ic climerh/ and rakerh holde of fuch 
things as arcnext vnto it. The leaucs be broade,ſharpe pointed like thoſe of the ſmooth or 

hedge Bindweed : among which come foorth very faire white flowers 'tendingto a bluſh colour, 

bell faſhion. The roore is long, thicke, and white within'; out of which is gathered a nuce thatbe- 
ing hardned > peo vſedin Phiſicke : for which confideration , there i# not any plant that gro- 
weth on the , the knowledge whereof more concerneth a Phiſition, both tor his ſhape and 
properries, then this Scammonie, which Pengcalleth LaiFaris ſeanſoriaque voluuls, that is wilki 
3nd climbing Windweed,whereofit is a kinde ; although for diſtinQtion y*ick haue placedthem 
astwo ſundrie kinds. And although this herbe be ſuſpe&ted,and halfe condemned of fome 

men, yet there is not any other herbe to be founde , whereof ſo ſmall a titic will do ſomuch 
good :neither could thoſe which haue carpedat ir,and reprooued this herbe , finde any ſimple in 
reſpe&ofhis vertues to be putin his roome: and heereof inſueth greatblarhe to all practitioner 
who haue not indeuoted to bee better acquainted with this herbe, chiefely to auoide the deceite 
of the craftiedrugſeller and medicine maker of this conſefted Scammonie, brought vs from farre 


| places, 


| E15TORTE OF PLANTS. «7 747: 
laces, rather to be called I feare infeted Scammonie , or poiſoned Scammanie, then confetted. 
Bur to avorde the, inconweniences heercot.,. by reaſon of the countertairigg and ill mixing 
thereof ;1 haue clicreforethought good toſerdowne whar Thaue taken ont of the<iligent , and nv 
lefle learned obleruations of Pexa, concerning this plant, Cano 1561. 0r 1562, | 
Sequins Martinellus, an apothecaric of Venice, being a moft diligent ſearcher of Symples,to the 
end he might havie the righe Seammonic of Antioche,trauclled into'Syrja, wherefrom the citic 
of Alepo, he ſent an hundcerh waight of the wiceof Scammonie of Antioche, prepared and 
Þardgcdinroa lumpe, at themaking whereof he was preſenthimſelfe. This man ſent alſo of the 
ſoedes thereofwbich in all points anſwered the cornered feed of Yolubilis : which being Towers wu 
thebeginning of che ſpring at Padua,and Venice,grew vp to the forme of a braue and goodly Con- 
wlag,in leaues, flowers and ſhewe hike vnto our Co[ampelos , that 2 manwoulde have taken it for 
—_— without controuerſic,ſauing thatghe toote was great, and inbigneſſe equal tothe great = 
mnic,as alfo.intendernefſe, The outwapde barke of the roote was of a pukie colour, and white 
within: the inocrpith being takenfoorth ſcemeth in all mens indgements to be the fawe and the 
betallowed Twrbith officinerum : andyer it differerh from Tutbjrh, inthat , that it is more britele, 
ndwill more eaſily be broken, though the pith: in Scammonie be no lefle gurmie, and full of 
milkie wice then Turbith. Further Pers reporteth that afterward he ſenr of this ſeedevnto Ant- 
werpe,where it grewC pn ay= Love climing ſtrings and braunches growing vp to the height of 
fue or fixecubirs, nocdiftering-fromithat which was fowen in lealie. Allo {rm Dries of: Ant- 
werpe,amoſt excellent apothecary,did curoffthe branches of this AntrOn Scammonie from 
the rote, anddriedthem, planted: the feedes in his garden, and conferred theſuperfluons bran- 
chedrootes with the Turbith of Alexandria, and coulde nor finde them to differor difagree the 
one from the other in any,point. Bur he that will knowe more concerning Scammonie (Imeanc 
whatapothecarie ſdcuer, ynto whomeſpecially it belongerh ) either concerning the right choiſe 
thercot;his difference from Opium,and how the counterfaiting theregf may be knowne,of the vic 
of Scammonie,and the reaſon thatthe,doſes which are giuen intheſedaies, will not anſwer the 
quantitie which was preſcribed tobe giuen in Gatez his time,and how Scammonieis to be correc- 
tedand mixed with other purging medicines, as D:aphenicon, Catholicon, Suerus roſerum , Braſiica 
merine.and Tithywna/e:lethim read Pars his learned obſeruations in his chapter of Scammonie, 
wha he ſhall finde many excellent ſecrets woorthiethe noting ofthoſe, as know how to vicfich 
rare and excellent medicines, T_T CT 
2  Scammonic of Montpe!lier(whereofshaue plentiemn my garden} is allo a kinde of Bindweed, 
growing naturally by the ſea'{ide vpon the grauelyſhore} bythe-mouth of the riverRhodanus, ar 
thewaters called Aguas marians,where the apotbecaries of Montpellier gather ofiringreatplen- 
ticwho haue attempred to harden the milkie 1uicethereofgtovicitin ieedef Scammonie of An- 
tioch. This plant bringeth foorth manie {lender brahches, which will climbeand verie well runne 
pon a pole,as being | therewith,and mgunterth-to the height of five or fixe cubirs, clim- 
bing and ramping like the firſt kinde of Scammonie. The leaues are pong ſmoorh, plaine,'and 
ſharpe pointed, which being broken do yeelde abundancedbf milke: the flowers are white, ſmall, 
and ſtarre faſhion; the rootes white and manic, ſhooting foorth ſundrie otherroores, whereby ir 


mightily increaſcth, T BY B's 


# 


© # Thedtſeription. © = wer 
3 Thisftrangekindeof Scammonie, which C/s/ku founde inthe marſhie groiindsnecte vnto the 
ſeainthe Prouince of Valcntia,being one of the'Bi as are likewiſe all the reſt of Scammo- 


nies: neverthelefſe hemakerh this ro be Periploce ſpecies, OY Ons and Scammoniero be of 
kinred, Thisplant hath a vetie long branch ramping;and taking [Id ypon ſuch things as do growe 
necre yntoit, of a darke ruſſet colourwhich we call aſh coloar , whereupon do grow leaues ſharpe 
pointed;crooked at theſerting on ofthe ſtalk like thoſe of the blacke Brionie, and likewiſe ofan aſh 
colour ertogither by couples: from the boſome wherof thruſteth foorth ſmall tenderfoote ſtalks, 
 Whereon are placed {mall white flowers ſtarre faſhion, The roote hath not as yerbeene diſconered 
byanythathath written heereof, = dp 7 " 


©. 


3 SLranmmonea 


© 
o 
x 


ws. |} FE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
3 Scamon('a Valentin. | KS 
Scammonie of Valentia, | * Theplace, | 
WT: — Ir doth grow in hatregions,in a fat ſoile, as in 
: Miſia,Syria,andother like countries of #fi2iris 
' likewiſe formdintheUandof Candia,as 3elbmay 
: wi eth, from wheneclI had ſome leedes, of 
© whichſcedI received twoplants that proſpered 
exceeding well, the one whereof I beſtowed w- 
: ona learned apothecanie of Colcheſter , which 
* continuethrothis daie, bearing both flowers ang 
+ = ſeede. But an ignorant weeder of my garden 
- pluckedmine vp, andeaſt it away inmy abſence, 
/ inſteedeof a weede, by which miſchance I'am 
' notable to write heereof fo abſolutely as I deter. 
- mined: it likewiſe groweth neere vnto the ſeg 
_ - fide abour Tripolis in Syria, where the inhabj- 
rants docall it Mexdhegads. 
; *+ The time. 
' Ir flowredinmygardenabour Saint Iames tide, 
as Iremember; for when Iwentto Briſtow faire, 
 Tleftir in flower ;but atmyreturne itwas deſtroj- 
: edas aforeſaid. WW. Kage q 
: | * The names. 74 
The Greekes call itowwworie: the Latines Scam: 
 monium, ſo naming not onely the plantir ſelfe, 
- butalſothehard and congealed ivice: of the apo- 
: ER Scamones, and when it is boiled in a 
Quince Dregrediwns, as though they ſhoulde faie, 
| WHT. 4419131 / duxpridey: which ſignificth a lictle <agaet the 
herbe and iuice 'are named Scamony, of Rhaſis Coriziols. [1 ewe hs 
| F: [4-1 '* Thetemperature. FS” 

This iuice doth mightily purge by the ſtoole, andis the ſtrongeſt purge whatſocuer; for as 07;- 
baſs aith, it is in nopart ouercome bythoſe things which ſtirre and mooue the bodice. It worketh 
theſamenot vehemently by any hot qualitie,byt by ſome other hid & ſecret propertie ofthewhole 
ſubſtance z for there isno extremitie of heat perceivedin it byraſte : for with what liquor orthing 
ſocuer it is mixed, it giveth vnto it no bitrerneſle, biting, or other vnpleaſan taſte at all,andrhere- 
fore it is not tobe accounted among the extreme hot medicines, but among thoſerharare mode- 
rately hot and drie. | | TE8T. Fault 1705 4 | 

* Thevertues. 


, andouerturnings 
| ih bring a continuall 
 defiretotheſtoole; | 

C . Theſe miſchictes are prevented 


8 


faithhe, © n the ſton gr? 
be put vnto one ſcruptepf it; On 
the 7.booke of his megicinall ColleRions, 


E Theold Phiſicioas were alſo woont to boil Scammonic ina Quince,and to giue the Quince - | 


HISTORLE OF PLANTS. 719 
beeaten,hauing caſt away the Scammonie: and this Quince foraken doth mooue the belly with. 
out any hurt vnto the ſtomacke, as Ga/enin his hit{t booke of rhe faculties of nomiſhments doth }. 
{-t downe,and likewiſe in his third booke of the faculties of fimple medicines, | 
' The appthecaries do vie Scammonie prepared inan apple, which as we haue aide, they name F 
Diagri41am,and do mixe it in diuers compolitions, 
| They keepe viually in their ſhops two compoſitions, or elefuaries , the one of P/U; or Flea- G 
woort,/et down by XMeſaes : the other of Prunes fathered ypon N zcho/ars, which were deviſed for 
the tempering and correction of Scammonie, and be commended for hot burning agues,and terti- 
ans,and for whatdieaſes ſocuerthatproceed of choler, 

Galen hath taken Maſticke and Bde{{zzzn out of the pilles called Cochie, which alfo conteine in LH 
them a great & ſufficient quantitic of Scammonie, as we may reade in his firſt bookeof medicines 
zccordingo the places afteted, which alſo we meane to touch in thechaprer of Coloquintida, 
where we intend to intreatat large concerning Maſticke, and other binding things, thatare accu- 
ſomedto be mixed for the correCion of ſtrong and violent purgers. | | | 

Thequantitic of Scammonie,or of Dzagridzwn it ſclfezas Me/ues writeth,is from five graines to ] 
tenor twelue: it may be kepr, as the ſame authour ſheweth, fower yeeres: Plinjeiudgeth itto be at- 
ter two yeeres little w :Iris ro be vied faith he when it is two yecres old, andit 1s not good be- 
fore,not after. The mixing or otherwiſe the vie chereof,more then 1s ſer downe I thinke it not expe- 
dent to ſet foorth in the Phiſicall vertues of Scammonie, vpon the receipt wherof , many rimes 
death inſuerh : my reaſons are diuers,for that the ſame is very dangerous, either if roo great a quan- 
titie thereof be raken,or if it be giuen without correftion; or taken at the hands of ſome runnagate 
phiſickmonger,quackſaluer, old women leaches, and ſuch like abuſers of Phiſicke, and deceiuers of - 
people. The vie of Scammonie I commit to the learned, vnto whom it eſpecially and onely belong- 
eth, who very carefully and curiouſly vic the fame, 


Of Bronie,or the white Vine. (hap.306. 


las * The kindes, 


 T Hereberwokindes of Brionie(beſides the wilde one,called Byionis Fueftris,or wilde Brionie) 
theone white,the other blacke,of the white Brionie as followeth. en ar 


* The deſeription. 


7 Hire Brioniebringeth foorth divers long and flender ſtalkes , with many claſping ten- 
Y drelslikethe Vine, wherewith it catcheththolde of thoſe things that are next vnto it, 
| The leaues are broad, fiue cornered , and indented like thoſe of the Vine ; but rouzher, 
| More hairie,and whiter of colour, The flowers be ſmall, white,growing manie togither. The frvi-e 
| conliſterh inlictle cluſters, the berrics whereof are arthe firſt greene, and redwhen they be ripe. 
Theroote is verie great, long, andthicke, growing deepe in the carth , of a white yellowiſh co- 
>extreme bitter, andaltogirther of an vnpleafantraſte. The Queenes chiefe Chirurgion, Ma- 

[ter Willem Goodoroxs,a very curious and learned gentleman ſhewed me a roote heereof, that waicd 
ale an hundred waight,and ofthe bignefle of a childe,of a yecre olde. F102 HEME 


 Brionia 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Bryonia a/ba, | Fi | 


'Whute Bryonie. ot * The place. 


: Brionic groweth almoſt every where among 
/ potherbes,hedge buthes, and ſuch like places, 
[ ue Thergne, | b 
: Irflowrethin Maie, and bringeth forth þ;. 
 grapesin Autumne. | : | 
þ * Tye names, 
' Bryonie ts called in Greek aUTA9s evyd : m Latin 
' Vitz alba,or white Vine,and it isnamed cunay; bj. 
* cauſciris not onely likethe Vine in leaues, bur al. 
: fo for that it bringerh foorth his fruire made vp 
| afterchelikenefle of a little cluſter, although the 
| berries ſtande nor cloſe togither : it iscalled of 
: Plimie Bryonia and Madon: of the Arabians cu. 
. pheſera: of Mathews Syluat ic144 Viticela: in the 
- poore mans Treaſure Rereſfrum:of has ps Api- | 
. «/tellum, vitis T aminia; Viticalba,and Vitalbs: in 
- high Durch Suchwurtz: in low Dutch Byjonie: 
 inEngliiſhBryonie, white Bryonie, and terter Ber. 
. rie:in French Coaleuxee tin Italian Zaccs ſaluatics: 
in Spaniſh Naezablancs. | 
0 + Thetemperature. 
White Brionic isinall his parts hot and diie, 
: exceeding the thirde degree, eſpeciallyof heat, 
: with an excecding great force of clenſing and 
ſcouring, by reaſon whereof purgeth and draw. 
._ ethfoorth, not onely cholericke and flegmatike 
__  humours,butalſowatne, 
: | | * The Vereues. kk 
A Dioeſecorides wrizeth that the firſt ſprings or ſproutings being boiled and eaten, do purge byſiege 
and vrine. Ga/exfaith,thar all men vic cuftomably to cate of it in the ſpring time, and that it isa 
nouriſhment kolfome, by reaſon of the binding qualitie that it hath 3 which is to be vnderſtood of 
thoſe of the wilde Vine,called in Latine Temas; and not of the {proutings of this plant; for the 
ſproutings or the firſt ſprings of white Bryonie are nothing binding at all » but do mightily purge 
the belly,and rorment the ſtomacke. =» | 
B Dioſcor:des allo aftirmerh,thar the iuice of the roote being preſſed outin the ſpring, and drunke 
with meade or honied water purgeth flegme: and nor onely the iuice,butalſo the decoQtion ofthe 
roote draweth foorth flegme,choler,and wateriſh humours, and that very ſtrongly ; andis withall 
oftentimes fo troubleſome to the Komacke,as ir procureth vomire. 
C Thiskinde of ſtrong purgation is good forthoſe that haue the dropſie,the falling ſicknes, and 
thedifineſle and ſwimming of the braine and head, which hath continuedlong, and1s hardly tobe 
remooucd : yet notwithſtanding it isnor daily to be giuen ( as Dioſcor:des a&monitheth ) to/them 
thar haue the falling ſicknes, for it wil be Cotllleſbrn: inough being taken now & rhen:Sc it 15(25 WE 
| haue ſaid)an excecding ſtrong medicine,purging with violence, & very forceable for Mans Nature, 
D Theroote pur vp in manner ofapeſlaric bringeth foorth the deadchitde and afcerbirth: being 
| boiled forabathtoſitin,ir worketh the ſame effet. - 3 & IVY: | 
E lIfcomerhche skin,and taketh away wrinckles, freckles, funne burning. blacke marks, ſyots,a0d 
ſcars of the face,being tempered with the mieale of vetches or Tares, of of Fenugrecke: 07 
m oile till it be conſumed; it taketh away blacke and blewe ſpots which.come of 1tripes: 1tis good 
againſt Whiclowes: being ſtamped with wine and applicdit breakerh biles 3 andſmall zpoltuncs, 
it drawerh foorrh {piinters and broken bonesif it be ſtamped and laid thereto... 
F Thefameisalfo ficly mixed with cating medicines as Dr/ocorracs wricerh. 
G hp The fruitis good againit ſeabs/ and the leprie,jifit be appliedaud aunointed on, as the ſame 
wr ath:merh., ve | 


7 ſeare cloth; 


1;: HISTORIE ' OF PLANTS. | 721 


Galen writeth that itis proficabile for Tanners to thicken their leather hides with.” || H 
Furchermore an eleGuariemadeof the roots and hony or ſugar, is ſingular good for them that I 

| acc ſhorte winded, tfoubledwith.an old cough, paine in the ſides, and for ſuch as are hurtand bur- 

| fcn inwardly : forirdfloluerh and ſcattereth abroad congealedandelottered blood. +: ©» -- 

© Theroote ſtamped with ſalt, 'is good to be laide vpon filthie vicers and ſceabbed legs: The fruite K 
| jslikewiſe good ro the ſameintenr it it be applied inmanner aforefaide. 

© Theroore of Bryonieandof wake-Robin ſtamped with ſome ſulphur or brimſtone, andmade vp L 
:nco a malle or lump, and wrappedin a linen clout,takerh away the moxphewe, freckles,and ſpots 
 oftheface,if it be rubbed with the ſame being dipped brit in vineger. | 


Of blacke |" "AE the wilde vine.  (hap.307. 


bf Bryonia wiera. | 2 Bryonia nigrs ſyluettyis. - 
| Blacke Brjonin | 0 Wilde blacke Bryonie. 


| * The deſcription. SR 
1 FF He blacke Bryonic hath long flexible branches ofa woodie ſubſtance, covered with a ga- 
pingor clouen barke growing very farre abroad, winding ir ſelfe with his ſmall rcndrels 
about trees, hedges, & what elſe is next.vnto ir, like ynto the branches of the Vine. The 
kaues are like vnto thoſe of Iuic or garden Nig| Jharpe pointed, andofaſhining greene co- 
flowers aze white ang ich being paſt, there ſucceede little cluſters of red 
Jomewharbigger then thoſe ofthe ſmall Raiſons,or Ribes, which we call Currans or ſmall 
lins. The roore is very great and thicke,oftentimes as bigge as 2 mans legge, blackiſh withour, 
and very clammie or ſliniy within; which being but ſcraped with a knife, or any other thing fir for 
thatpurpoſe, it ſeemeth to be a marter fit to ſpread vponcloth or leather inmaner of a plaiſter or 


pwhich being ſo ſpred and vſed,it ſeruerh to laie ypon many infirmities,andto very good 
pupoles.as ſhall be declared in the proper place, 7 | The 
Z 1 A 


# 


__" THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 

2 Thewilde blacke Bryonie reſembleth the former , as well in lender Yinic ſtalkes as leaves; þ,; 

claſpinghendrdls hath jr none,neuerthelcfſe by reaſon of the infinite braunches,and the tendernes 
_ of theſame;jit raketh holde of thoſe things thatſtand next vntoir,although caſiero be looſed, con. 

trarie to the other of his kinde. The berries heereof are blacke of colour when they be ripe. The 


roote alſo is blacke withour,and within of a pale yellowe colour like boxe. 


* The place. _ | 1538 

The firſt oftheſe plants doth growin ed endbuthen almoſt everywhere, 

The ſecond growethin Heſlia, Saxonic,Veltphalia,Pometland,8& Miſnia,where white ony 
doth noqgrowe,as YValerizs Cordwe hath written,who faith thatitgroweth vnder Haſell trees; necr 
vnto aciuc of Germanie called Argentine,or Strawsborough, = 7 

Lhd t Thetime. Th (5 

They ſpring in March,bring foorth their flowers in Maic,and their ripe fruire in September, 

© * The names. 6 qt 

Blacke Bryonie is called in Grecke 4m2os 46a: in Latine Bryonia nigrs , and Vitis fplaeftris, or 
wilde Vine; notwithſtanding itdoth not a little differ from ,or Fitts por ar. 3 [plueitris,that 
isto faic, from the wilde Vine,which bringeth foorth wine, which is likewiſe called Ampelyzagria: 
why both theſe were called by one name, Plnie was the cauſe, whocould nor ſufficient! cpolpde 
chem inhis 23.booke firſt chapter z bur confounded them,and made them all one, in whic 
are alſo the Arabians.. it ws: LL $17 

This wilde Vinealſo is called in Latine,Tamm,and the fruit thereof Yas Taminia. Plinienamerh 
it alſo Salicaſtrums.Reelins ſaith that in certaine ſhops itis called S:gillwm B. Marie: itis allo called 
Cyclominus altera butnot properly: in Engliſh blacke Bryonie,wilde Vine,and our Ladies Seale. 

EF: | .| w*Thetemperatare. = 


: 


The rootes of the wilde Vine are hot and dric in the thirddegree : the fruice is of like tempera. 
” ture,but yet nor ſo forceable: both of them ſcower and waſt awaie. | | 
| | ' *% Thevertues. $4. v | 
 Dioſcorides faith that the roores do purge warcriſh humours, and are goodfor ſuch as have the 
droplic; if they be boiled in wine, adding vntothe wine a little ſea water;, and be drunke in three 
ounces of faire freſh water : he ſaith furthermore, that the fruit or berries doth take away the ſunne 
burne and other blemithes of the skinne, = | 


B Theberriesdonotonely clenſe and remooue ſuch kinde of fpots,but do alſo very cy waſte 
and conſume away blacke and blewe marks that come of bruſes and drie beatings , which thing 
alſo the roots performe being laid vponthem. E413 

C Theyoong and tender ſproutings are keprtinpickle, and reſerued ro beeaten with meate as D+- 
ofcorides teacherh. Mathiolus writeth that they are ſerued atmens tables alſo in our age in Tuſeane: 
others report, the like alſo tobe done in Andalaſia,one of the kingdomes of Granado, 

D Iris faigthat ſwine ſecke after the rootes heerof, which they digge vp and catewith noleſle de- 
light then they do the rootes of Cyc/arinus, or P anis jorcings , whereupon it was called Cyc/aminu 
«ters, or Sowe bread zifthis reaſon ſtande for na + then may we in like maner joine heereunto 
many other rootes, and likewiſe callthem Cyc/ammws alters ,or Sowe bread: for ſwine do not ſecke 

after the rootes of this onely , digge them vp and greedily deuoure them, but the rootes of divers 
. other plants alfo,of which none are of thekinds of'5 Sowbread. It would therfore be a point of raſh 
neſle ro affirme 7 ames or our Ladics Scale to be a kind of Sowbread,bicaulſe the rootes thereofare- 
pleaſantmeate to Swine | 18 FA ke 3 

E | Theroote ſpred ypon) apeece of ſheepes leather,in manerof a plaiſter whileſt ir is yet freſh and 

* greene, taketh away blacke orblewe matkes, all ſcarres and deformities ofthe skin, breakerh harde 
apoltemes, draweth foorth ſplinters and broken bones, diffolueth congealed bloud ; and being laid 
on and vſed ypon the hippe or huckle bones , ſhoulders, armes , or anyorher part where there 1s 
great paine and ach it taketh it away inſhort ſpace,and worketh very effeQually. 


{7 


of 


wy Of Bryome of e Mexico. Chap.z08. 


—<-. 


neo 13% ir 44 be ' - u The defeription. | | 
I Hatplantwhichis nowe called Mechoxcan,or Bryonie of Mexico, commeth verie neere 
the kinds of Bindweeds, in leaues & trailing branches,bur in rootes like the Bryonies; for 
| there ſhooterh from the roote thereof many long ſlender tendrels, which do infinitely 
Falpe andclaſpe about ſuch things as growe or ſtande next ynto —— 9s | 4 mang 
roadleaues {harpepointed,of adarke greene colour,in ſhape like thoſe of our Ladies Seale,jom- 
wiatrough and hairie,and a little biting the toong:amongthe leaues come foorth the flowers (as 
Nicola Monardis writeth)not valike to thoſe ofthe Orengetrec, butrather of the golden apple 
of Loue,conſiſting of fiue {mall lcaues; our of the midſt wherofcommethfoorth a lircle's leclappet or 
peltellin maner _ around lumpe,as bigge as a Haſell Nutwhich being diuided withathinne skin, 
of membrane, that commetrh thorou h it, openeth into two partes,in each whereofarecontained 
 Woſeedes,as big as Peaſc,in colour blacke and ſhining, The roote is thicke and longopery likevnto 
theroote of white Bryonie,whereof we make this a kinde, although in the taſte of the rootes there 
is ſomedifference : for the roote of white Bryonic hath abirter raſte, and this hath little or no 


2 TheBryonie,or Mechoacanof Peru growerh vp with —_—_—— trailing flexible branches,inter- 
with divers Vinie tendrels;'which take hold of {uchthi gs as are nextor neerevato them, 
euenin ſuch manner of. claſping and climing as doth the blacke Bryonie,or wine Vine, whereunto 
1s Cry like almoſt in eche reſpe&, ſauing Tin his moſſie flowers do ſmell very (weetly. Thefruit 
25XeLhauenor obferaed, by reaſon thar the plant which doth growe in my garden, did not per- 
*meſame, by occaſion off the great raine:andintemperate! weather, that happened in #179 
1596. but Iam in:good hope, woes it in bis perfe&ion , then'we ſhall calily iudge whether it be 


Lz 2 F- that 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS)! 723 


gage 01 erg —_ - 


T4 * THE SECOND(BOOKETOPF|THE 
that right Aechoacan chat bath beene brought from Mexico, and other places of theWeg Indies 
orno? Theroote by the figureſhould ſceme to an{weretharof the wilde Vinebur a; yet Uiereof 
Icannor write certainly. © | 10 | Ts 
| 41h 6 1 EY | * The place. | | | 

Some write that Merhoacan was firſt found jn the prouince of new Spaine, neerewno the citis 
of Mexico or Mexican, whereofirtooke his name. It groweth likewiſe in a proumcepf the Welt 
Indies called Nicaragueand Quite,wher it is thought the beſt doth growe, | 

[J-£>1 | ** The names. of (3H KY 
It beareth his name as is ſaid,of the province in which itis found, Some take ittobe Bryomis 


cies,or to be akinde of vt : bur ſecing the rooce is nothing bitter, bur rather withour ——— 
as one fairh,withourqualitie,ithath little agreement with Bryonie 3 for the roote of Bryonie wwe | 
bicter. Diuers name it &ha a/burn, or white Rubarbe, but vnpropertly, being nothing like. Le, 
meth neerer vnto Stammonie, and if I might yeeld my cenfureit{cemethto be Scammenizn, 
don Americanm,or acertaine Scammorue of America, Scammonie creepeth,as we haue laid,in 
manner of Bindweede, The roote is both white and thicke : the ivice hath bur lictle taſte, a hath 
this of Mecheacan: it is called in Engliſh Mechoca and Mechocan, and may be called Indian 
| Bryonie. IH | i; | | ' nf 
| {8 '! + The temperature. > 
The roote is of a meane temperature berweene hot and colde,bur yerdrie, 
- 1988 0 . * The vertues. | EX (loſs | 
A AIrpurgethby ſiege,eſpecially flegme, and then wateriſh humors, Iris giuen from one full dram - 
weight ro two,and that with wine,or with ſome diſtilled water (according as the dilcaſc requiteth) 
or elſe in fieſhbroth. || | | 8 bp! # 
B 'ltis ginen with good ſucceſle ro.all, whoſe diſcaſes proceede of flegme andcolde humors, Itis 
good againſt headachthat hath continued long,olde coughes,h ardnelicof breathing, thecolicke, 


| Paineofthe kidneies and ioints,the diſcaſcs ofthe reines and belly. | 
Of the Manured Vine. (hap.30g. 
1 | +7 he kinds. S 


T He Vine maybe accounted ariong thoſeplants that haue needeof ſtaies and props, andcan- 
not ſtande by chemſelues zitis helde vp with poles and frames of woode,and by thatmeanes it 

ſpreadeth all abour and climeth aloft: it 1oineth ir ſelfe vnto trees, or whatſoever ſandethnext 

vnto it. 440-4 Wi bf | 

Of Vines that bring forth wine, ſome be tame and husbanded; and others that be wilde:of tame 


Vines there be many that are greater and likewiſe another ſort that be lefler. | 


— 


þ | He trunke or bodic of the Vine is great and thicke, very hard, couered with many barkes, 
bo andthoſe full of cliffes orchinkes ; from which growe foorth branches, as it were armes, 
many waies ſpreading; out of whichcomefoorth jointed ſhootes and ſprings; and from 
_ theboſomeo! rhole ivints,leaues and claſping tendrels; and likewiſe bunches or cluſters filled full 
of grapes: the leaues be broad, ſomething roand, fiue cornered, and ſomewhat indented about the 
edges ; among which come foorth many claſping tendrels, that take hold of ſuch props and ſtaies 
as do ſtand next vnto ir. The grapes do differ both in colour and greatnes, and alſo in many 
things,the which to diſtinguith ſcucrally were impoſſible,conſfidering the infinite ſorres of kindes3 
and alſothofe which are tranſplanted from one region or climate to another, do likewiſe alrer 
both from the forme and raſte they had before 3 in.conſideration whexeof,it ſhall be ſufficientroſet 
foorth the figures of a few,and ſpeake ſomewhat of the ret, Mos; . 
2 The Spaniſh Wine Vine, or the. Vine of whoſe frujre the wine called Secke is made, differeth 
woonderfully according to theplaceor countrie where it groweth : for itis well knowen that Win 
of Madera,Canaria, Grecia,and ſuchother countries where thoſe kindes of Vines do gr _ 


1H 1HIST ORE) OF PUANTS. 4" 


kindes of Adm; vant yr EAT YP OF 5 ey wi TieaR ext 
Vine, morechen toler-you knowghet 
' aVine ofawoodie ſubſtance , irbringeth foorth bunches of grapes like ynto thecommon Vine, 


hingthatthe ſimpleſt doth knowe;that is to faiezitis likewiſe 


_ 1 Vitawvinifers. ; E RL 2 Vitivinifers Hiſpazita. al. 
The manured Vine, |, _ .-- The Spaniſh manured Vine. 


th 434 (4 $44 


- 
US £ i 
_ 
. - 
\ -— 


- SO "hogs S * s 4 WP. 2 
RS SED 
2 FA 

”" « A ; 
P %' 
I 


] ; 44 
. þ L 4## .\ 
= k 
- . 
”- — ; I- bs 
"Da o 


»4+ \** 
dawvyst 
. 


= 
% 
v* *,* 
IJ 


T3 


+ Theade ſcription. 


3 Thereis found in Grecia and the parts of Morea, as Partalarea, Zante 4 viay Se Pety4s, 
(whereof ſome are Ilands,and the other of the continent ) a certaine Vine that hath atrunke or bo- 
dy of a woodie ſubſtance,with a ſcalic or rugged barke, ofa grayiſh colour ; whereupon do growe 
faire broad leaues, {lightly indented abour - edges,not vnlike vnto thoſe of the Marſh Mallow: 
from the boſome & yaw; come foorth many fra claſping tendrels , and allo rough and-plianr 
s, whereon'do grow very faire bunches of grapes ,ofa watcher blewi(h colour trom the 

which fruite commeth foorth long tender laces or ſtrings, ſuch as 1s found among Sauoriczwher- 
upon we call that plant which hath ir,laced Sauonie,not vnlike vntothat that groweth among and 
an Flaxe, which we call Dodder;or Podagre bmi, whereof is made a blacke wine,which 1s called 

recke Wine, yer of the caſte of Secke. 8 | | 

4 Theplant that bearerh thoſe ſmall Raiſons which are commonly called Corans or Currans, 
orratherRaiſins of Corinth, is not thatplant which among the vulgar people 1s taken for Cur« 
Fans, being a ſhrubbe or buſh that bringeth foorth ſmall cluſters of berries,6 frermg as muchas 
may bee from Corans, hauing no affinitic with the Vine, or any kinde thereof. The Vine 
that beareth ſmall Raiſins or þl Cerone hath a bodie or ſtocke as other Vines haue , braunches 
andtendrels likewiſe, The leaues are larger then any of the others, {nipt about the edges lice 
teeth of a ſawe; among which come ſoorth cluſters of grapes, in forine like che other, bue {mak 

| krof ablewiſh colourgvhich being ripe are gathered and _—_— hardels, carpets , mats _ 
| "68 2 uch 


725 THE SECOND' BO'OKE!OF'/THE 
- ſuch like;in the ſunne todrie: ther) are they (carigdt houſe and laid vpontheapes, ax we 4; 

apples,or corne in a garner,vntilthe marchan Jobuiethem:then do they parthem inco Bunce 
other wooden veſlels, and treade them) downe with their bare feere, whichrthiey call Stiving, and 
ſo are they brought into thele partsfor our vie, | aagint If Þ- «fo nyc 


3 Yubobds,) | 
Laced,or bearded Grapes. 


hg 


Gb; M14; 


* The deſcription. 


- 5 This kinde of Vine hath great leaues, very broad, of an ouerworme colour, wherupondo grow 
reat bunches of grapes, of a blewiſh coloyr. The pulpe or meate whereof ſticketh or cleaver 
Z hardrothe graines or little ſtones, that the one is nor eaſily divided from the other, reſembling 
ſome ſtarued oc withered berric that hath beene blaſted, whereof it tooke the name Dwracine. = 
There be ſome Vines that bringfoorth grapes of a whitiſhor reddiſh yellowe colour; others of 
adeepered,both in the outwarde skin, pulpe andiuice within, + * 
There be others whoſe grapes are of a blewe colour,or ſomthing red , yetis the juice like thoſe 
ofthe former. Theſe Grapes do yeeld forth a white Wine before Acne into the preſle, and 
areddith or pallet wine whenthey are troden with the huskes,and folcft ro macerate or ferment, 
with which if they remaine 00 long they yeeld foorth a wine of a higher colour. | 
There be others which make a blacke and obſcure red wine , whereof ſome bring bigger cir 
ſters,and conſiſtof greater grapes ; others of leſſer : ſome growe mare cluſtered and cloſer 10g? 
ther,orhers looſer ; ſome have bur oneſtone, others moe; ſome make a more auſtere of Þ 
wine, others a moreſweerte zof ſome the old, Wine is beſt, of divers the firſtyceres Wines 
exccllenr; ſome bring foorth ſruite fower ſquare,of which forts or kinds,we haue great Po 
F | IESt : k 5 


HISTORIE ' OF PLANTS. 


_ 
'F 


1;t6 Au; 4Cema. 
Srarued, ot har d grapes. % T: hevlace, 


A fir ſoile for Vines, ſaith Florentinus,is cuery 
blacke earth , which is not very clofe nor clam- 
mic, hauing ſome moiſture;norwithilanging Co- 
lamells faith , that great regarde 1s to be had, 
what kinde or fort of Vine you woulde nouriſh, 
according to the nature of the countrie and 
ſoile, | 

Awiſe husbandman will commit to a fat and 
fruirtull ſoile a leane Vine, and of his owne na- 
turenot too fruitfull: to a leane grounde a fruir- 

| full Vine: roacloſe and compatt earth, a ſprea- 
ding Vine, and thar 1s full of matter to make 
| branchesof: roa looſe and fruirfull ſoile, a Vine 
of fewebranches. The fame Colwnela ſaith, that 
the Vink delighteth notin dung, of what kinde 
{ocuer it be; burttreſh moulde mixed with fome 
ſhauings of horn is the beſt to be diſpoledabour 
the rootcs, to caulc ferulitie, 
*%* The time, 

Colwmelliſaith, that the Vines muſt be pruned 
before the yoong branches bud foorth, Palledine 
writeth in Februriedf they be pruned later, they 
loſe theirnouiſhment with weeping. 

 ,, % Thenanes. | 

The Vineis called in Greeke Zumwus irriooger, as 

Wen. | | much toſay.in Latinas Yzrs venifere,orthe Vine 
which beareth wine, and 4:macc Tere, that is, V itis1manſuefatta, ine culting, tame of manured Vine: 
and itis called 3ieeges,chat it may differ from both the Bryonies,the white and the blacke,and from 
Tanus,or our Ladies feale , which be likewiſe named 44m4:: Ir is called Yits, bicauſe inuitatior ad- 
vas perrendgs.lt is cheriſhed to the intent to bring foorth full cluſters,as Ferro ſaith, 
_ #hniemaketh Fas Zibebe, Alexandrine vitts,or Vine of Alexandria,in his 14.booke third chap- 
ter.deſeribing che ſame by thoſe very woords that TheophraFtw doth. Dioſcorides ſerterh it downe 
tobe alters Fecie Vitis jyluefris, or a ſecond kinde of wilde Vine, but we had rather reraineir 
among the tame Vines.VVe may name it in Engliſh ſmal Raiſin Vine. The fruits are hereof called in 
[hops by thename of Pafulrram de Corintho : in Engliſh Currans,or ſmall Raifns, 
; : naeftriVzze,or wilde Vine,is called in Greeke cumwersgelia,and in Latine Zabruſca: as in Firgils 

clogs, | | | 


|, Sylueltrierarts ſharſit labruſcs racemin, 

The wilde Vine with her branches few andcluſters thinne 
Adornes our countrey Bowre,a ſcemely thing I winne. IN4EES 
Tothiswilde Vine da belong thoſe,which Plcze mn his 16. booke 27.chapter, reporterh to be cal- 
dTryfere, or that bring three ſundrie fruices in one yeere, as , and mad bearing Vines, bi- 
caule11 thoſe ſore cluſters are ripe and full growen, ſome in ſwelling,and others bur flowting., = 

The fruit of the Vines called in Grecke &77pve and =91od: in Latine Racemmand Yu4cinEvupgliſh 
abmchorcluſterot Grapes. REESE! | I! £214 Þ: 1 
| The cluſter of Grapes that hath beene witheredor'dried:inthe ſunne, is named in Greek wer, 
In Latine Fa peſ/a: in ſhops Paſſa/e: in Engliſh Raiſins of the ſunne. ANISH 
(Ins or grapeitſclic/is called in Latine:d4ctnm,and allo Granwn,as Democr its ſaithiſpea- 

2 Nthe derrie.. | is; 1 | 0! I}. WON Ana 


. 


ae ſeeder fipags *nontajned within thabqnica, arecalledia Latine Fixzces ; and ſometimes "TW 
Nactes:in ſhops arobbas though they ſhould ſay OI they are drig,and yeeldno vice, 
| z 4 | 


if not- 


728 | THE SECOND BOOKE OF/THE 
notwithſtanding 7;zaces arcallo taken in Colamelis for the drofle or remnanr of the grapes afier 
they be preſſed. ' | | ++ | ; | 

*® Theſtalke,whichis in the middle of the cluſters, and vpon which the Grapes do hang, is called 
of Galen &rrves,of Yarro, Scaptss Vuarum. | | 

| Eli] x Thetemperature andwvertues. [| 

A Thetender andclaſping branches of the Vine and the leaues do coole and mightily bind, Th 
ſtay bleeding in any part of rhe bodie, They are good againſtthe laskethe bloodie flixe,the hare. 
burne,or heare of the ſtomacke, readines to vomir. It ſtaieth the luſtingor longing of women with 
child though they be but outwardly applied,and alfo raken inwardly any manner of waies.Theybe 
pans) 1 remedie for the inflammation of the mouth and Mimonkefhe throte, if they be gar. 
ealed,orthe mouth waſhed therewith. : Fl pF 

B Ofthefſamefacultie be alfo the cluſters gathered before they be ripe; and likewiſe the bunches 
of the wilde grape ( that we accept forone of the manured grapes called Currans) whichis ac. 
counted robe more cfte&uall againſt all thoſe infirmities. 

C Diofeorides ſaith, thar the liquor which fallech fromthe bodie and brz being cut, and that 


ſomrime is turned as jt were into a gum(which driueth foorth ſtones our of the kidneies andblad.. 
der,if the fame be drunke in wine 3 ) healerh ringworms, ſcabs, and leprie, bur the place isfirſt tobe 
rubbedwirh Niter; being. often annoinged or laide on, it taketh awa £1 mane hates: butyer 
he ſaith that the ſame js beſt which ifſueth fogrrh of the greene and ſmaller ſticks, eſpecially chat 
liquor that falleth away whileſt the branches are burning, which takethaway warres, if irbee laide 
- onthem. T2 | L "8 | + 
D Theſtones andother things remaining after the preſſing,are inſt the bloodie flixe, the 
laske of long continirias.aidfor thoſe that are wo 5 ei: n b 
E Theaſhes made of the ticks, and droffe that remaineth after the preſling, being laid wonthe 
piles,and hard fivellings about the fundament, doth cure the ſame : being mixed with oile of Rue 
or Herbegrace and vineger, as the ſame author affirmeth, irhelperh ro ſtrengthen members | 
out of ioint, and ſuch as are bitten with any yenemous beaſt, and eaſerh the paine of the ſpleene 
: ormilr, being appliedin manner of a plaiſter, = | 
F - Thelatter age do vieto make alic of the aſhes of Vine ſticks, in compoſitions of cauſtickeand 
burning tmedicines, which ſeruc in ſtecde of a hot iron : the one we calla potentiall cauterie, and 
_ theotheracuall. * |; | i | m 1 


£ 


! | of Grapes. 


G Of Grapes thoſe that are eaten rawe do trouble the belly, and fill rhe flomacke tull of winde: 
eſpecially ſuch as are of a ſower and auſtere raſte,ſuch kinde of grapes do very much hinder the con- 
cottionof the ſtomacke, and while they are diſperſed though the liner and veines, they engender 
cold and rawe iuice,which cannot eaſily be changed into good blood, | ' Bak 

H Sweete grapes andfuch as are thorow ripe, are lefle hurrfull: their juice is hotter, and is cafilier 

; diſperſed. They allo ſoonerpaſſe thorow the belly, eſpeciallybeing moiſt; and moſt of allif thel- 
4 quorwiththepulpe be taken without the ſtones and skin,as Gaſer aith. | , "$ E 
; I Theſubſtance of the ſtores although ir bedrier,and ofa binding qualitie, doth deſcend thorow 
{ allthe bowels, and is nothing changed : asalſo theskins, which are not alteredin the bodicatall, 
*- orvery little. 1 | ot RE . [þ 
K.. Thilegiapes which haue a ſtrong taſteof wine,are in a meane betweene ſower and ſiweete, 
L _.. Such-grapesas haye little juice-do nouriſh-more , and thoſe leſſe that have more iuice : but 
_ theſe dofooner detcendfor the bodie receiueth more nouriſhmene by the pulpe,than by theiuice; 
by theiuice the belly ismade moreſoluble. bx# £0 DOLCE RIAL 


M Grapeshauec way 2017s among the Autumne fruits,and nouriſh more than they all,but 


yernarlomych as figs : andthey have in them-litle ill iuice, eſpecially when they be thorowe 
> he | | bl tt a ht it; Bi areyf LL obs 


N .. Grapes nay: be-kept thowholo yeere, being-ordered afterthat marjerwhich Joachim Cone- 
rarizs nowe living in Noremberg reporteth - Youſhall rake (faith he) the meale of muſtard ſeede, 
and(tiowin the botrame of anycarthen porwellicaded; whereuponyou ſhall lay the faireſt bun- 


ches ofthe ripeſt grapes che which you thalleouerwith more of the| ? ale, and lay ; 


HISTORIE'OF PLANTS. 7:9 


thac another ſort of grapes ſo doing vnrill thepotbefull, Then ſhall you Sill vp the por tothe brim 
' withakinde of ſ1yeere wineicalled Muſt, The por being very cloſe couered ſhall be ferinto ſome 
celler,or cold place. . The grapes may you take foorth at your pleaſure, waſhing them with faire 
water from the powder. | 


Of Raiſons. 


Of Raiſons moſt are ſweere;z ſome hane'an auſtere or harſh raſte. Sweete Raifons are horter, A 

auſtere colder; both of them do moderately binde, bur the auſtere fomwhar more , which do more 
then the ſtomacke. The" ſweete ones do neither flacken the ſtomacke nor make the belly 

arr they be raken with their ſtones whichare of a binding qualitie: otherwiſe the ſtones ra- 

ken foorth,they do make the belly looſe and ſoluble. | | XZ 

Raiſons do yeeld nouriſhment to the bodie ;zthey have in themno il[ inice ar a!l, bur doin- B 

r ſomewhat a thicke iuice, which notwithſtanding doth nouriſh the more. | — 

There commeth of ſweere and fatRaiſons moſtplentic of nouriſhment; of which they are the C 
beſt that haue a thinne skin. L=5þ-- | 

There is in the ſweete onesa temperate and ſmoothing qualitie with a power ro clenſe mote- D 
rately, They are good for the cheſt, lungs, winde pipe, kidnetes, bladder, and for the ſtomacke : tor 
they make ſmooth theroughnes of the winde pipe, and are —_ againſt hoarfneſle, ſhorrnefle of 
breath,or difficulric in breathing : rhey ſerue tro concot the ſpettle, and to caule it toriſe more caft- 
lie in anydiſeaſe wharſoeuer of the cheſt, ſides and lungs, and doth mitigate the paine of the kid- 
neies and bladder , which hath ioined with itheate and ſharpenefle of vrine: they dull and allaic 
the malice of ſharpe and biting humours that hurt the mouth of the ſtomacke. 

Moreouer Raiſons are good for the liuer,as Galen writeth in his 7,booke of medicines according E 
tothe places affected: for they be of force to concoQ rawe humours, and to reſtraine their malig- 
nitie,and they rthemſclues do hardly putrefie: beſides they are properly and of their owne fibſtance 
familiar to the entrailes,andcutc any diſtemperature,and nouriſh much, wherein they are chiefely 
tobecommended,for Raiſins nouriſh,ſtrengrhen refiſt putrefaQion, and if there be any diftempe- 
_ by reaſon of moiſture and coldneſſe , they helpe without any hurt, as the faide Galen at- 

h, | 

The oldePhiſitians hane taught vsto take foorth the ſtones, as we may ſee in divers compoſiti- F 
ons of the auncient writers,as in that compoſition which is called in Galen _Ayteriaca Mithridatis, 
which hath the ſeedes of the Raiſins taken foorth: for ſeeingrthat Raiſins containe in them athicke 
ſubſtance,they cannot eaſily paſſe through the vaines, bur are apt ro breede obſtruQions and ſtop- 
pings of the entrailes which things happen the rather by reaſon of the ſeeds : for they ſo much the 
harder _ through the body,and doquicklier and morecafily cauſe obſtruQtions, in that they are 
more aſtringent or binding. VVherefore the ſcedes are to be taken our; for ſoſha!l the juice of the 
Raiſins more eaſily vaſſe,and the ſooner be diſtribured throughthe enrrailes. 

Py mg reporteth that they Raiſins being chewed with pepper,draweth flegme and water out G 
- Of Raiſins is made a pulris good forthe gour , rortings ahour the ioints , gangrenes and morti- H 
hed vicers, being ſtamped with the herbe Alhcale,irquickly takerh away the nailes that are looſe in , 


the lingers or tocs,being laid thereon, 
Of Muſt. 


Muſt, called in Latine A«itwn, that is to ſay, the liquor newly iſſuing outof the grapes when 1 
ney be troden or preſſed, doth fill the ſtomacke and eentrailes with winde, iris hardly digeſted, ir 
is ofathicke ivice, andif itdo not ſpeedily paſſe: through the bodie,it becommerh more hurrfull, 
Ithath onely this 6ne 909d thing init; as Ga/ewfaith,jn that itmaketh the bodie ſoluble. 

That which is ſweeteſt 'and preſſed out of ripe Grapes doth ſooneſt paſſe through 3 but*thar K 
which is made of ſower and auſtere Grapes is woorſt ofalltit is more windre, itis hardly concoc- - 
edit ingendrech rawe humours ; and although ir doth deſcend with a looſenefle of the belly, nor- 
| withſtancing it oftentimes withall bringettythe colicke , andpaines of the ſtone; bur if rhe bellie 
| benotmooued, all things are the woorle , and more troubleſome, and it oftentimes bringeth an 
_ Atremelaske, and the bloodie flixe. "_ | x 

art 


930 THE SECOND|BOOKE OFTHE 

A Thatfiſt part of the wine that commeth foorth of it ſclfe before the grapes be hard prefled. is 
anſwerable to rhe grape itſelfe,and doth quickly deſcend: but that which iflueth forth afterwards, 
hauing ſom part of the nature of rac ſtones, ſtalke,and ins, is much woorſe. | 


B Of Cutethatis made of Muſt, which the Latines call Sape, and Defratum is that liquor which 
wecall in Englith Cure,which is made ofthe fweereſt Mult, by boiling it to a certaine thickneſſes 
or boiling it to a third part, a5 Colwmells writeth, = [5 
C Plajeaffirmeth, that Sapz and Deſrutum do differ in the manner of Pro poling: and that Sapgis 
wa_s 6 the new wine 15 boiled away,tillgnely a third partremaineth: and Defrutwm till halfe 
c boiled. | | 8 4 Sp 
D Sirawn,faith heinhis 14.booke 17,chap.which others calli4»««,and we Seps;theworke of wit & 
not of nature, is made of new wine boiled to a 3.part:which being boiled to halfe,we cal Defoumn. | 
E Palladizsioineth to thelc Carenum, which as he faith, is made when a third part is builed away 
and two remaine. 2 | 1! bi. Yikes 
F Leontiminhis Geoponickes, ſheweth that Hepſems muſt be made of cight parts of newwine 
and a 190.of wine itſelfe boiled to athud, | | | Wl We =) 
.. G  Galenteſtifieththatifnus is newe wine very much boiled, The later Phiſtions do call Hezſemaor 
Saps. boiled wine. he# Wl | 1 | 
\, H Cuteorboiled wine is hot,yer nor ſo hot as wine, bur itis thicker; yetnotſo eafily diſtributed,or 
| caricd through the body,andirflowlier deſcendeth by vrine , bur by the belly oftentimes ſooner, 
for it moderately maketh the ſame ſoluble, | ; E 


I Irnouriſheth more andfilleth the body quickly, yet doth itby reaſon of his thicknes ſticke inthe 
ſtomacke for a time , & is nor ſo fit for the luer,or for the ſplene.Cure alſo doth digeſt raw humors 
thar ſticke in the cheſt and lungs, andraiſeth them vp ſpeedily. Iris therefore good for thecouph | 
and ſhortnes of breath. | (>... |... | 

'K The Vintners of the low countries(Iwill not ſay of London)do make of Cute and wine mixedin 

acertaine proportion, a compounde & countertaite wine, which they ſell tor Candie wine, com- 
monly called Malmſey. 1 | | | | 
L  Plinefaithin iis 14.booke g.chapter,that Cute was firſt deuiſed for a baſtard honie., 


Of Wine. | 
'M Toſpeakeof Wine, the iuice of grapes, which being newly preſſed 


k 


/ 


cnt foorth, is called as webaue | 
ſaid 2uſturs,or new winc.After the dregs anddrofle are ſetled. and now it appeererh pure&cleer, 
is called in Greeke #irs,in Latine Yam : in Engliſh Wine, andthat not ynproperly. For certaine 
other iuices,as of apples, pomegranates,quinces,pearcs,medlcrs,or feruices, of ſuch as areother- 
wiſe made (for example ſake) of barlic and graine, benor arall ſimply calledwines, but with the 
name of the thing added, whereof they Socoafiſt Hereupon is the wine,which is preſſed foorth of 
the pomegranate berries narhed Xhoites, or wine of pomegranates: our of quinces Cydonites, Of 
wine of quinces: outof peares pres, or perrie : and that which is compounded. of batlie 1s 
called Zythww,or barlic wine tin Engliſh Ale or Beere., 9 yr = Wy fs 

N And other ccrraine wines Thins, ani ſurnames of the planes that haue beene ſteeped, 
or infuſed in them: and yer all wines ofthe vine,as Wormwood wine, Mittle wine ,Hyſſopowine, 


and theſe are called artificiall wines. : Fj | 
O Thartisproperly and ſimply called wine which is preſſed out of the grapes of the Vine, and is | 
without any maner of mixture,” .. | Py TREE (EVE | 


P Thekinds of winesare not of one nature, nor. of one. facultic or power; but of many dieting 
one from another; for rhere is 6ne difference therofin raſte,another in colour; the third jsxeterre 
to the conſiſtence or ſubſtance of the wine rhe fourth conſiſteth in the: vertuc, & ſtrength chercof, 

- Galexaddeth that which is found inthe fmel, which belongerhito the vertve & ſtrength of the wine: 
Q . Tharmay alſobe ioined vnto them which reſpccterh the age : for by age wines become hotter 

- andſharper,& do withal change oftentimes thecolour,the ſubſtance & the ſmel:for ſome wines 37e 
ſweere of taſte,others auſtere or ſomthing harſh,diuers of arough taſte,or altogither hatſÞ,8 molt 
of them ſufficient ſharpe: there be likewiſe wines of a middle fort, incliningto/one orother qualitie. 

R Whine is of coloureither white or reddiſh, or of a blackiſh deepe red, which is called blacke:or 
of fome middle colour betweene theſe, = Fo} | Some 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 8 
- Some wineisof ſubſtance alrogitherthinne: other thicke, fat; and many alſo ofa midyle con- A 
57 | oh | 
out wincis of great ſtrength and anotheris weake, which is called a warteriſh wine za fall wine B * 
«called in Latine YVimoſwn.There be allo among theſe,very many that be of a middle ſtrength, | f 
Thereis inall wines be: theyneuer fo weake, a certaine winic ſubſtance thin and hor. There be C 
likewiſe waterie partes, and alfo diuers carthie, For wine is nor ſimple,bur, as Ga/es reſtificth in his 
fourth booke ofthe faculries of medicines,confiſteth of partes thathaue duers faculties. | 
Of the ſundrie mixture and proportion of theſe fi ces one with another, there riſe diners D 
andſundric faculties of rhe wine. b.] | ; $298 8 | 
- Thatis the belt and fulleſt wine, in which the hor and winie partes do moſt of allabound: and E | 
the weakelt is that,vherein.the waterie haue thepreheminence; - ($1 
- The earthie ſubſtance abounding in the mixture, 'cauſeththe wine tobe auſtere, or ſomething Þ | 


i : 


harſh, as acrude or rawe ſubſtance doth make ir altogither harſh. The carthie ſubſtance being 
ſevered fallerh downe, andin continuance of time ſinketh to the bortome, and becommeth the 
dregs or lees of the wine; yet it is not alwaies wholy ſcucred, burhath both the taſte and other qua- 
lities of this ſubſtance remainingin the wine. | on | | ; 

All wines haue their heate, partly from the proper nature and inwarde or originall heate'of the G 
vine, and partly from the ſunne. For there is adouble heate which ripeneth notonely the grapes L 
but alſo all other fruits,as Gazes teſtifieth, The one is proper and naturall to euery thing : the other - -_ 
is borrowed of the ſunne,which if it be perceived in any thing, iris vadoubredly beſt and eſpecially « 

intheripening of grapes; | 440 + $352 

Far x # hearte which proceedeth from rhe. ſunne, concocerh the grapes and the juice of the H 
grapes, anddoth eſpectallyripenthem, ſtirring vpand increaſing the inward and naturall heate 
ofthewine, which otherwiſe is ſo ouerwhelmed with abundance ot rawe and warteriſh partes, as it 
ſeemeth tobe dulled, and almoſt without life. | | | 

For vnleſſewine had in it a proper and originall heate , the grapes could not be ſo concotted by I 
theforce of the ſun, as that the wine ſhould become hor, no leſſe thenmany orher things naturally 
cold,which although they be ripened and made perfect by the heate of the ſuinne,donor for all thar 
loſetheir originall nature , as the fruits,iuices,or ſeedes of Mandrake, Nightſhade, Hemlocke,Pop- 
pie,andof other ſuch like,which though they be made ripe, and brought to full perfeQion,yer (till 
retainetheir owne cold qualitie, | | 

Wherefore ſecing that wine through the heate of the ſunne, is for the moſt part brought to his K 
proper heate,and that the heate and force is nor all alike in al regions and places of the earth: thee. 
_ by reaſon of the diuerſitic of regions and places, the winesare made not a little to differ in 
aculrie, | | | 

The ſtrongerand fuller wine groweth in hot countries andplaces that lieto the ſun : the rawer L 
and weaker,in cold regions and prouinces that lie open tothenorth, BY 

The hotter the ſommer is,the ſtronger is the wine: the lefle hot or the moiſter itis, the eſſe ripe M 
is thewine., Notwithſtanding not onelythe manner of the weather and of the ſunne, makerh = 
qualities of the wine to differ ur the nariue propertie of the ſoile alſo. For both the taſte and other 
qualities of the wine,are according tothe manner of the ſoile. And it is very well knowen, that not 
onelythe colour of the wine, bur the raſte alſo dependeth on the diverſiie of the grapes. 

Wine,as Galen writeth,is hot inthe ſecond degree, and that whichis very old in the thirde : but N 
new Wine is hotin the firſt degree ; which things are eſpecially to be vnderſtood concerning the 
meane berweene the ſtrongeſt and the weakeſt: tor the fulleſt and mightieſt being but Horns, 
(thatis as I rake itof one yeeres old) are for themoſt part hotin the ſecond degree: the weakeſt 
andthe moſt wateriſh Wines although they be ald,do {eldome exceed the ſecond degree. 
 Thedrines is anfwerable tothe heat in proportion (as Geer faith in his booke of Simples: ) but O 

| in his bookes of the gouernment of health he /ſheweth, that wine dothnor onely hearte , bur alſo 
moiſten our bogies, and that the ſame doth moiſten and nouriſh ſuch bodies as are extreme drie : 
andboth theſe opinions be true, | | 335 | 
| For the faculties of wine are of one ſort as itis a medicine, and of anotheras it is a nouriſhment, Þ 
which Galenin hisbooke of the faculties of nouriſhments doth plainly ſhew, athirming thatthole 
qualities of the wine, which Hrppocrates writeth of in his booke of the manner of dier, be not as a - 
nouriſhment, bur rather as of a medicine. For wine as it is a medicine doth drie, eſpecially being 


Otit- 


732 THE SECOND 'BOOKE OF THE 
outwardly applicd ; in which caſe, for thar irdothnornouriſh the bodie at all, the drineſſe d6cy; 
more plainly appeere,and is more manifeſtly perceiued. 4 | 
A Wine is a ſpeciall good medicine for an vicer, by reafon of his heate and moderate drying, Fe 


Galen teacheth in his fourth booke of the merhade of healing, 


: & 


B Hippocrates writeth,that vicers what manner of ones ſocuer they are, muſt not bemoi 

lee: be with wine:for that which is dry,as Gale; dicmenath necter to that wr 
andthe thing that is moiſt to that which is not whole. W [+ 0 
C leis manifeſt that wine is inpower or facultydry,and notin a:for wine actually is moiſt ang jj. 

* quide,and alſo colde: for thefame cauſe ir likewiſe quencheth thirſt, which is an appetire ordefire 
ofcolde and moiſt, and by this aftuall moyſture(that we way ſo termeiit) it is if it be inwardly ta- 
ken not a medicine, but a nouriſhmentzfor itnouriſheth, and thorowehis moiſture maketh plenty 
of bloud, and by increaſing the nouriſhment, it moiſtacth the body, vnleſſe peradventure the 
old and very ſtrong: for it is made ſharpe and biting by long lying, and ſuch kinde of wine dos 
not onely heate bur alſo conſume and dry the body; for as much as itis not nowe aouriſhmenr; 
buta medicine. E337 5 Tos: T8 "hs 

D That wine which is neither ſharpe by long lying nor made medicinable, dothnouriſh and moi. 
ſten,ſcruing as it were to make plenty of nourithment and bloud, by reaſon thar through his aQu- 
all moiſture it more moiſtenerh by feeding, nouriſhing and comforting , then it is able to dryby 
his power, ; \:-: i = | 

Wine doth refreſh the inward and naturall heate, comforteth the ſtomacke, cauſeth it ro haue 
an apperite ro meate, mooueth concofion, and,conueyerh the nouriſhmentthrough all panes of 
the body,increaſerh ſtrengrth,inlargeth the body, maketh flegme thinne, bringeth foorth by vrine 
cholericke and watery humours,procureth fweating,ingendreth pure bloud, maketh the body well 
coloured,and turneth an ill colour into a better, - [| 

F lrtis good for ſuch as are in a conſumption byreaſon of ſome diſeaſe, and that haue need tohave 
their bodies nouriſhed and refreſhed(ſo they benot ſick of an agewe) (as Ga/en ſaithin his ſeyenth 
booke of the methode of curing; ) it reſtoreth ſtxength moſt of all other things ,and thar ſpec« 
dily : it maketh a man merry and joiefull : it putteth away feare, care, troubles of minde, andfor- 
rowe : it mooueth pleaſureand luſt of the body z and bringeth fleepe gently. 


G Andtheſe things proceede of the moderate yſe of wine; for immoderate drinking of winedoth 
al 


£ 


togither bring the contrary. They thar are drunke are diſtraughted in minde,become fooliſh and: 
opprefied with a drowſie ſleepines,&be afterward taken with the apoplexic,the gour,or alrogither 
with other moſt grecuous dileaſes:the braine,liver,lungs,or ſome other of the entrailes, being cor- 
rupted with roo often andouermuch drinking of wine. is a 


H Moreouer, wineis aremedic againſt the raking of Hemlocke, or greene Coriander, theiuiceof 
blacke Poppic, Wolfes bane, and Leopards bane, Todeſtooles, and othercolde poiſons, andalſo 
againſt the biting of ſerpents and ſtings of venemous beaſts, that hurt andkill by cooling, |  * 

I Winealſois aremedic againſt the ouerfulneſſe and ſtretching our of the ſides,windy fwellings, 
the greeneickneſſe, rhe dropſie, and generally all cold infirmities of the ſtomacke, liver, milt,and 
alſo of the matrix, [44+ --24-14 - 8 by | 

K Butwine which is of colour and ſubſtance like water,through ſhining, bright,pure, of a thinne 
ſubſtance, which is called white, is of all wines theweakeſt; and if the ſame ſhould be rempered 
with water, it would beare very little : and hereupon Hippocrates calleth it ixry490097, thatis to lays 
bearing little water todelay it withall, = ; = ET 

L Thistroubleth the head, and hurterh the finewes lefſe than others do , and is not vnpleaſantto 
theſtomacke: iris eaſily and quickly diſperſed through all partes of the bodice: itis giuen with far 
leſle dangerthan any other wine, to thoſe that haue the ague (except ſome inflammation orhot 
{welling be ſuſpeted) and oftentimes with ie ſuccefſe ro ſuch as haue intermirring feuers: for, 
as Galen in his $ booke of method ſaith , ithelperh concoRion , digeſterh humours chat be halfe 
raiwe,procureth vrine and fiveate : andiggood for thoſe that cannot fleepe, and that be full of care 

. andfſorrow,and forſuch as arc ouerwearied. | W: * 

'M Blackewine, thatistoſay, wine of a deepe redcolour, is thicke, andharely diſperſed, and doth 

'  notealilypaſſethroughthe bladder:ir quickly raketh hold of the braine,and makerh aman drunke, 


. 


' itisharderofdi z it remaincth longer in the body zir eaſily ſtopperhthe liver and ſpleenezf 
© themolſtpart Eden, notwithſtanding it nopriſheth more, and is moſt fitto engender blood: i 


HISTORIEOF PLANTS. —_ 


P02 


Ellech the body with fleſhyſooner than others do. | 

That which is of a light crimſon red colour, is for the moſt part more deligh tfull to the rate, fic- . 
[er for the {tomacke,it is ſooner and cafier dilperted, ir rroubleth the head 1: le, itremaineth nar ſo 
long 'vnder he ſhorcribs, andeaſter deſcendeth to thebladder then blacke wine doth : !Tt doth alfo 
make the belly ccſtiue,ii ſo be thatit be gpe.on fuch crude and rough wines,do oftentimes molc{F 
weake ſtomacks,andare troubleſome tothe belly, * | 

Reddiſh yellow wine ſcemeth to be in a meane betweene athin and thicke fubſtance: otherwiſe B 
is ofall wines the hotreſt; and ſuffereth moſt winerobe mixed with 1t,as Hijzpocrates writeth, 

The olde wine of this kinde, being of a thin ſubſtance and good ſmell, is a fi ngular medicine for C 
allchoſe that aremuch ſubject to ſwouning: although che cauſe thereof proceede of choler that 
hucteth the mouth of the ſtomacke,as Ga/exreſtifierh in his 12.booke ofmethod. | | 

Sweere wine the lefle hor iris, the lefle doth. it trouble the head, and offende the minde; and it D 
berrer paſſerh through the belly , making it oftentimes ſoluble: bur ic doth noo eaſily paſle, or 
deſcend by vrine.. | | | F | 
, {5g the thicker it is of ſubſtance ,the harder and flowlier it Paſſeth through : it is good ſor B 
the lungs, and for thoſe that haue the cough, It ripeneth rawe humours that ſticke 1n the cheſt,and 
cauſeththem to be caſilier ſper vþ ;but itis not ſo good for the liuer,whereunto ir bringeth noſmall 
hurt, when cutherit is inflamed , or hath in ita hard wennie ſubſtance, or when iris ſtopped. Ir is 
alfo an enimie tothe ſ{pleene, it {tickerh inderthe ſhortribs, and is hurrfullro rhoſe thatare full of 
| choler. Forthiskindeof wineeſpecially the thicker it is,is in them very {pecdily rurned into choler: 
andin others when it is well concocted;jitincreaſeth plenty ofnouriſhmenr. | 

Auſtere wine,or that which is ſomewhat rough in taſte, nouriſheth not much; and if ſo be that F 
it berhinand white , it is apt to prouoke vrine, it lefſe troublerh the head, itis not quickly digeſted, 
for which cauſe it is the more to be ſhunned,2s Galen ſaith in his 1 2.booke of method. 

__ » Thatwinewhichis altogither harſh or rough intaſte, theleſle ripe itis,theneerec jt commeth G 

- tothequalities of Veriuicemade of ſowre grapes being euidently binding, Irſtrengrhneth aweake 

ti itis good againſt che vnkindely luſting or waging of women with child? it ſtaicth the 
lacke,bur it Rickerh in the bowels: it breedeth ſtoppings 1n the liver and milt 3 irflowly defcenderh 


by vrine,and ſomthing troubleth the head. | 


Olde wine which is alſomade ſharpe by reaſon of age , is not onely troubleſome to the braine, xx 
butalſohurtech che ſinewes: itis an enimnnie to the intrailes,and makerh the body leane, PM 

Newe wine,and wine of the firſt yeere,doth eaſily make the body to ſwel,and ingendreth winde, 7 
itecauſeth troubleſome dreames , eſpecially that which is not througlly refined, orthicke, or very 
ſyeere : for ſuch do ſooner ſticke in the entrailes then others do.Other wines that ate in a meanc,in 
&lourfubſtance,taſte orage , as they do declinc in vertues and goodnefle from the extreames ; fo 
alſotheybe free from their faults and diſcommodities. They come neere in. faculties to thoſe 
wines whereuntothey benexr,cither in colour,taſte or ſubſtance,orelfe in ſmell or in age. 

Wineis farceſt for thoſe thatbe of nature cold anddry; and allo for old men, as G+/cx (hewerth 
in his 5booke of the gouernment ofhealth: for irheaterh all the members oftheir bodies,and pur- 
geth away the wateric part of the bloud if there beany. | 

- The beſt wines are thoſe that be of afar ſubſtance:for thoſe both increaſe bloud and nouriſh the 7, 
body,both whichdommodities it bringeth to old men, eſpecially at ſuch time as they haue no was- 
tery humour in their vaines, and hauc necde of muchnouriſhment. Ic hapneth tharoftentimes 
there doth abound in their bodics a wateriſh excrement, and then-{tande they in moſt neede of all 
of ſuch wines as do prouoke vrine, -.. | | 

As wines beſt for old men,ſo is it woorſt for children: by reaſon that being drunkeit both moi- M 
ſeneth and drieth ouermuch,and alſo fillerh the head with yapours, in thoſe whoare of amoilt & 
hot complexion,orwhoſe bodies arc ina meane berweene the extremes, whom Ga/em in his b&ok 
of thegavernment of health doth perſwade , that they ſhoulde not ſo much as taſte of wine for a 
very longtime: farneitheris it good for them to have theirheads filled, nor robe made moiſt and 
hot.more then is ſufficient, bicauſe they are already of fuch a heat and moiſture, as if you ſhould 

licele increaſe cither ualities,they would foorthwith fall into the extreme. | 
 Andſceing thar cuerycxceſlc.is tobe ſhunned,it is expedicnt moſt of all toſhun this, by which N 
 hotonelythebody,bur alſo the minde receiveth hurt. - | 
Wherefore we muſtthinke , that wine is neither fir for men that be already full of age, valefic O 
| | IT » 


Y 
t 


&s 


%. 


\ 734 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF. THE 


F 
_ itbe moderately taken, bicauſe it carieththem headlong into fury and luſt,and troubleth ana 4.4 
Icth the reaſonable parr of the minde. "4 __—_ _ ms 


+ ";jOf thedelaying,or tempering of Wine, | 


A. It was an auncient| cuſtome; andof long continuance in olde time, for wines to bee mi 
with water , asit is plaine and euident not onely by Hiypocrates , buralſoby other KG an 
writings. VVine firſt beganne to be mixed with water for health and wholeſomneſſe ſake : for 
as H:ppocygtes writeth/in his booke of auncient Phiſicke,- being ſimplic and of it ſelfe guch 

- drunke,itmaketh a man in ſome ſort weake and feeble,which thing Ow-4leemeth allo to allowe of, 
writing thus : Th | h | 

| 1 Vt Vents eneruat vVires, ſie copia wins, 

Et rent it greſſie,debilitatque pedes. 


J 
* 


Immoderate wie of Bacchwiuice and Penm Arte 
Weaknerh mans ſtrength,and makes his foote aſide ro ſtarre, 


B Moreouer,wine is the ſweeter, having water powred into it, as CHhenaen faith. Homer likewiſe 
commendeth that wine/whichis well and fitly alaied. Þ helchor ws writeth(as MHhenew re 
that _Arphiction king of Athens was the firſtthat alaicd wine,as hauing learned the ſame of Dis- 
nſſes : wherefore he {aith,that thoſe, who in that maner dranke ir, remained in health, that before 
had their bodics feebled and ouerweakened with pure and vnmixed wine... 

The manner of mingling or tempering of wine was diuers : for ſometimes to one part of 
wine, there were addedtwo, and ſometimes three or fowerof water; or to two parts of wine, 
three of water : ofa lefle delaie was that,which conſiſted of cquall parts of wine and water, 

D The olde Comedie' writers did thinke that this lefler mixture was ſufficient ro make men mad, 
among whom was CMne/theus,whoſe words beextant in uMNhenew. | | 

E H1yppocrates inthe 7.Booke of his Aphoriſmes ſaith, thatthis manner of tempering of wineand 
water by equal parts,bringerh as itwerea lightpleaſant drunkennefle, and that itis a kindeof re- 
mediz again{t diſquiernes,yawnings,and (hiuerings; and this mingling belongeth to the ſtrongeſt 
wInes, { þ «| , | 

F Suchkindeofwines they might be which in times paſt the Scyrhians were reported of the olde 
writers to drinke, who for this cauſe do call vamixed winethe Scythiangs drinke. And they that 
drinke ſimple wine ſay,that they will Scythizare , or do as the Scythians do: as we may read in the 


n 


 _ 10.Boockeof CMHhenaru. [vi ; bald 
G The Scythians as H/ppocrates and diuers other of the olde writers affirme, be people of Ger- 
manic beyonde the floud Danubius , which is alſo called Iſter : Rhene' is a riuer of Scythia : and 
 Cyruwshauing paſſed oner Iſter is reported to haue come intothe borders of the Sceyrhians. 
Andin this our age all the people of Germanie do drinke vnmixed wine , which growethin 
their owne countrey, andlikewiſe other people of the north parts , whomake no ſcrupleat all to | 
drinke of the ſtrongeſt wines without any mixture; | b (hve 


Otrhe liquor which is deſtilled our of the Wine, commonly f 
called Water of life. [ | 


I There is drawne out of Wine aliquor, which the Latines commonly call Aqgaz wite, 00 Wa: 
ter of life , and allo Agzz 4rdens, or burning water, which as diſtilled waters are drawne our of 
herbes and other things,is after the ſame manner diſtilled out of ſtrong wine, that is to ſay, by 
raine inſtruments ok for this purpoſe, whichare commonly called Lembickes. | 

'K This kinde of liquor is in colour and ſubſtaunce like vnto waters diſtilled out of herbes, and 
alf»reſembleth cleere ſimple water in colour, bur in faculcic itfarre differeth. - 

L lr beareth the ſurname of life, bicauſe-that it ſeruerh to preſerue-and prolong the lifeof 

man, | | "i | | | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 735 
- kris called Ardens, buming, for that iris eafily rurned into aburning flame: for ſeeing itisnot 
any other'thing then the thinneſt and ſtrongeſt part of the wine, it being purtothe flame of fire , 
* aticklic burned. | F-411 
bs liquor is very hot,and of moſtſubcill and thinne partsz hor and drye in the later ende of A 
the rhirde degree, elpecially the pureſt ſpirits thereot; for the purer itis,the hotter iris, the dryer, 
and of thinner parts: which is made —_—_—_— by often deſtilling. | 
This water diſtilled outof wine, is-good for all thoſe that are made cold cither by a long diſcaſe, B 
or through age , as for olde and impotent men : for itcheriſheth and increaſerh naturall heate 
whol ſtrength,repaireth and augmenterh the ſame : it prolongeth life , quickneth all the ſen- 
ſes,anddoth not onely preſerue the memorie,bur alſo recouereth itwhen itis loſt: it ſharpnerh the 


hr. | 
iti fir for thoſe thatare raken with the Caralepſie,(whichis a diſeaſe in the braine, proceeding C 
of drines and colde) and are ſubie& rodead ſleepes, if there be no agewe joined; it ſerueth for the 
weakenes, trembling,and beating of the hart z it ſtrengtheneth and heateth a feeble ſtomacke; ir 
conſumeth winde both in the ſtomacke, ſides, and bowels it maketh goodconcoRion of meate , 
and is a ſingular remedie againſt colde poiſons. * | | 
| Ithathſuch force and power in ſtrengrhning ofthe hart, and ſtirring vp the inſtruments of the D 
ſenſes, thatitis moſt effeuall, nor onely inwardly taken tothe quantitieof a little ſpoonefull, but 
alſo outwardly applied : that is to ſay,ſet to the noſthrils, or laide ypon the temples of the head, & 
tothe wreſts of the armes; and alſoto foment or bathe ſundry hurts and griefes, 
| Being held inthe mourh it helperh the toothach: itis alſo good againſt colde cramps and con- E 
uulſians,being chafed and rubbed therewith. y | 
_ . Somearebold ro giueitin quartaines before the fit , eſpecially afrerthe height orprime of the F 
diſeaſe. | 
This water is to be giuen in wine with great iudgement and diſcretion, for ſeeing it is extreme G 
hot,and of moſt ſubtill parts, and nothing elſe bur the very ſpirite ofthe wine, it moſt ſpeedily pear- 
ceth thorough, and dothcaſfily aſſault and hurt the braine. | | 
Therefore it may be giuen to ſuch as haue the apoplexie, and falling ſickneſſe, the meprim , the H 
headach of long continuance, rhe Vertigo or giddinefle proceeding through a colde cauſe,yet can 
itnot be alwaies ſafely giuen : for vnleſſe the effeQuall matter of the diſeaſe be ſmall, and the ficke 


man of temperature very colde, ircannot be miniſtred without _— : forby reaſon that ir ſpre- 


deth and diſperſeth the humours, it filleth or ſtuffeth the heade, and maketh the ſicke man worle : 
| burandif the humours be hot ,as bloud is it doth nor a little increaſe inflammations alſo. 

This warer is hurtfull co all that be of nature and complexion hot , and moſt of allto cholericke I 
= it - allo offenſiue to the liuer and likewiſe vnprofitable for rhe kidneies,being often and ple 

y taken, | | 

If ſhould take in hande to write of euery mixture, of cach infuſion, of.the ſundry colours. and 
every other circumſtance that the vulgar people do giue vnto this water, and their diuers vic, I 
ſhould ſpende much time but ro ſmall purpoſe. 


Of Argall,tartar,or wine Lees, 


TheLees of wine which is become hardlike acruſt , and ſtickerh to the ſides of the veſſels, and 
wie Casks, being dry, hard, ſound and well compa&t,and which may be beaten intopowder, is cal- 
kedin ſhops Tarrarwm : in Engliſh Argall,and Tartar. | | : 

Theſe Lees is vſed for many things the ſiluer Smiths poliſh their ſiluer heerewith : the Dicrs K 
vcit:andit is profitable in medicine. | | 2% 4-5 

It doth greatly dry and waſte away,as P au/us CAEginetaſaith : it hath withall a binding facultic, L 
proceeding from the kinde of wine,of which it commeth. _ | 
The fame ſeruerh for moiſt diſcaſes ofthe body z itis good for them thathaue the greene ſick- M 
nc$andthe dropſie,eſpecially thatkinde which heth in the fleſh,calledin Larine Leucophlegmaticas 
gtaken every day faſting halfe apenny waight or a full penny waighe(which is a dram andnine 
Wo after the Romaines computation) dothnor dry vp thewateriſhexcrements , and voi- | 
eth chem by vrine,butir prevatleth much to clenſe the belly by ſiege. wow; 

I wduld worke more effectually,ifit were mixed either with 2 ſpices,ot with other —_— N 

| caks 


736 THE SECOND: BOOKE OF THE 
breake winde,orelle with diuretickes,which ace medicines that prouoke vrinez likewiſe to be mixeg 
with gentle purgers, as the {icke mans caſe ſhall require, G [ n | 

A The ſameofit ſelfe,ot tempered with oile of Myrtles,is a remedie againſt ſoft ſwellings as Diof 
coridesetcacheth : ir ſtaieth the laske,and vomiting, _ applied outwardly vpon the region of the 
ſtomacke,in a pultis z andifitbelaide tothe bottome of the belly and ſecrer parts, it ſtopperh the 
whites,waſteth away hot ſiwellings of the kcrnels in the flankes and other places, which be not yer 

_ exulcerated:it aſlwageth great breſts,anddrieth vp the milke,if it be annointed on with vineger 

B This Lees is oftentimes burnt: ifitbecome/all white it is afigne of tight and perfe@ bumino. 
for tillthen it muſt be burned : being ſo burnt, the Graecians terme it ovizws, as AErzmetalaith: the 
Apothecaries callit Txrtarum vitwm, and Tartaramcalcinatum : that is to ſay , burnt or calcined 
Tarrzr, TBS! | | 

C Ithathave atcauſticke or burni aliie: it clenſerh and throughly heatcth, bin 
cateth,and banc = dricth as p< anrF'5\o write: being mixed with Roſin I —— av, 
andill nailes to fall away : Paws laith, that ic is mixed with cauſticks or burning medicines to in. 
creaſe their burning quality : ie muſt be vied whileſt it is newe made, bicauſe ic quickly yaniſheth : 

- forthe Leesof wine burned,doth ſoon relent,or waxe moiſt, & is ſpeedily refolued into liquor:ther. 
- forchethat would vic it drie, muſt haue it purin a glaſle,or glaſle veſſeſl well ſtopped, andſet nz 

- hotanddryplace. Itmelcerh andis turnedinto liquorif irbe hanged in a linnen bagge in ſome 
place inaceller vnderthe ground, 4 : 

D. The Apothecaries call this liquor that dropperh away from it, oile of Tartar, Ir retainerh acau- 
ſticke andburning quality,and allo a very dry tacultic :it very ſoonetakerh away leprie, ſcabs, ter- 
ters,andother Ih and deformirie of the skin and face: with an equall quantity of Roſe water ad- 
ded,and as much Cerule as is ſutficient for a liniment, wherewith the, blemiſhed or ſported pars 
mulſtbe annointed ouer night, | ; | 


 Thebriefeſumme oftharhath beenſaid of Wine. 


E Theiuiceof rhe heyy leaues,branches,and tendrels of the Vine drunken,is good for thoſethat = 
vomite or {pit bloud, for the bloudic flixe,and for women with childe that vomite ouermuch. The | 
kernell within the grapes boiledin water and drunke,harh the ſame effec. ER =] 

F Wine moderately drunke'profiteth much, and maketh good digeſtion , but it hurterh and di- 
ſtempererh them that drinke it ſeldome. | h | 

G White wineis good to be drunke before meate;preſerueth the body, and pearcerh quickly into 
che bladder:bur vpon a full ſtomack it rather maketh oppilarions or ſtoppings,bicaule irdoth ſwift- - 
ly driue downe meate,beſore nature hath of hirſelfe digeſted ir. L | 

H Claretwinedoth greatly nouriſh and warme the body, and is wholſome with png 5,9 


: 


vnto flegmatike people: bur very vnwholſome for yoong children,as Ge/es faith,bicaulcithea 


aboue nature,and hurteth the head. . j H | | 
I Redwineſtoppeth the belly,corrupteth the bloud,breedeth the ſtone,is hurtfull to oldepeople, 
and goodor profitable to fewe,ſauc to ſich as are troubled with the laske,bloudy flixe,or any other 
looſeneſle of the body. HINDER ; i | 
K Seckeor Spanith wine hath been vſcd of a long time to be drunke after meate , to caule the 
meartethe berrer ro digeſt : but common experience hath founde it tobe more beneficiall tothe 
ſtomacke,to be drunke beforemeate. | «1 | 


'L Likewiſe Malmeſie, Muſcadel!, Baſtard,andſuch like fweete wines haue been vſcd before meat, 
_ tocomtort the coldg and weake ſtomacke, eſpecially being taken faſting; bur experience teach 

eth;thar Secke drunke in ſteede thereof, is much better, and warmeth mote effeQually. 
Almighty God for the comfort of mankindordeined winebutdecreed therwith,that it ſhoulde 
be moderately taken,for fo it is holſome and comfortablezbut when meaſure is turned into excelle, 
. it becommerh vnwholſome and a poiſon moſt venemous, relaxing the ſinewes, bringing with it 
the baſe and falling ſicknes: to the aged ic bringeth hot feuers, frenſie, and lecherie, conſumeth 

| 


the liver and other ofthe inward parts:beſides, how little credence is ro be giuen to drunkards it is 
euidenr , for though they be mighty men, yer.it maketh them monſters, and woorſe then brute 
beaſts,Finally in a word to conclude: this excefliwe drinking of wine diſhonoreth noblemen, beg- 


gereth the poore,and more hauc beenc deſtcoigd by ſurteiting therewith,then with crucll bal. 


HISTORIE (OF PLANTS, 
Of Hops. Chap.yio. © 
T' ebe two forts of Hops: one the mantred, or the garden Hop; the other wildezpr of thi 
hedge. ay = 99 yl | 1 450g 31,4 cod 8; PLP * | h | | 


ſ 


4 TY! T4 F: 


+ The defer iption. 


l He Hop dorh lite and flouriſh by imbracing and taking holde of poles , pearches , and 
other things,vpon Which it climerh. It mo foorth "iy long ſtalkes,rough and hai- 


ric; alſo tugged leaues, broad, like rhoſe of the Vine,or rather of Bryonie, bur yer blac- 

ker, and with ſewer dented diviſions. The flowers hang downe bycluſters from the tops of the 

branches puffed yp , ſet as it were with ſcales likelitde canes, orſcaledPine apples, of a whitiſh 

hom tending ro yellowneſſe , ſtrong of ſmell. The rootes are flenderand diverfly foldedone 
another, | | | | If 


' 


2 Thewilde Hop differeth not from the manured Hop in forme or faſhion, bur is altogitheref- 
fer, as well in the Toſters of flowers, as alſo in the franke ſhootes, and doth not bring toocth fuch 
of flowers,wherein eſpecially conſiſterh the difference. 
nl |  *%Theplace. | | 
The Hop ioyeth'in a fat and fruitful Sutry' itproſpereth the better by II IT 4 alſo it gro- 
among briers and NE nry 7 of fields, ſpeaking of the wilde kinde, | 
y *% The tome. | | 
The lowers of Hops are gatheredin Augult and FW; andrceſerued to bevſed in beere: 
| 7 « } aa TI | 1 


738 THE SECOND 'BOOKE. OFTHE 


in the ſpring time come foorth new ſhootes, or buds, In the winter onely the rootes remaine 


|  % Thenames. 
 Iriscalledin ſhops,and in all gther places Zaps/as : of ſome Lapw ſalitFerime, or Lupulu (4l,c, 
ris ; in high Dutch Hopflen; in low Dutch Hoppe; in Spaniſh embeds in Frenh Caryn 
Eat Hopes 77TH OO Cott "Ix. vs Me 
yo 9 mak 1 mention of Hops in his 2: booke,r5.chapter among the prickley plants, -  * 
- Sea. A wt Thetemperature. {& @23 to ROS 

The flowecs of the Hoparehot and dric inthe ſecond degree; mY land ſRuffe the head, and 
hurt the ſamewith their ſtrong ſmell. Of the ſame temperature allo arethe leautes emſelues | 

which do likewiſe open and dlenſe. os bed | 


. 


(Set: * The vertuts. =y | 
A Thebudsor firſt ſprouts, which eqmefootth in the ſpringare vicd to beearen in fallads: yer are 
they as Pliny ſairh, more toothſome then nouriſhing , for they yeeld bur very mall noariſhnen:: 
notwithſtanding they be good fortheentraiſes,both in opening and procuring of vrine, and like- 
wiſe in keeping the dy ſoluble. | FY | 
B Thelcaues and lirtle tenderſtalks, and alſo the flowers themſelues,temooue ſtoppings outof the 
liuer and ſpleene: purge by vrine,clenſe the blouc, and be profitable againſt long lingering agues, 
fcabs,andſuch like filth of the skio,if chey be boiled in Whaie. | | | 
C. The iuiceis of more force,and doth notonely remooue obſtruftions our of theentrailes,burit is 
alſo thoughrto auoide choler and flegme by the ſtoole. Iris written that the ſame dropped into 
* theearestakethawaythe ſtenchandcorrupuion thereof. f 4 
D The flowers are vſedtoſcafon Beere or Ale with, and oucrmany docauſe bitternes thereof, and 
areliforthebea © |! | * 
E Theflowers make bread light;and the lumpe to be ſooner and caſllier leuencd, if the meile be 
rempered with liquor,wherein they hauc beene boiled. * 


z 


ry 
&# 


F Thedecoion of Hops drinkegopeneth the ſtoppings of the liuer,the ſpleene,and kidneies, and 
purgeth the bloud from all corrupt humourscauſing the ſame to come foorth with the vrine. 
G Theiuicc of Hops openeth the belly,anddriucth toorch yellow cholexicke humours, and purg- 
cth the bloud from all filthines, | [8 | 7 
H The manifold vertues in Hops do manifeſtly argue the hoifomneſſe of Beere aboue Ale; for the 
Hops rather make it a Phiſicall drinke tokeepe the body in health , then an ordinarie drioke for 
the quenching of our thirſt, fi * 


£ 


Of the T raneilors oy. Chap.zu 


* The de ſcription. 


I He plant which Z'Obelias ſetteth foorth vnder the title of Yjorpe , Dodonaws maketh Fit 
| aibs, butnorproperly,whoſc long woody and Yinie branches, extende rhemſelues veric 
' fane,andinto infinite numbers, decking with his claſping tendrels and white ha 
flowers ( being very fveere ) all the buſhes, hedges, and ſhrubbes that are neere vnto it. It ſendet! 
foorth many braunched ſtalkes, thicke, tough, full of ſhootes and claſping rendrels, wherewithic 
foldeth it ſelfe vpon the hedges, and taketh holde and climeth vpon ſuch things as ſtande neere 
vnto it, The leaues are faſtned for the moſt part by fiues ypon one nib or ſtemme;rwo on either ſide, 
andone in the midit or point ſtanding alone, which leaues are broadelike thoſcof Juice, butnot 
cornered atall,among which come foorth cluſters of white flowers, and after them. great tufts of 
flat ſeedes, each cede having a fine white plume like a fether faſtned to ir , which makethin the | 
winter a gooey ihepyronecry the hedges white all over with his fetherlike tops. The root is long, = 
rough and thicke, with many ſtrings faſtned thereto, - 4. LY 
2  Claſiushath ſet foprth a kinde of Clematy, calling it Clemati Betiea, hauing a marucilous lon 
ſmall branch full of A WEE many leaues indented abour the edges,Jike thoſe of Gooſefoote,but 
ſtiffer and broader,comming fromeuery ioint,from whence alſo proceede ſmall claſping rendrels, 
as alſo the finall footeſtalks whereon the ſeeds do ſtand, growing in great tufted plumes or _—_ 


» 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |! | RY 
like into the precedent,which is a kinde heereof, The flowers are not expreſſed inthe hgure, nor 


ſcene by the author ,and therefore what hath beene faid ſhall ſuffice. » 
1 Viorn.. Fe 2 Cl-mat#Batica. 
The traucilers Joie. + | 'The traucilers Toile of Candie. 


—_ 


= 


WA 


5 < - 
= FL er | 

d 6. WW 
p \ | " 
UO/ ZN AD A WAS, 
g \ A \ ra 


Fa ( C 
4 
LES —— \ 
0 - Fa , : 
4 \ 
4 . 
, Tc 
Z . 


* The place. 


TheTraueilers Toic is foundin the borders of ficldes among thornes and briers, almoſtin euery 
hedge,asyon go from Graucſend to Canterbury in Kent; in many places of Eſſex, and in moſt of 
theſe Southerly parts about London, but notin the North of England that Ican heare of.” 

Theſecond is a ſtranger intheſe parts, yet haue I found it in the Tle of Wight, andin a wood by 
Walthamabbey. | | 

* The time. © [Fn 
| Theflowers comefoorth in Tulie : the —_— thereof appeereth in Nouember and December. 
| *% T he names. | 

The firſt is called commonly Yiorme qua/i2i45 ornans, of decking and adorning waies and hed- 
ges where people trauell,and thereupon Ihauenamedir the Traveilers Toie ; of Fachſis it is called 
u, u nigra: of Dodonauw Vitalba : of Mathiolus Clematis altera: of CordusV1ths atha : of Dioſeorides 
Fits plueſtris: of Theothraftu Atragene: in Dutch Linen! in French as Euchus writeth 7 porne, 

| «] '* The temperature and vertues. | | 
_ Plants haue no vſe in Phiſicke as yet found out,burare eſteemed onely forpleaſure,by rea- 

N of the goodly ſhadowe which they take with their thicke buſhing and clyming,as alſo for the 
deautc ofthe flowers,and the pleaſant ſent or ſauour of the ſame. FT I 1 


Aaa 2 Of - 


} 


MN 


X j 1 Hat which Z'Obe/ deſcribeth bythe name Clematis Peregs ins, hath very long andiflender | 
- | | 


ſtalkes like the Vine,which are iointed,ofa darke colow; itclimeth aloft andraketh holde 
with his crooked claſpers vpon euery: thing thar ſtanderh neere vnto ir: it hath manic 
| leaves diuidedinto divers parts, among which come the flowersrhat hang vpon ilender foote- 


ſtalks,ſomething like to thoſe of Peruinckle,conſiſting odely of fower leayes, of a blew colour and 


{omerimes purple,with certaine threds in the middle: the ſeedes be flat, plaine , andſharpe poin- 
- ted, The rootes are ſlender,and ſpreading all about. Ego 2 = 
2 Theſecond differeth nor from the other,in leaues,ſtalkes branches nor ſeede. The onely diffe- 
rence conliſteth in that,thatthis plant bringeth foorth red flowers,and the other blewe. 

1-4-4 - + Titpiece. Tek 6Rs 

Theſe plants delight ro groweinſumnie kr proſper better in a fruirfull ſoile then a bat- 
ren. They grow in my garden where they flouriſh exceedingly. = 1208 


They flower in Iuly,and perfett their ſeede in September. ] ; 


Ladies Boweriscalledin Greeketh+uars:in Latine Ambaxion: in Er 
Bower, which TI cake from his aptnes in making of Arbors, Bowers, ani 
_ dens; BIT <f) 3 The temp tart andwvertues. 
Thefacultics and the vie of theſe inPhiſicke ts notyerknowne. 
» | > 


ou may call ir Ladies 
adie coucrewes in Gar: 


of 


HISTORIE)OF PLANTS. as 
Of purging Peruink{e. (hap.313. 


1 Clematis vrens. 2 Elammala Touts ſarretta. Ly 
' Virgins Bower. | - Vpright Virgins Bower, 


*% The deſeription. | 
I Mong thoſe plants which are called C/ematides, theſeare alfo tobe numbred, ashaning a 
A certain affinitie , bicauſeof the preating: branching and ſemblance of the Vine, and is 
called F/ammmuls wrens, by reaſon of his firie and burning heate, bicaule that being laide 
ypon the skin,it burnerh the place, & maketh an eſchare, euen as our common cauſtick or corrofiue 
medicines do. The leaues hereof anſwere both in colour and ſmoothneſle,Y inca Peruinca, or Per. 
uinkle, growing vpon long clambring tender branches, like the other kindes of climing plants. 
The flowers are very white,ſtar faſhion, and of an excecding ſweete ſinell, much like vnto the fme!l 
of Hawthorne flowers, but more pleaſant, and lefle offenſive rothe head; hauing in the middle of 
ya flowers certaine ſmall chiues or threds. The rooteis tender, and diſperſeth it ſelfe farre vnder 
ground, | | ET. 
2 VprightClamberer or Virgins Bower, is alſo a kinde of C/ematis, having long tough-rootes, .. 
not wlike to thoſe of Licoriſe z from which riſeth vp a ſtraightvprighr ſtalke, ofthekeight of {ixe 
orleven cubits, ſer about with winged leaues, compoſed of diners ſinall leaues , fer vÞon a middle 
rib,4s are choſe of the Aſke tree, ot Valerian, but fewer in number : at the rop of the ſtalkes come 


toorth ſmall white flowers, very like the precedent,but not of ſopleaſant a ſweete {mel ; after which 


comethe ſeedes flarand ſharpe pointed. | | 
3 Thereis another Clemats, of the kinde of the white C/ematis or burning Clemaris, which Thaue 


rccouered from ſeede,that hath beene ſent me from a curious and learned citizen of Argentine now 
alled Straw borough , which is ke vnto the others in each reſpeR, ſauing rhar, that the flowers 
Kercvi are very double,wherein confiſteth the eſpeciall difference, 


Aau43 3 Clematis 


42 THE. SECOND: BOOKE OFTHE 


3 Clematis vrensmultif[oya. 


Double flow red Vn wins Bower. | 


s 
- 
Fn - 
- fe: HO 


' 


* 
j 
iS 


* 7 hedeſcription. 
4 Amongltthe kinges of climing or clam. 
bering plants,Cero/us Cluſa,and likewiſe 17. 
belrws hauc numbred,; thete two, which ap. 
proch ncere vnto them in leaues and flowers 
but fat different in claſping tendrels , or Ci. 
ming otherwiſe, being lowe and baſe planrs in 


© >f-rheir kin 
cofr 


reſpe&of the oth de. Thefirf 


hath for his rootes a bt 


| * doprowe 
long leaves; of a bir np taſte, frogiterly 


- 


ow woort. The flowers growear 


yoong of a whitiſh yellow colour, hauing little 
or no imell atall. The flowers bei palt 


commeth the ſecede, ſuch as is to be ſeenein 


the other kindes of Clematis, The whole plant 
dietharthe approch gf winter andrecouereth 
it ſeIfe againe from the roote, which endureth; 
whereby it greatlyincreaſerh, 

5 Clemuatiomaior Pannenics. 
Great Buſh Bower. 


HIST ORIE OF PLANTS. WW |} 
5  ThegreatBuſh Bower differeth not fromthe former laſt deſcribed, but in greatneſle: which * 
name of ercarncfle ſetreth foorth the difference. a. T8 | 

Theſe plants do not growe' wilde4in England, thatT ean/as yet learne; notwithſtanding I haue 
them altin-my garden,where they floutiſh exceedingly, | + 

Theſe plants do flower from Auguſt torhe endof September. 

| ; 8 * Thenames. , 

There is not much more founde of their names than is expreſſed in their ſeverall titles, nor. 
withſtanding there hath beene foinewhar ſaid, as Ithinke, by heare ſay, butnothing of cerraintic: |, 
whereſore let that whych is ſer downe ſuffice. VVemay jam + call the ficſt;, Biring Clematis, ; 
orwhice Clematis,biting Peruinkle,of purging Peruinkle,and Ladies Bower,and Virgins Bower,” | 

| $ * The temperature. | l 

The leafe hereof is bicing and doth mightily blilter,being as Gelen ſaith;of a cauſticke or burning 1 
qualitic:itis hot in the beginning ofthefourch4egree. ft 5 | | 7 
| | - "o The wvertues. | | ? 
Dizſearides writerh, that the leaves being applied doe hewlethe ſcurfe and leprie , andthat the A 
ſeede beaten andthe powder drunke with faire water or with Meade, purgeth flegme andcholetby = 


the ſtoole, | 
Of Woodbinde,or Honiſuckle. Chap.314- 
| | *% The kindes. 
Here be Jiuers ſortes of Woodbindes, all of thew ſhrubs with winding ſtalkes, and thatwrap 
X themſclues vnto ſuch things as are ncere about them, Likewiſe there be other orres or kindes 
thereof, found out by the later herbariſts,thar climenotar all, burſtand vpright, the which ſhall be 
fetfoorth among the ſhrubbicplanrs. And fuſt of the common VWoodbinde. -. 


1 Periclymenum. | 1 3 Periclymenum p*rfoliatuon. 
Voodbinde or Honiſuckles. - Iralian VWoodbinde, 


C \ © A 
ANC; 

(LEE. D; SN 
| ll | 4 L 


F025 


i; 
VA 


4 
| b 


744 THE: SEQON D/BOOKE” OF!THE 


, bj: | : + The deſeription. | oo 
1X. Oodbinde or Honilucklecliweth yp aloft, hauing long flender woodie Rtalkes, pared 
VV inco divers branches: al uewhichſtand by certaine diſtances [moothleaues,fer zogi. 
\.. ..--.. .., therby couples one right againſtanother z of a lighe greepe. colour aboue, vnger.. 
neath of a whitiſh greene. The flowers ſhew themſclues in the tops of the branches many in num. 
ber long,whire,fweereot ſmell,hollow withinz in one part ſtanding more-our, with certainethieds 
growing out of the middle. The fruite 15 like to little bunches of; red when theyberipewher. 


*1n is conteined ſmall hatd ſecede. The roote is woodie, and notwithour ſtrings. 
2 This ſtrange kinde of Woodbine hath leaves, ſtalks and cootes like.ynto the common Wood. 
binde or Hontluckle, ſaving thatneere vnto cheplace where the flowers Tqme foorth , the Ralke; 
do growe thoroughthe leaues,like vnto the herbe Thorow waxe;calletl Pgrfoliate, which leaves do 
reſemble little ſawcers: outof which broad round leauesproccedefaire, beautifull, and well ſet. 
ling flowers, ſhining with a whitiſh purple colouyr,& ſomwhatdaſht withyellowpy litdeand little 
ſtretched ourlike the noſe of an Elephant, garniſhed within with ſmall yellow chines orthreds; 
and when the flowers are in their flouriſhing , the leaues and flowers do reſemble 1awcers filled 
with the lawersof VVoodbindez many times itfallerh out, that there is eqbefoundthree orfower 
ſawcers one aboue another, filled with lowers as the firſt, which hath cauſed it tobe called double 
Honiluckle,or Woodbinde, | | = 

j  *\Theplace. ' : | | 
The Woodbinde growerh in woods and hedges,and vpon ſhrubs and buſhes,oftentimes wind- 
_ Ingir ſelfe ſoftreight and hard abour,thac ir leaveth his print ypon thole things ſo wrapped, 
The double Honiſuckle groweth now in my garden,and many others likewiſe in great plenty al- - 
_—_ not long ſince very rate and hard to be found, except inthe garden of ſome diligent Her 
ariit, F4 | ; | FP .-6 | 
| | 1} uh Thetone. a th agia 
 Theleaues come foorth betimes inthe ſpring: the flowers budde foorth in Maie and Iune: the 
fruite is ripe in Aurumne, | | | = 
| | %* 7 he » "n Lind 


. 


Itiscalled in Greeke meaouurer: in Latine Yolwerim meine, Of Scribenins Largie Sylue mater :in 
ſhops Caprifoliam , and! Matriſyliue , of ſome Lilzum inter ſpines: in Iealian Y inc:boſeo: in high 
Derch Sevgblant : in low Dutch Gheytenblayi,and Dammekens Cruſt: in French Cheaefae- 
ie: in Spaniſh Madreſelns :in Englith VWoodbinde, Honiſuckle,and ( aprifoly. f 
|| | | % The tempe: arnre. SY (et | 

There hath an errourin times paſt growen amongſt a fewe,and nowalmoſt paſt recouerie tobe 
called againe,bcing growen an errour vniuer{all,vhicherrour is, howthe decoRion of the leaues 
of Honiſuckles,or the diſtilled water of the lowers, are rafhly giuen for the inflammations of the 
mouth and throte , as though they were binding and cooling, Bur contrariwiſe Honiſuckle is nei- 
ther coldenor binding; bur hot andattennating or making thinne. For as Galen faith, both the 
fruit of Woodbinde,andalſo the leaues,do ſomuctratrenuate and heate, as if ſomewhat too much 
of them be drunke,they will cauſe the vrine to be as redas bloud, yer do they at the firſt onely pro- 


uoke vrine. * 


| [1 i  % Thewertwes, =3 (8 
A DPioſcirides writeth thar the, ripe ſcede gathered and dried in the ſhadowe , and drunketo the 
quanritie of one dram waight,fortie daics rogither doth waſte and conſume away the hardneſſe of 
\ the ſpleen,remooueth weariſomneſle, helpeth the ſhorrnes and difficultic of breathing, cureth the 
40's 1 I bloudy vrine after the ſixr day,and cauſerh women tohaye ſpeedy trauel in chilce 
aring, - | bY 1 ; | - | F 
B Theleaues be of the ſame force: which being drunke thirty daies rogither, are reported to make 


» P 


 menbarren,and deſtroicth their naturall ſeede. = *T'Y 
C The flowers ſteepedin oile and (er inthe ſunne, is good to annoint the bodie that is benummed, 
and growen very colde, lat | "26 ITY © 


D bs \_ water of the flowers are giuen to be drunke with o0od ſcreſſe againſt the piſſing 
O OUudg. [3 | | © 158 


| E Aſyrupemadeof the flowersis goodto be drank againſt the diſeaſe ofthe ung 6:pleene hat 


''"HISTDRTE” 'OF' PLANTS. 45 


£ 


js ſtopped, being drunke with a little wine. 


omwithſtanding the words of Galen, ft ainly forme by experience, that the water of Ho- F 
Wa good aiainſtthe ſorenelſe in oth ang Voula md with the fame leaves boiled, or 
the fexvesand flowers diſtilled, are made diners po0d medicines againſt cankers, and ſore mouths, 
well in fdren as —_—_— and likewiſe for vicerations and fcaldings inthe prinie parts of 
min or woman: ifthere be added cothe decotion heerof ſome hony and allome or Verdigreace: 
ifthe ſore require greater clenſing outwardly , prouided alwaies that there be no Yerdigreace put 
into that water tharmuſt be inieQtedinto the ſecret parts, . | 


| ; Of Faſmine,or Gelſemine. Chap.215. 


| % T he kindes. | {&4þ 2 
Here be found at this day fowerſorts of Lalinine, diffeting as we!l incolour of the flowers, as 
/ingrearnes ofthe fame,as ſhall be declared inheir ſeuerall deſcriptions, 


- A Je 1num album. - 2 Taſminun Candiforwnmaius, 
dich Vihive Geſlemine, Great white Geſlemine, 


( - 2 / 
3 4 


ſ Yd 


| y yY. 
=D WA EC, | [ TC | 
NEE: 
SYS». AN 


; 4 4 * of 
k. # 
IV = - 
LY \ » k *4 
: = 
( , * OL Cc” 
/ Oo. 
£8 
=. 
" 
H/ wW 
<- "4 
4 *, \ 
- &, 


- 


- 


WELD 


1K 7a 


v% T hedeſeription. | | 

t J Aſmine,or Gelſemine,jis of the number of thoſe plants, which haue neede to be ſupported or 
opped vp, and yet notwithſtanding of it ſelſe claſpeth not or windeth his ſtalks about fuch 
Non as ſtand neer vntoit.but only leanerh and licth ypon thoſe things,that are prepared ro 
ſuſtaine it abour arbors and banquering houſes in gardens dy which iris held yp. The alks therof 
are long,round. branched.jointed or kneed,and of a greenecolour, hauing within a white ſpunge-- 
ous gry leaves ſtande ypona middle rib,ſerrogither by couples like ofe of rhe aſh. rree, but 
ſmaller,of a deepe greene colour. The flowers .growe at the yppermoſt parr of the branches.ſtan- 
, Cinginaſmall uft,farre ſer one from a0 yak GE in ſinell,of colour white, The ſeece is Bat and -- 

broade like thoſe of Lupincs,yhichſcldome come to ripenes, The rooteis tough andthreddie, 


2 LObelime 


"ESRT am... 


” 


745 - THE SECOND. BOOKE OF THE 
2 LObelimreponeth that he ſawe in a garden ar Bruxels, belonging toareuerend perſon c.1 
-maſter Joby Boiſot, a kinde of Gellcmine, very much racms beer our common + wet a 
nouriſhedinan earthen par; it grew not aboue(faith he)ro che height of a.cubir,diuidedincoduer, 
branches, whereupon 1d growe leaues like thoſe of the common white Laſmine, bur blacker _ 
, Founder. The flowers to the ſhew were molt begurifull, in ape lhe thoſe of the common Laſmine, 
bur tower times bigger,gaping wide open, white on the our ſide,and of a brightred on the inſice, 


Ycllowe Iaſm inc, 


... X & 4 : 4 D 
1 {2 
LI 4 | } 
þ > . —_ «CS wy = 


; Thereis akinde heereof with yellow flowers : bur ſome do deſcribefor the yellowe Iaſminegthe 

rubbic Trefoile,called of ſome Trifo/rwm fruticans ;and of others Polemoniurs : but this ellowe 
Laſmine is one,and that is another planr,differing from thekinds of Iafmine,as ſhall be declaredin 
his proper place, Theyellow Iaſmine differeth nor from the common white Gefmine, in leaues, 
ſtalkes,nor fathion of the flowerszthe onely difference is,that this plant bringeth foorth yellow flo- 

 wers,andrheother white, | | | = | 
4 Thereis likewiſe another ſort that differeth not from the former in any reſpe&, but in the co- 
lourotthe flower; for this plant hath flowers of a blewe-colour,and the others notſo,herein con- 
ſiſtech the difference, | BIDET. | | 


[ot | | 1 Ti pine. this Cn aFg. 7 Sheng 
Gelſemineis foſtered in gardens ,andis vſed for arbors, and tocouer banquetting houſes 1n gat- 
dens: it growerh not wilde in England that can vnderſtande of, thoitgh! maſter Tyre be of ano- 
rheropinion: the white Tafmine is common in moſt places of Englande: the reſt are ſtangers and 
nor ſcene intheſeparrs as yet. |! |! | 1 
LVITOSS:  **Thetime. [| 
They bring foorth their pleatinc fowers in Iuly and Auguſt. 
Gs VIGAS "+ Thenames. = | 
_ Amongthe Arabian, Seyopiowas the firſtthatnamed Geſſemine , Zambaehzitis called m 


1 


747 
There i$18 Dioſcoridesa compoſition of oilz gf Iaſmine, which he faith is mage in Perfia of the 
white f(owers ot Violets vhiclt Violets ſeeme tg be none other then the flowers of this Geflemine: 


for Droſcoredes oftentimes hath taken one plant for another z ſo thar ir muſt not ſeeme ſtrange thar 
he calicrh the lowers of Geſfemine Violers, eſpecially ſeeing that the plant it ſelfe was vaknowne 


HISTORIE| OF PLANTS. 


Low, ard 2:ferinom and allo Greminum: in Engliſh Iaſmine, Gefſemine,and lelie. 


i 


varo him;as it 15 exident, 


w % T he remper ature. 45 rt | 
Gefiemine,andelpecially the lowers thereof be bot mthe beginning of the ſecond degree, as 
Serapio rcporictly eubof Afeſee. | ob pletany 5:4 $hT 


o*% The ve tary. - | ; 
Theoyle which is madeof the flowers heerof,alteth away rawe humours, andis goodagaintt A 

colde rheuimes,but in thoſe that are of an hot coniticutionyecauerh headach, andthe ouermuch 
nc{lthercofmakerhhe noſe ro bleede,as-the ſame auchar affirmeth., Itis vied(as Dtoſcorides wri- 
reth,and after him Meri ) of the Peiſtans. in cheir hanquersforpleaſuretake tics good robe an- 
nointedon after baths,in thoſe bodies that haue necde to be ſuppled and warined,burby reaſon of 
theranknes of the ſmell,it is not much-vied. | 134 | 

' Theleaues boiled in wine vntill they be {oft and made vp to the forme of a pultis , and applied, B 
diſolueth cold ſwellings,wens,hard lumps, and ſuch like ourgoings. PT”. 


3} 


Of Perninkle. Chap.316, 


| CIs * T be kinges, | | j 
TE" be diners fortes or kindes of Peruink!e, whereof ſome be greater, others lefler, ſome wich 
whiteflowers,others purple and double,and ſome of afaire blew $kie colour. 


I Yinca Pervuines, | | bs £1 
Peruinkle. | > | wu Thedeſeription. 24 
Wu OD [1 Eruinkle hath flender and long branches 
W NEAR P trailing vpon the-ground, taking holdhere 
| and there as itrunneth, ſinall like roruſhes., 
with nakedor bare ſpaces betweene ioint andioinr. 
The leaues are ſmoothe, nor vilike to the Bay leaſe 
butleffer. The flowers growe harde by the leaues, 
iptrading wide open, compoted of five ſinall blew 
leaues. 

'| Wehauein ourLondon gardens a kinde hereof 
bearing white flowers , whuch maketh it ro diffes 
from the former. | | 
| Theres another with purple flowers, doubling 
it lelfe ſomewhat in the middle, with ſmaller leaues, 
wherein is the difference, 
| There is another ſort, greater than any of the 
reſt, which is called of ſome Clematis Daphmoides, of 

_ |the fimilicude the leaues hane with thoſe of the 

Bay. The lcaues and flowers are like vnto the pre- 

cedent, bur altogither greater 3 whercin confifterh 


the difference, 
| |  *% The place. | Sg 
| They growe in moſt of our London gardens 
they loue a moiſt and ſhadowie place: the branches 
| remaine alwaies greene. | | 
VR | | *% Thetime. 
\ | Theflowersof them do flouriſh in March, April 
| | and May,and oftentunes later, 


* The 


48 N THE SECOND BOOKE OF. 


| | ' * Thenones. | | 
Peruinkle is called in Greeke+uark $31466Y%, bicauſe it bringeth ſoonth ſtalkes which creepelike 
thoſe of the Vine, and Daphnoides by reaſon that the leaues arelike thoſe of the Bay, as aforeſaide 
Pliny calleth it Vince Perurmca,and Chem edaphne ;nowirhſtanding there is another ch amedaphne 
of which in his place. The fame author {ikewiſe calleth it Centumcates: in high Dutch Jngryun: in 
lowe Dutch Ulincoozte, margden cruyt : in French Pucellage Yawche & Pernanche: in ltalian pyg. 
wence :in Spaniſh Peraimgus: in ſhovpes Clematwpernines: in Engliſh Perunkle , Pervinkle , and 
Periwinkle. - bi'# | 241 44 Thetemperature. BY Ee 
Peruinkle is ſomething hor but within the ſecond degree,tomerthing drie and aſtringent, | 
BE, | _»% Thivertues."\: $ 
The leaues boiled in wine and drunken, ſtoppeth the laske and bloudie flixe. ral7 oe 
An handfull of the leaues ſtatped and the ivice giuen to drinke in red:wine, ſtoppeth the lask 
and bloodie flixe,ſpetting of blood which never faileth in any bodice, cither man or woman: itlike. 
wiſe ſtoppeth the tnordinate courle of the monethly ſickneſle. 4208 FD 2h 


Of Capers. (;hap.317. | | 


* in 


Z 
_ 


| 1 ou Thekinges, EE | 
g Here be two ſortes of Capers eſpecially,one v ith broad leaues ſharpe pointed: the other with 
rounder leaues. The Brabanders hauc allo anothcr ſort,called C.eppar® fab-go,or beane Capers 


I Capparts folio PORE E 2 Capparid rotandiore folie, 
Sharpe leated Capers, | T Round leated Capers, 


(N 
4 $ 


: . % Thedeſerittion. | ; VE 
I He Caper is a prickly ſhrubbe,the rl cod or braunches whereof be full of ſharpe price 
thornes , trailing vpon the grounde if they be not ſupported: or propped vw: W "77 
upon doe growe leaues like thoſe of the Quincetree, but broader and ſharper gou'er 
among the which come foorth long {lender footeſtalkes , whereon do grow rounde knops , V 4 


70 


HISTORIE OF PEANTS.* 17 __ 
do open or ſpead abroad into faire flowers, af ter which commerh in place long ſruite, like to an 
aliue.and ofthe ſame colour wherinis conreines flarr ona eds. of 2 dultic colour. The rooteis 
©oody and coticred with a thicke barke or rinde\whichis much Viedin Phiſicke. © | | 
The ſecond kinde of Caper is likewile a prickly plant,much like the Bramble buſh, hauipg ma: 


2 . ” ; F RIS SY | | 

lender branches ſerfull of ſharpe prickles. The whole'plane rraileth "POReed 468 Phete it 
7 1h beſet wy na Blackiſh leaues dilorCerly placed,jn ſhape like r ofe of AftriBy, 4, but 
grovyerh,t | 


axcater -approching tothe forme of Foletoote : among which commethfoorth afmaltand tender 
naked rwigge, charged at the end with a ſinallknap of bud , Which openethit ſelfe to a {mall ſtarre- 
Ike flower, ofapl | fanc veere ſinell, in plate whereof comes aſmall frujre, lon and rquade like 
the Cornell berty,ofa browne colour, Theroore is long and woody, and covered withia thicke 


bake or tinde,which is likewiſe vicd in medicine. | ©, Mr 
: Patt 467906 BARE  _ %Theplace, Caet= 
fl Caber beth in Italy, Spaine, and ther hot regions without manwring, it alearte file, 
in roug}! places among rubbiſh,and vpon old wals,as Dieſcortaes reporteth, | f . h -— 5 
Theophraſtus writeth,that it is by nature wilde,, and refirſerh ro be husbanded, yet intheſe our 
daies divers vic to cheriſh the ſame,and to letit in dry and ſtony places: my lelfe atithe. impreſſion 
heereof,vlanted fome ſeedes in the bricke wals of my garden; which as yet doe ſpring broe 
orcene,the ſucceſleIexpett. | | [t | 


| | | + The time. | | 
"TheCiper flowreth,in fommer , cuen vntill Aurumne; The knops of the flowers befofe they 
apetiare thoſe Capers or ſauce that we cate,which are gathered and preſerued inpickleorfale;. 
| | | | * T he names. El: m_ 
[It iscalled in Greeke wi7x=*: and in Latinealfo Capparis: but properly Cynosbatas;or Carirabuc, 
which is alſo taken'for the wilde Roſe; ir is generally called Cappers,in molt languages: th Engliſh 
Cappers,Caper,and Capers, | —_— 


HOY _...  %* Thetemperaturg. | SI. 7 19 

Capets,orthe flowers not yet fully growen,be ot temperature hor andof thinne parrs 3 if they 
be eaten greene,theyyeeld very little nouriſhment, and much lefle if theybe ſalted. Andtherfote 
they be cather aſapce and medicine,then a meare, BEIT acts” © 

Ay oy -_. % Thewcrtues. | Ny 

Tliey ſticre vp an appetite tomeate; theybe good foramoiſt ſtomackgand ſtaieththe warering A 
theref,and clenfeth away the flegme that cleauurh vnto it. They open the ſtgppings of the liner 
and milt, with meaterhicy are good to be taken of thoſe that haue a quartaine agew,andill ſpleenes. 
They axe eaten boiled,(the falt fiſt waſhed off,) with oile and vineger,as other ſallads be,and ſon. - 
times are boiled with meate. _ "* ih 87 w” ro” 

The rinde or barke of the roote conſiſterh of diuers faculties,jit heateth, clenferh, purgeth, cur- B 
tethand digeſteth;hauing withall a certaine binding qualitie., " ip Ip 

This batke is a ſingular remedie for hard ſplecnes , being outwardly applied , andalſo inwardly C 
taken,and the{ame boiledin vineger or oxymel , or being heaten and mixed with other ſimples: 
tor afterthis naner it expelleth thicke and groffe humours and conueieth away the ſame mixed 
with bloud,by vrineand alfoby ſicge,whercby the miltor {pleene is helped, and the paine of the 
huckle bones taken away: moreouer it bringeth downe the deſired ficknes , purgeth and draweth 
flegme our of the head,as Gelenwriterh, | i 38 $0 | 

The ſame barke, as Djoſeoridesreacheth, doth clenſe olde filthie ſores , andfcqureth away the D 
thicke lips and cruſts about the edges, and being chewedit taketh away the toothach. 

Being ſtamped with vineger, it ſcoureth away tetters or Ringwoormes, hard fwellings, and cu- E, 
reth thekingseuill; \ 2:57 | | Hm Ss rs 

_ The barke of therootes of Capers is goodagainſt the h 


+ ®8 LS 4a 
7 


ardnes and ſtopping of the fplecne, and E 


profiteth much if irbe ginen in drink to ſuch as haue theſciatica,the palfie,and thoſe that are bur. 
ſten or bruſed by falling from ſome high place: ir doth mightily provoke vrine , infomuch , that 
> be vied ouermuch, or giuen in too great aquantitic, it procureth bloud ro: come with the 


! 
\ 


EL 4 - 4. .Þy | ; | - 
| . l © TEE # : ; ow 
” 


[ on 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF! THE 


| ">|; Of Beane Capers. (hap.z18. | 


* The deſeription. 


white, with ſome yellowe chives in the middeſt, 
which being paſt , there appeere long coddes, 
whereinis contained ſmall flat ecde. Theroote 


is tender,branching hither and thither, 
| +4 Ti | | 


The place. ' 

Ir groweth of it ſelfein the come fieldes ofthe 
lowe countries , from whence I haue receiued 
ſeeds for my garden,wherethey fowiſh, 

Ic lowreth when the Caper doth, 


| | | % The names. [1 
It is called in Latine of the later Hetbariſts Capparis fabago ,of moſt "apparis Legumineſ« : It is 
thought to be an herbe which duicenwe ceſcriberh in his 28. chapter, byrhe name of CArdifrigr, 
we may content our {clues that Capparis fabago reraine that name ſtill, and ſecke for none other, v- 
kſle tbe for an Engliſh name,by which it may be called after the Latine, Beane Caper. 
| | + Thetemperature and vertnes. EA: | 
Touching the facultics thereof we haue nothing left in writing woorth the remembrance, 


$ 
£ 


| Of Swallow woort. Chap.y19. | 
| | + Thedeription | 
t (© Wallow woortwith white flowers hath divers vpright branches of a browniſh colour, of 


{ 


the height oftwocubirs, beſer with leaues not vnlike to thoſe of Dulcamars or Wood , 
night ſhade,ſomewhar long,broad ſharp r6-05 a blackiſh/green colour, and way ſa- 
uor: among which core forth very many ſmall white flowers ftar faſhion,banging vpon lictle _ 
der footeſtalks : after which come in place thereof long ſharpe pointed cods, Iu full of a __ 
perfe& white cotton reſembling ſilke , as well in ſhewe as handling, which cods the grauer 8 
omittedin the figure : ( our London gentlewomen have namedir Silken Cithe) among c 
is wrapped ſoft browniſh ſeede, The roots are verit many , white, thieddic and of a frong id 
UOUr, | | ; | l 
; | | 2 The 


o 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _— 
+ Theſecond kinde is oftentimes founde with ſtalkes much longer,climing vpon props or ſuch 
things as ſtande neere vatoir attainingto carince, 91 of fue or {ixc cubirs , wrapping it ſelfe vpon 
them with many and ſundry foldings : the flowers hectcof are blacke the leaues, cods;and rootes, 
belike thoſe of the former, | | 


'* 


1 Aſelepiasfloreulbe, © ; Aflipia irene a alagl 


White Swallow woort, - © + | Blacke Swallow woort. 


: Hy 
\ 
: A ! 


#-. 

| 
| a y, 
| «. 


= 1.4 — 
vv 4 a 
”; 
A 


WTR = | 
AR - <4 | 
 &Nk Z 1) 
WW Zx0.- 


\ 


*% The place. ET 
Both theſe kinds do growe in my garden,but al wilde in England ; yet haue Thearditreported, 
_ thatitgroweth in the Rides abour Northampton, but as yetI am not certaine of it. | 
*%Tkhe time. LEE +22 
They flower about Iune,in Autumne the downe hangeth out of the cods, and the ſeede falleth 
totheground, 
ke *% The names, | 
Iriscalled of thelater Herbariſts Yincetoxicutn: of Ruelines Hederalii: in high Durch Dwalutve 
woztelezthar is co ſay in Latine Hirandinaria: in Engliſh Swallow woort,of our gentlewomen ir is 
called Silken Ciſlie ; AEſculapims (who is ſaide to be the firſt inuenter of Phiſicke, whom therefore 
the Greekes and Gentiles honored as a God)called it after his owne name _Mſclepyas, ot AEſcula- 
pies herbe, forthat he was the firſt that wrote thereof, and nowe itiscalled inſhoppes Hirun- 
aria. * The temperature. 
The rootes of Swallow woort are hot and dry; they are thought to be good againſt poiſon, 
| * Thevertues, | 
 Dioſeorideywriteth,that the rootes of Swallow woort boiled in wine,and the decotion drunke, A 
5 aremedic againſt the gripings of the belly, the ſtingings of Serpents andagainſt deadly poilon, 
being one of eſpecialleſt herbes againſt the ſame. | 39] | 
ie leaues boiled and applied in forme of a pultis, curerh the cuill ſores of the paps or dugs and B 
matux.that arc hard tobe cured. = 
| .0f 


98 THE SECOND: BOOKE: OF THE 


Of Fndian Swallow woort, Chap-326. | 


 Wiſanch, fine V imceroxicam Indianun. | Sh 
| woot, _ | * The deſert 7 | 
= allo | | Here gromerhintha par of Virginia,or 
Ly Fd | Norembega, where our Englth men 
. "_" cn { 
ny)a kind of 4/clepias, 
the Sau iy LIC! 


h,there come in pou wo 

ſharpe pointedlike thoſe 

of our Swallow woart , but greater , ſtuffed full 

of moſt pure ſilke , of a ſhining white colour: 

among which filke appeereth a final long 

roong ( which is the cede ,) reſembling the 

toong of a birde , or that of the herbe called 

Adders toong. The cods are not onelyfull of 

filke , bur every nerye or {inewe wherewith the 

| leaues be xibbed, are likewiſe moſt pure (ilke; 

and alſothe pilling of the ſtems,cuen as Flaxc1$ 

torne from his ſtaiks. This conſidered; beho!de 

: the iuſticeof God, thar as he hath ſlut yp thoſe 

.. people aridnationsin infidelitie and nakednes; 

# fohathhenotas yet giuenthem vnderſtanding 

41 [i 14 | to couet theirnakednes , nor matter wherewith 

todo the Sor fiencley the earth is covered ouer with this ſilke, which daily they tread m- 

der their feere, which were ſufficient ro apparell many kingdomes ifthey wete carefully manured, 

; Irgroweth, as before is rehearſed, in the countries of Norembega , andnow called ogy by 

the H.fir Wa/ter Raleigh who bath beſtowed great ſurnames of monie in the diſcouerie thero where 
arc dwelling ac this preſent Engliſh men, if neither vntimely death by murdering , or peſtilence, 

corrupt aire,bloodic fixes, or fore orher mortall ſicknes hath not deſtroied them. | 

It pringethvp,flowreth, and flouriſheth both winter and ſommer, as do many, or moſtof the 

plants of that countrie. | | = | 


# t 


| | i * The names. © | | 

The ſilke is vſed of the people of Pomeioc, and other of the prouinces adioining ( being parts of 
Virginia) to couer the ſecret parts of inaidensthat neuer taſted man, /as in other places thi vca 
white kinde of moſſe Wiſanck : we haue though Aſelepias Vir giniana,or Vincetoxicum Indian wn it 
and proper names for it: in Engliſh Virginia Swallow woort,or the ſilke woort of Norembega. 

| | | | wu } henatwreandvwertnes. 5 HW 

We findenothing by report ot otherwaies of our owne knowledge, of his phiſicall vertues, but 
onely report of the abundance of moſt pure ſilke,wherewith the whole plant is poſſeſſed. | 


[:: oP + 8 of 


LW 


HISTORIE OF" PLANTS. 


Of the/Bombadte,or Cotton plant, Chap.z21. 


GefCprum [rue X ron, 
The Cotron buth, | * The deſeription. 


| o& x He Corton buth is a lowe and baſe plant, 
% i >&) 4 | having ſmall ſtalkes of a cubire hioke and 
> ſometimes alittle higher ; divided tromrhe 
| loweſt parttothe top into tundrie fjuall branches, 
whereuponare ſet confuſed!y or without order, a 
few broadleaues, cut for the moſt part into three 
' ſections, and ſometimes more, as nature liit to be- 
ſtow,ſomwhart indented abour the'edges,nor vn- 
like tothe leafe of che Vine,or rather the Veruaine 
| Mallowe, butlefler, ſofter andof a grayiſh colour: 
| among which come foorth the flowers, ſtanding 
| 4a Wa | vpon {lender footeſtalkes; the brimmes or edges 
Cad ;  whereofare of a yellow colour,the middle part pur- 
<> Gw ple: afrex which appeereth the fruit, round, and of 
the bigneſle of a Tenniſe ball,wherein is thruſt to. 
githera great quantity of fine white Cotton woolz 
> | among which 1s wrapped vp blacke ſeede of the 
bignefle of Peafon, in ſhape like the trettles or 
dung of a conie. I he fruit being come to maturiie. - 
or ripeneſle, the huske or cod openerh it ſelfe into 
ſ{ower partes or diuifions, and caſteth foorcl1 his 
wooll and ſeede vpon the ground, if it benor ga- 
theredin his time and featon. The roote is tmal!l 
and fingle,with {ew threds annexcd thereto,and of 
a woodie ſubſtance as is all the reſt of the planr, 
| % The place, ES | 
lt growethin India,in Arabia, Aegypt,& incertaine Ilands of the Mediterranean fea,as Cyprus, 
Candia,Mclita,Sicilia,and in otherprouinces of the continent adiacent, It growerth abour Lripo-. 
lisand Alepo in Syria, from whence the Factor of a worſhiptull merchant m London, Maſter N4- 
cholss Lete before remembred,did ſend vnto his faid Maſter diuers pounds weight of the ſcede,wher- 
of ſome were commirted to the earth at the impreſſion hereot: theſucceſle we leave to the Lord, 
Notwithſtanding my lelfe three yeeres paſt did ſowe of the ſeedes, which did grow very frankly,bur 
periſhed before it came to perſeCtion , by reaſon of the colde troſtes that ouertooke it in the time of 
flowring, | + Thetime. | 
Cotton ſeedeis ſowen in the plowed fields inthe (pring of the yeere,and reaped or cur downe in 
harueſt,cuen as corne with vs, and the ground muſt be tilled and fowen-new againethe next yeere, 
and vied in ſuch ſort as we do the tillage for corne and graine: for itis a plant of one-ycere,andpe- 
riſheth when it hath perfected his fruit,as many other plants do. 


* The names. 
Cotton is called in Grecke £:>or and -wtmer: in Latine Xylwm, and Gofipriom after the Greeke : in 
ſhops Lanugo,Bombax,and Cotum: in Italian Bombagis : in Spaniſh A/godon :inhigh Durch Baunis 
Wool; in Englith and French Cotton,Bombaſte, or Bombace, | | 
Theophrajtws hath made mention hereof in his fourth booke g.chapter, bur without a name; and 
ielathitis atree in Tylus which beareth wooll: neicher is it any maruel[if he tooke an vniriowen 
ſhrub or plant,and that groweth in countries faroff, for a tree; ſceing alſoin this age, m which very 
manythings come to be better knowen than in times paſt, the Cotton or wooll keereot is called of 
e GLermanes,as we haue ſaid Baum wwll, that 15,wooll of a tree : Whereas in tru it is rather a 
ſmall ſhrub(and not robenumbred among herbes.) 


: 
: 


Bbb 1 Of 


Þ ! : "i 
E; "F ; # 


754 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Ofthis, Theephraitus writeth-thus + It is reported, tharthe fame Tlande, that is to ſay 
bring foorth many diners trees that beare wooll, whereof ſome haue leaues like thoſe 5; the Vine. 
 #lmie writing of the fame in his 19; booke chaprer r. ſaiththus; The vpper partof Ae; I 
ward Arabia, bringeth foorth a ſhrub, which 'is called Goſgpion and Xybn, and therefore thek $54 
that is made of it, 15 called Xy/ma, or mſec woolfie. Iris faithhe, the plant thatbcareth that iÞ = 
wherewith the garments are made,vluch the prieſts of Egypt do weare. | E Tuth 
| | 7 * The temperature, 61 


Tb, doth 


The ſeede of Corto1),according tothe opinion of Serapo, is hot anf moiſt : the wooll itſelfe i; 
hor and drie. | l | | | TIE 
E410 || *% Thevertmes, [1 | 
A The ſecede of Cotton is good againſt the cough, and for them that areſhort winded: i : 
reth vp luſt of the bodyþy citakng naturall ſeede,wherefore it ſurpaſſerh. 3 it alſo ſtir. 
B Theolleprefſedoutpt rheſeede,raketh away freckles,ſpors,and other blemiſhes of the «in 
C Theaſhes of the wodll burned, ſtancherh the bleeding of wounds, vicedin reſtrictiue medicine 
as Bole Armoniack ; and is more reſtritiue than Bole it telfe. =; | 1 
D To fpeake of the commocities of the wool of this plant it were ſuperfluous. Common experience 
and the daily vie and bencfit we receive by it doth ſhew. $o thar it were impertinene to our hiſtory 
to ſpeake of the making of Fuſtian, Bombaſtes, and many other things that are madeof thewocl] 


3 
4 


thereof, 


$1 


Of Dogs bane. Chap.322. 


There be two Dogs bancs : the one a climing or clambering plant;the other an ypright ſhrub, 


Periploca repens, wy ; =! 
Climing Dogs bane, |. | | *% The deſcription. 


Ogs banerifeth vp like vnto a ſmall hedge 
buſh, vprighrand ſtraight, vntill it: have 
| attained ro a certaine height;:hendork it 
 claſpeandclime with his tender branches as do 
| the Bindweeds,raking hold vp on props orpoles, 
' orwhatſocver ſtandeth hext vnto it : whereupon 
| dogrowe faire broad leaues ſharpe pointed like 
thoſe of the Bay trec,of a deep green colour. the 
| flowers come foorthatthe top of the ſtalks,con- 
fiſting of fveſmall white leaves , which being 
| paſt,thereſucceede long coddes ſet vpona fleti- 
der fooreſtalke by couples, ioynirg themlelues 
rogither at the extreme point, and likewiſe atthe 
. Rtalke}, making of two peeces knit togitherone 
' entire cod; which cod isful of ſuch downie mat- 
ter & ſeed as that pak 741 een more in quan- | 
titic by reaſon the cods arc greater,which being 
drie and ripe, the {ilken/ cotton hangeth foorth, 
 andby little: and little ſhedderh,vnull che whole 
| be fallen vpon the grounde. The whole plant 
yeeldeth thatyellowe ſtincking milkisiuicethat 
| theother doth,and ſomerimes it is of a white £0- 
| lour,according to the climate where it growett 
| forthe morecolde the countrey is, the whiteris 
the juice, and the more hor, the yellower. The 
roote is long and ſingle, with ſoiwe threds an» 
| nexed thereto, | 
| There 


—_ <4 [ 
Wo th % : l 
WIMNOSD SOR 


/ 


HIST ORIE:;OF PLANTS. _. 755 


There is another Dogs bane hat hath long & flencer ſtalkslike thoſe of the Vine,butof a brown 
reddiſh colour, wherwith it windeth it ſelfe about fuch things as ſtande neere vato it,in maner of a 
Bindweede:wherupon are ſet leaues not vnlike tothoſe of the Juice but norſo much cornered, of a 
darke greene colour , andof a ranke ſmell being bruſed berweene the fingers , yeelding foorth a 

ing yellowe milkie iuice whenitis ſobroken : among which come foorrh little white flowers, 
Ta ſcatteringly vpon little husks:after the fiowers come long cods,very like vnto Aſclepias, or 
Swallow woore,but þ reater,ſtuffed with the like ſoft downie filke, among which downeis wrapped 
vp flat blacke ſecde.The rootes are many and chreddie creeping all abour wichin the grounde,bud- 
ding foorth newe ſhootes in ſundry places, whe reby it greatly increaſeth, | 
| ES  * Theplace, | | 
They do grow naturally in Syrja,and alſo in Italy as Mathiolwereporterh : my louing friend 7-b» 
bin Herbariſt in Paris,did ſende me plants of both the kindes for mygarden, where they flower 
and flouriſh ; but whether they do growin Fraunce,,or that he procured chem from ſome other re- 
gion,as yer I haue no certaine knowledge. | 


| | * 7 he time. [ | 
They begin to bud foorch their leaues in the beginning of Maie , and ſhew their flowers in Sep- 


wr | % 7 he names. | | | 
Dogs bane is called by the learned of our age Perip/oca: it is cuident thar they arc to bereferred 
ro Aporynuws of Dioſcorides, The former of the two hath been likewiſe named rare, and Braff 
ſoa Canjns,, Ol Dogs Cole: notwithſtanding there is another Dogs cole, which is a kinde of wilde 
Mercury: we may call the firſt Creeping Dogs bane,and the other vpright or Syrian Dogs bane. 
* The temperature. | 
Theſe plants are of the nature of thar peſtilent and a ncompgan herbe Thora, which being eaten 
of dogs,or any other liuing creature,doth certainly kill them, except there be in readines an Antz- 
bte,or preſeruative againſt poiſon and giuen,which by all probabihtie is the herbe deſcribe4in the 
former chapter, called Y jncetoxicurn, euen as Anthorg is the Antidote or remedie againſt the poiſon 
of Thors, and Herba Paris againlt Pardelia nches. | Fr 
* The vertues. 
bane is a deadly and dangerous planr,ceſpecially to fower footed beaſts , for as Dio/corides 
writeth,the leaues heereof being mixed with bread and giuen, killeth dogs,woolues foxes and leo- 
rds, the vie of their legs and huckle bones being preſently raken from them, and death it (clfe fol- 
ethiincontinent,and therefore not to be vicdin medicine. | 


Of Salomons Seale. Chap.323. 


| | * The kindes. | 
T Here be diuers fortes of Salomon his ſealc , differing in leaues and fruit very hotably , buc in 
rootes there is ſmall difference. i | 


} 


* The deſcription. ji | 
I He firſtkinde of Salomons ſeale hath long round ſtalkes, ſet for the moſt part with long 
leaues, ſomewhart furrowed and ribbed, not much vnlike Plantaine, but natrower, which 
 forthemoſtpartſtandall yon one ſide of the ſtalke, and hath ſmall white flowers reſem- 
bling the flowers of Lillie Conuall : on the other ſide when the flowers be vaded,there come foorth 
round berries,which ar the firſt are greenc, and of a blacke colour tending to blewnefle z and when 
they be ripe,be of the bigneſle of Iuie berries, of an exceeding ſweete = pleaſant taſte. The roore 
Is white and thicke,full of knobs or ioints, which in ſome places reſemble the marke of aſeale,wher- 
ofI thinke it tocke the name Streriham Salomonts, and is fweeteatthe firſt, but afterwards of a bitter 
taſte, with ſomeſharpneſle. | | 

2 The ſecond kinde of Po:ygonatwns doth not much vatie from the former, fauing in the leaues 
which be narrower,atid growe round abcur the ſtalke like aſpur,in faſhion like vnto VVoodroofe,or 
red Madder; among the leauescome foorth flowers like the former, butof a greener white colovr : 
which beingpaſt,there ſucceede berries like the former,bur of a reddiſh colour. The rootes are th ic * 

and knobbie like the former,with ſome fibres annexed thereto, I - 
| | Bbb 2 | Polygonatum 


756] THE SECOND BOOKE OF;THE | 


I Polygonation. 
Salomons Seale. 


1% a K : 
4 ; | A 
+ md * os a. 4 "a 
\ 4 
bo 
d . 
; 207 wer : - - . V ;rom ” 


\ 


( \ 


mw woognt apy x 08 
* 


3 Polygonatum L.Clusy. TE}! 
_ Sweete ſmelling Salomons Seale, 


- "> * ' ®. 4 w - D . 
[ I i : 
WW a , Wy *4 " 


AXEL? 


PS by | 
J, SJE 11/9; 


4 Polygonatum ramoſin. 
Branched Salomons Seale. 


- 


L - 
\ 
\ 
" 


| |  *% Thedeſcription. | ; 
. Thethird kinde of Salomons ſeale, which Carols Cluſius founde in the woodie mountaines of 
Leitenberg.,aboue Manderſtorf,and many othermountains beyond cheTiuer Danuhbius, eſpecially 
among theftones: he ſent to London vnto Maſter Garth a worſhipfull Gentleman, and one Shar 
atiydelighterh in ſtrange plants, who very louingly imparredthe ſame vnto me. This plant hath 
tkes very like vnto the common Salomon his ſeale, a foote high, beſet with leaves vpon one ſide 
of the talke, like the firſt and common kinde, but larger and more approching to the bigneſle of 
-hebroad leated Plantaine,the taſte whereof is not very pleaſant : tromthe bofome of which leaues 
gome footth ſmall well ſmell:ng greeniſh white flowers, normuch vnlike the firſt; which being paſt, 
there follow ſeedes or berries, that are art the firſt greene;but afterward blacke; containing within 
the fame berries a ſmallſeed, as big as a Vetch, andas harde asa ſtone, "The rootes are like vnto the 
orherof his kinde,yet not ſothicke as the firſt, | | 2 OM 
The fourth kinde according tomy account, bur the third of C/u/7#5 (which he found alſo in the 
mountaines aforeſaid) groweth a foote high, but ſeldome a cubite, differing from'allthe others of 
his kinde : for his ſtalkes diuide themſelues into ſundrie other branches, which are garniſhed with 
goodly leaues, larger and ſharper pointed than any of thereſt, which do imbrace theſtalkes abour, 
after the manner of Per foliata or Thorow waxe, yet very like 'vnto the kindes of Salomons Seale 
in ſhew, ſaue that they are ſomewhat hoarie vnderneath the leaues, which are fweertcatthe firſt, in 
taſte ſomewhat ſalriſh rowards the latter end, From the backe part of the leaues ſhoote foorth ſmall, 
long, tender and crooked ſtems, bearing at the ende little gaping white flowers, not much vnlike 
Lilia connallizon, favouring like Hawthorne flowers, ſported on the inner fide with blacke ſpors ; 
which being paſt, rhere come foorth berrics like the narrow leafed Salomons ſeale; greene atthe 
firſt, and red when they be ripe, containing many white hard graines. The rootes differ from all the 
other kindes,and are like vnto the crambling rootes of 7 halztFrwm, which the graucr hath onutted 
inthe picture, \ | | | 


5 Polygonat un acutum Clusje. © 6 Polygonatumaneu#tifoliun, 
Sharpe pointed Salomons Seale. | Natrow leafed Salomons Seale, 


» 
ws # 
"OD 


+ THE SECOND..BOOKE/ OF THE 


| | | | wThedcſerp E rev 
The faftkinde of Salomons ſeale hatha thicke k roote, vaide of ſuch watkes as the tl 
kinde hath,whitc both withovr and within, andofa ſweete taſte; Abe Oe) vp fn fir 
which diuide them{clyes. into ſundrie branches ;whereuponare ſerar; certaine igints or knees on 
fing!e broad leafe, with certaine nerues or ſinewes running D—_ thelamelike Ribanan: 7 
{moothe and ſhining; trom the boſame of which leaues commeth foorth a ſlender foo iy 
whereondorh growe little fooliſh idle flowers of ſmall moment, which turne intored berries my 
they beripe. _ TH SE BE UG STI [7 HOON 643s | -þ + ty gaſ! 
Js "This nd ſortof Salomons ſeale riſeth vp from his tuberous or-knobbie roote, with a (1:4; 4 
vprighrſtalke; iointedar certaine diſtances, leauing betweenecach-ioint a bare ar naked &:jte 
{moothe and of a greeniſh colour tending royellownefle.: fromthe which iointes ; thruit oak 
diners finall branches,with fower narrow leaues ſet abour like a ſtar,or the herbe Woodioof 
which tender branchegare ſct about the ſtalkes by certaineſpaces, lang natrow leaues , inclof 
the fame round about : among which leaues come foorth ſmall whiciſh Bowers of little tegarde 
The truitis ſmall, andof a cole full of pulpe or meare ; among which is contameda hard 
ſtonie ſecede like thoſe of the firſt Salomons feats -AitÞ hrs [ny 
| || | % Theplace, [au t20 ba. 
The firſt ſort of 6 rg ſeale groweth naturally wilde in Somerſerſhire ypon the north fide 
of aplacecalled Mendip, inthe pariſhof Sheptcn Mallet; alſo in Kent by a village called Cray. 
Forde vpon Rough or Rowe hill; alfo.in Odiamparke in Hampſhire, in Bradfords wood necre to. 
_ towne in Wiltſhire fower miles from Bathe ; in a wood neere to a village called Horſley five miles 


from Gilford in Surrey,and divers other places, 


v3 
That ſort of Salomons ſeale with broad leayes growethin certaine woods in Yorkſhire called 
Clapdale woods, three miles froma village named Sertle. By BED! 
The ficſt,ſecond,and third I haue growing in my garden; the reſt are ſtrangers in England, 
They ſpring vp in/March,and ſhew thetz layers in May : the fruit is ripe in September. 
| 1 [f'} | Thenames. Lcd + 
| Salomons fealeis called in Greeke mgirerey: in Latine likewiſe Polyrenatiwn,of many knees; for 
ſo the Grecke word doth import : in ſhops Sigilium Salomonts, and Stals cel : in Engliſh likewiſe 
Seala cxli,Salomons ſeale,and white woort or white roote :in high Dutch UNteifwurtz tin French 
| Seaude Salomon : of the Hetrutians' Freſinelis Ot Fraxemela. * &y- 
| "|| 4 Thetemperature. [| 
The rootes of Salomons ſeale,as Galen ſaith,haue both amixt facultieand qualitic alſo. For they 
| haue, faith he, acertaine kinde of: aftrition or binding, and biting withall, and likewiſe a certaine 
lothſome bitrerneſle, as the ſame aythor affirmerh : which is not to befoundin thoſe that do growe 
in ourclimate, | | | i | FI; : | | 
| | $14 * The vertues. [4 | 
A Di#oſerrides writeth, that the rootes are excellent good for to ſeale orcloſe vp greene wounds be- 
 ingſtamped and laide thereon: whereupon itwas called 6igillum Saloments, of the ſingular yerte 
that ithath in ſealing, or healing vp wounds, broken bones, and ſuch.like. Some haue thoughtir 
_ wa name Sizllam, of the markes vpon the rootes : bur the firſt reaſon ſeemeth tome more 
IODADIE, | Pl Fl; ve j- | 
B : The roote of Salomons Scale ſtampedwhile it is freſh and greene, and applied, takerh awayin 
one night or twoat the no bruſc,blacke or blew ſpots gotten by fals or womens wilfulnes, in 
ſtumbling vpon their haſtie husbands fiſts,or ſuch like. | [| 
C GEnfaith,thar neither herb nor root hereof is to be given inwardly; but note what experience 
hagh found our, 8& of lace daies,eſpecially among the vulgarſort of people of Hampſhire,which Ga 
len, Dioſcorides,or any other that hath written of plants, haue not ſo much as dreamed of hich 1s; 
_ Thartjtany of what exe or age ſoeuer that chance to haue any bones broken, in what part of thei 
bodiesitbe; theirrefuge is to ſtampe the rnotes heereof, and giue it vnro the parient in ale to 
drinke , which ſoddereth andglev/erh togither the bones in verythort ſpace , and very ſtrangely, 
yea,although the bones be bur ſlcnderly and nhandlomly placed and wrapped vp. Morcouer the 
laid people do giuE itin ike maner vntothcir cattle,if they chance tohaue any bones broken, with 
| HEE I £ 


] - 


out of 


coftion thereof made in wine , helpeth any inwardebrufe, diſperſerh the congealed and clocied 


bloud,in very ſhort ſpace. 


That which might be written of this herbe, as touching the knitting of bones ( and that true. F 


) woulde ſceme vnto ſome incredible, but common exverience teacherh , that in the woride 
; ets not to be found another herbe comparable toit for the purpoſes aforeſaide; and therefore 


in briefe, if ir be for bruſes inward,the rootes mult be tamped 


andgiuen ro drinke. 


It muſt begiuen in the ſame maner to knit broken bones, againſt bruſes,blacke oc blewe markes G 


gotten by ſtripes, falles or ſuch like, againſt inflarmarion, tumors or ſwellings, that bappen vnto 
cord 699" ak are broken,or members out of "ct rafter reſtauration : CET tobe 
{mall,and applied pulris or plaiſterwiſe, wherewith many great workes haue becne perfor- 


med evan credite. 


Mathiolwreacherh that a water is drawen out ofthe roores, wherewith the women of Italic vſe H 


to ſcoure their faces from ſunne burning, freckles, morphew,or any ſuch deformitie of the skin, 


Of Knveebolme,or Butchers Broome. ('hap.32.4.. 


Ruſcnc ſive Bruſcra. 


Knceholme,or Butchers Broome 


' 
| 
% 
'/; ba * 
= 
_ 


2.3 


\ 
My IJ 


CS 
»/ _ f 
yy - 


1#. » 4 ACN ; 
% "T Ay 
XV, Iz. 
\ /, 4 " YM +**., 
2 4d 
4 
/ 


| 


& The deſcription. 
k Nechoime isalowe woodie plant, hauing di- 
uers ſmall branches or rather ny riſing 1mM- 


mediately from the ground, ofthe height of a foor, 


whereupon are ſet many leaucs like vnto thoſe of 
the Boxe tree, or rather of the Myrtle ; but ſharpe 


 andpricking atthe point, The fruit growethvpon 
. the middle rib of the leafe, greene art the fi:ſt, and 


red ascorall when itis ripe, like thoſe of T{/ara- 
ew, but bigger. The rootes are white, branched,of 
a meane thickneſſe, and full of tough ſprouting 


ſhoores thruſting foorth in other places, whereby 


it doth greatly increaſe. _ 
| % Theplace, 

It groweth plentifully inmoſt places oueey! mg 
in rough & barren grounds,efpecially vpon Hamp- 
ſteede heath ſower miles from London, indiuers 
places of Kent, Eſſex,and Barkſhire ,almoſt in euc- 
ric woodie coples and lowe woods, 

* Thetime, 

The yoong and tender ones come foorth ag 
the firſt of the ſpring, which are eaten in ſome pla- 
ces as the yoong tender ſtalkes of Aſparagus and 
ſuch like herbes. The berries are ripe in Auguſt, 

| * The nomes. Bobs: 
Itis calledin Grecke 54cm, as though they 


ſhould ſay .Heuts Myrriwe, or pricking Myrtle, and 


AMyrtus fylneftris,or wilde Myrtle: in Latine Ruſcurn 
or Xuſcas : in ſhops Braſews: of diuers Scopa rega, 
Bbbg4 as 


- 


Jfomeale or wine put therro, ſtrained, 


— 


760 THE SECOND. BOOKE OH [THE 
as teſtifieth 2ſgrcellms Empericns an olde writer : in high Durch Duet 19 

kende palm in Tcalian Ryſee,and Poxtogopr : in Spanith Grlbarbeyra: th En 
hulme,Kneehu!uer,Burchers broome,and Petigree. 


> 


r 


| wt Thetemperature, 14-] 

Theroots of Knecholme, whichbe chiefly vied, are temperartely hor, aud dric alſoin a racane, 

with a thinnefle of eſſence. | [|| w% Thewertues. | þ | | 

A Thedecottion of the rootes of Knecholme made in wine & drunken,prouckethvrine, breaketh 
the ſtone, driueth foorth grauell and fand, and eaſerh thoſe that make their water with great paine. 

B Dieſeor writeth the ſame things of the leaues and berries, which moreouer, faith he,bring downe 
the delired ficknes,helperth the headach, and the yellow iaundies. Ouer and beſides theroores d5 
ſcruetoraife vp gentlyſthe rough and groſſe flegme which ſticketh in the lungs andcheſt, and do 
concot the ſame | Fe uy 


Of Horſe toong or Double toonp. Chap. 325. 


| | | | %& Thedeſeription. [:"} 

TT Orſe toong ferdeth foorth. round ſtalks of a ſpan long ; whereupon are ſet long, broad & 

ſharp pointetl leaues, butnor pricking as are thoſe of Kneeholt,not vnlike to the leaves 

” of the Bay tree,burlefler zgreater than thoſe of Knecholme: out of the middle rib wherof 

commeth foor.h another leafe, ſharpe poitited alſo, bur ſmall, and of the bignelle of the leaſe of 

Knecholme, reſembling a lirtle roobg, From the boſome of which two leaues commeth foorh a 

berrie,of the bignefle of a Peafe, of 'colour red whea it is ripe, which is ſometimes in a manner all 

hid wnderthe leafe. The roote is white Jong and tovgh,and ofa ſweeteandpleaſant ſmell. 

2 The female Horſe toong differeth not trom the precedent bur in tarute and colour of the fruit: 

itriſeth vp (faith my author) rotheheighr of fower or fiue fingers, The berries come foorth of the 

- middle part of the greater leafe, andthe ſcrtingon of the leſler , of a faint yellowiſh red colour, 

wherein confiſteth the difference, || | \\W | Wy 

2 Thereis likewiſe ahother fortof Double roong ſet foorth by Mathiolus , which ſeemeth vnt9 
ſome to differ from the! firſt deſcribed or beſt knowne Horſe toong , 0p eruth the ſelfe ſame. 

plant without any difference : notwithſtanding T haue ſer forth the tigyre that it may appeeret9 be 


+ 


2 } , 
þ 
% 


_ theſame orverie little different, and thatnorrs be diſtinguiſhed: but Marhrolus maynot elcape 
without reprchenſion,who knowing the vntrue tran(ation of Ruelize would ſer foorth ofalſe apic- 


1 


4 - © | | 1 Hippoglo/ſu 


ture 12 his commentaries. 
"es 


f 


3' Hippog/oſſuwn Matthiol, 
Italian Horſe t 


7m 


' AISTORIE OF PLANTS. T7 


DRIES EY 


gloſſum Ffroming k 


| - | Thefemale Haile toong, 


% The place. 
Theyare founde on the Alpes of Liguria, 
and on the mountains of Auſtria, Belonize wri- 
tcth, that they do growe very plentitully abour 
the hill Achon. | | ” 
The firſt of the Horſe toongs groweth in my 
garden very plentifully, is 
" . % The time. | j 

That which growerh in my garden flowred 
in the beginningof May. The frutis ripe in the 
fall of the leafe. Fl IB 

3 *%* Thenames. 

Horſe roong is called in Greeke irntyawony; 
of the later Herbariſts Bonifatia, Vaularie, Bife 
lingua, Lingua Pezans,and Y iftoriola. The fame 
is alſo named d&rmidiie, of Ida a monntaine of 
Troy which is called Alexanders Troy: of fome 
Liurns Alexandrins, or the bay of Alexandria, 


_ and Lawrie [dei | 


This H'ppozloſſum Bontfacia is called in high 
Dutch 5a pogo inlow Dutch Tot1ghen- 
bladt : i Spaniſh Lengua de Canals : in Engliſh 
Horſe toong, Toorg blade,Double roong,and 
Laurcell of Alexandria. 
* The trmperatare. 8 

Horſe roong is cuidently hot in the ſeconde 

degree,and dric inthe ficſt, 


% The 


"— 


> | 


762 THE SECOND/BOOKE: OF, THE 


| % Thevertues. 


A Therootes of Double roong boiled in wine, andthe decoCtion drunke, helpeththeſtranguri 
prouoketh vrine,cafeth omen that haue hard rrauell in childe bearing. It expelleth the ſecondine 
or afterbirth.The roote beaten in powder,whereof ſixe drams giuen infweete wine, doth helpethe 
diſcaſes aforeſaid. It bripgeth downe the termes, as Dieſcorrdes teacheth. The like wtiteth > {ni 

alſo: adding further, rhar it cauſeth women to haue ſpeedie deliuerance, if halfe an ounce of the 
powder of the roote be giuen to drinke in a draught of ſweere wine. | {' | | 

Baptiita Sardus doth: notably commend this herbe for the diſeaſes 'of the mother : by giuing, 

faith he,a little ſpoonefull of the powder cither of the herbe, the fruir, or of theroote, to hir tharis 

_ troubled with the motherſhe is thereby foorthwith recouered. He alſo writeth, that the fame is 4 

— "ſingular good medicine for thoſe thatare burſten, if a ſpoonefull of the powder of the rogtebee 


drunke in the broth of fieth certaine daics togither. 


in Of Cucumbers. Chap.326. 


*% The kindes. 


"5 el 9 A Here be diuers ſorts of Cucumbers ; ſome greater, others lefler ; ſore of the Garden; ſome 


wilde; ſome of one faſhion z andſome of another, as ſhall be declaredin this chapter. 


©: Wh | 2 
1 Cacarms7 1 | [ -z Cucamii Turcteas. 
Common Cucumber, » | | 


Ef -. | | | 
on : > d F' Ab Y 


(- 


 % Thedefeription. 


T He Cucumber creepeth alongſt ypon the ground all abour withhis long rough branches; 
whereupon do growbroad rough leaues vneuen about the edges: from the boſome whet- 

| of come foorth crooked claſping tendrels like vnto thoſe of the Vine. The flowers 
ſhoote foorth berweene the ſtalkes and the leaues ſer vpon ſlender footeſtalkes , compoſed of fiue 
{mall yellow leaues : which being palt,the fruits ſucceedeth,which is long, cornered, rough,an"'et 


Wi 


| HISTORIE |JOF; PLANTS. | Im63 

with certaine burppes of rilings, greene atthefuſt, and yellow when theybe ripe 3! wherein is con- 
rzined ahirme and folide pulpe-or ſubſtance, tranſparent o r thorow ſhining; which cogicher with 
the {cede is catenga little before they befully rive.The ſeeds be white, long and flat; ; 

> The Turkic Cucumber hath manylong flexible branches trailing vpon the ground, ſer here 
and here by cerraine diſtances, at cueric ioint with one leafe and no more, very broad,deepcly cur 
about the edges,not vnlike to thoſe of the Pompiony among which come foorth the claſping ten- 
drels, wherewith it taketh ho:d of weedes or other herbes thatare in his way as alſo may be 1ct to 
clime vpon poles, arbors, and ſuch like , forthe ſhadowe ſake , as well as for the fruite : fromthe 
{aid joint likewiſe commerh fogrth a ſmall tender footeſtalke, whereon doth growe a little pale 
vellow flower,bell faſhion ; after which commerh the fruit creſted;chamfered,or furrowed like che 
Pompion. The meate or pulpe is more ficme and ſolide thanthat of the common Cucumber, The 
ſeede.is long, very whire,in ſhape like thoſe of the common Cucumber;bur greater, 


+ Crcumi ANguPE. 4 Cucwns Pyriformss. | 
Adders Cucumber, Pearefaſhion Cucumber, 


2 The ! '# A . F *% The dtſeription. | | 
p . re be al oof this kinde certaine long Gucumbers , which were firſt made (as it is ſaide) by 
lntle |; manuring, which narureafterwards did preferue, Foratthe firſt, when as the fruitis very 
al wig. ur into ſome hollow cane, or other thing made of purpoſe, in which the Cucumber 
WI ey 0ng.by reaforrofthat narrow hollownefle being filled vp,the Cucupber increaſeth 
oy 4 OI of this kinde of Cucumbers being ſowen , bringeth foorth not ſuch as were 
very Sr "W Spins _— mer : W _ - their owne re are found long, and oftentimes 
crooked Cucumblers, | reupon they haue beene called 2nguins, or long Qucumbers, and 
kn —_— Cucumber hath many trailing branches, lying flat vpon the grounde, 
_—_ Prickley, wheron do ſtand at each tointone great rough leate,ſharpepointed, and of an 
om greenecolour zamong which come forth claſping tendrels; & likewiſe ilender footſtalks, 


whereon 


764 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
whereon do growe ſmall yellow ſtarlike flowers, The fruite ſucceedeth, faſhionedlike a Peare, ang 
of the bignes of a great Warden. The rooteis threddic, [1 i 


© 


| Curnmis ex Hiſpanico femme nat ns. 414 
1 Spaniſh {wc any = PW * Thedeſcription. 
Fay WI — ﬀ 5 Here hath been nor long ſince ſent 
1 Ts aine ſonic feeds of a = and beau 
ucumber,into Argentine a citic of Ger. 
| manie, otherwiſecalled. Strawsborough , which 
there brought foorth long trailing braunches 
cough and hairy,ſet with very large rough leaves. 
| ſharpepointed, faſhioned hike vntothe leaues of 
the great Burre docke : among which come forth 
faire yellow flowers growing nakedlie vpon their 
tender footeſtaikes : the which being paſt, the 
- fruitecommerth in placezot afootin length,oreen 
on the ſide toward the gtound, yellowetotheſun 
warde,ſtraked with manie ſports and lines of divers 
colours, Thepulpe or meate is hard and faſt like 
thatofour PompTon, 
| " »% Theplace. 
Theſe kindes of Cucumbers are plantedin gar- 


AVE b 
\? = i&4 
*. 
KI - i — 
[1 "X./ - 
a3”. 
'- 
= 


dens in moſt countries of the world, 
| *% The time. 
According ro my promiſe heeretofore made, 
\ I haue thought it good and conuenient in this 
* Place tofet downe, not onely the time of ſowing - 
* andſettingof Cucumbers, Muskemelons, Ci. 
A, | >. NI eruls, Pompions,Gourdes,and ſuch like; bur alſo 
\ DDD ern how to ſer or fowe all manner and kindes of other 
en if  coldſcedes,as allo whatfocuer {trange feedes are 
broughe vnto vs from the Indies,or any orher hotregions,vrdel, | | | 
Firſtof allin themiddeſt of Aprill or ſorawhar ſooner ( if the weatherbe any thing temperate) 
you ſhal cauſe to be made a bedor bank of hor & new horſe dung taken fo1th of che ſtable(and not 
fromthe dunghill)of an ell in breadth,and the like in depth or thicknes,of whar length youpleale, 
according to the quantitic of your ſeed: the which bancke you ſhall cover with Hoopes and poles, 
thatyou may the more conueniently couer the whole bed or bancke with Mars , olde painted cloth, 
ſtraweor ſuchlike, to keepeir from the iniuric of the colde froſtie nightes, and not hurtthe things 
lantedinthe bed: then ſhall you couerthe bed all ouer with the moſt ferrtilleſt carth finelylifred 
lfea thicke,wherein you ſhill ſer or ſowe your ſeedes: that being done, caſt your ſtraw or 
other couexture ouer:the fame; and fo ler ir reſt without looking vpon it, ortaking away of your 
couering for the ſpace of ſeauen oreight daics ar the moſt, for commonly in that ſpace they will 
thruſtthemſelues vp nakedlie foorth of the grounde : then muſt you caft vpon them mn the hoteſt * 
time of the daie fore water that hath ſtoodevin the houſe or in the ſurine a daic beforr, bicauſe 
the water ſo caſt wo them newely taken foorth of a well or pumpe , willſo chill and coolerhem 


being brought and nouriſhed vp infuch a hot place, that preſently in one daie you haue loſt all yout 


labour; I meane not qnely your ſeede, but your bancke alſo; for in this _ the great heat of a 
dung is loſt and ſpent, keeping in memorie that cuerie night they mult bee couered and opene 

when the daic is warrmied with the ſun beames : this muſt be done from time ro tune yntill thatrhe 
plants have fower or fie leaues apeece , and thar the danger of the cold nights is paſt: rhen w_ 
they be replanted verie curiouſly with the earth ſticking to the plant as neere as may be vnto 4 

moſt fruitfull place, and where the ſunne hath moſt force in the garden; prouided that mol c 
remoouing of ther you moſt couer them with ſome Docke leaies or wilpes of ſtraw, propped P 
with forked ſtickes ,as well tokeepethem fromhe cold of the night,as allo the heate of the tunne: 


{ot 


| HISTORTE OF" PEANTS. 765 
fax they cannot whileſtthey be yoong and newly plainted,indureneirher ouermuch cold nor much 
here, vntill chey arewellrooted in theirnew place or dwelling.} | . WE — 

Ofrentimes it fallerh our that ſome ſeedes are more {rankerand forwarderthatthe reſt, which 
commonly do rite vp veric nakedlie with long necks nor vnlike tothe ſtalke of a ſmall muſhrome, 
of a night olde, [I his naked ſtalke muſt you cover with the like fine earth evento the greene leaues, 
having regard roplace your bancke ſo that it may be defended fromthe North windes, 

Obicruerheſe inſtructions diligently, and chen you ſhall nothauecaufe to complaine that your 
ſeedes were not £000, norof the intemperancic of the climare-(byrezſonwhereat youcan get no 
fruite)alchough 1 werein the furtheſt partes ofthe North of Scotland. Lk 

| | % The names. * | 


The Cucumber is named generally Cucwmy: in ſhops Cucumer : and is taken farthat which the 
Grecians call azus $ue2e« zin Latin Cucwnt ſatrates or garden Cucumber: in high Nurch- Eucumern: 
in Italian Concomero: 11 Spaniſh Cogombro : in French Concambre : m lowe Dutch Concommeren: 
in Engliſh Coweumbers and Cucumbers, | | RS, 

| | | % The temperature and pertues. | | | | 
All the Cucumbers are of temperature coldand moilt in the ſecond degree. They putrifie ſoone A 
inthe ſtomacke, and ycelde vnto the body a cold and moiſt nouriſhment, and that vecie lirtle, and 
the ſame not goad. | | , | | 
Thoſe Cucumbers muſt be choſen which are greene andnotyetripe: forwhen they are ripe and B 
yellow they be vnfir to be caren, | | 

The {cede is colde, but nothing ſo much as the fruir, It openctharidclenſerh , prouoketh vrine, C 
openerh the ſtoppings of rhe liver , helperh the cheſt and lungs that are inflammed: and being 
ſtamped and outwardly applied in ſteede of a Clenſcr,ir makerhrthe skin ſmooth and faire, 

Cucumber(faith my Author) taken in mears,is good fortheſtomacke andother partes troubled D 

with heate, It yeeldethnot any nourithmenrt that is good,in fo much as the yvnmeaſurable vie ther- 
of filierh the vaines with naughtie colde humours. | | a 

The ſeede ſtamped and made into milke like as they do with Almonds, orſtrained with milke or E 
ſwecete wine and drunke , looſeth the bellic gently, and is excellent againſt rhe exulceration of che 

bladder. = | ED "5p 
The fruite cutte in-peeces'or chopped as herbes to the pot and boiled ina ſmall pipkin with a F 
peece of mutton, being made into portage with Otemeale,euen as herbe portage are made, whereof 
-ameſſe eaten to breakefaſt, as much ro dinner, and the like to ſupper:raken in this manner for the 
ſbaceof three weekes togither without intermitſion;doth perfe&ly cure all manner of awe eflegme 
and copper faces,red and ſhining firie noles(as red as redRoſes)with pimples pumples,rubics,and 
ſuch like pretious faces, | | 

Prouided alwaies thatduring the time of curingyou do yſeto waſh or bathe the face with this G 
liquor following. | | 


Take a pinte of ſtrong white wine vineger , powder of the rootes of Ireos or Orrice three H 
dragmes, fearced or bolted into moſt fine duſt ; Brimſtone in fine pouder halfe an ounce , Cam- 
phire two dragmes , ſtamped with two blanched Almonces, fower Oke. apples cut rhorowe 
the middle, andthe jniceot fower Limons : put them all togither ina ſtrong double glaſſe , ſhake 
them togither verie ſtrongly, ſetting the ſame.inchefunne for the ſpace of tenne daies : with which 
letthe face be waſhed and bathed &aily, ſufferingir to drie of ir ſelfe without wiping iraway. This 


doth not onely helpe firie faces,bur alſo raketh away lentils, ſpots, morphew, funneburne, and all 
other deformities of the face. 


— 


Of Wilde Cucumber. (hap. 327. 


| % Thedeſeription. | 
He wildeCucumber hath many fathairic braunches,yverie rough and ful of iuice,creeping or 
trailing vpon the ground z whereupon are ſet veric rough leaues,hairie, ſharpe pointed,and 
ofan ouerworne grayiſh greene colour: from the boſome of which, come foorth long ren. 
der footeſtalks : oh the ends whereof do gxow.{mall flowers compoled of fiue ſmall lcaues of a pale 


yellow 


Ms 


766 © THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
yellowe colour: after which commeth foorth the fruite of thebignes of the ſmaleſt pullers eg 
ſomewhart Jonger, verie rough and hairic on the outſide, and of the colour and ſubſtance TP 
ſtalkes, wherein is contained verie much water and ſmall hard blackiſh ſeedes allo,of the bignesof 
rares ; which being come tomaruritic or ripenes,, it caſteth orſfquirreth fgorth his water with the 
| ſeedes, citherof itowne accord, or being touched with the moſt tender or delicate hande never ſy 
gently , and oftentimes ſtrikerh{o harde againſt choſe that couch ir (eſpecially if it chaunce ro hix | 
againſt theface) that the place ſmarreth long after; whe ot ſome it hath beene called vs; 
me tangere, Touch me nor. The roote is thicke,white, and long laſting:the whole plane as alſothe 
fruir, is veriebitter, || | 1 : | 


1 


[5 


o 
A 


l * The place. | 
! Tris found in moſt of the hot countries, among 
rubbiſh, grauell, and other vntilled places: it is 
| plantedingardens inthelowe countries, andbe. 
 1ng once planted, ſaith Dodonews, it cafily com. 
| methyp againe manyyeeresafter ( whichis true) 
and yet faith he further, thatir doth nor ſpring 
|  againeoftheroote, burof the ſeedes ſpirted or 
* caſtabout: which may likewiſe be true where he 
7 hathobſerucdir,burin wy garden it isotherwile, 
for as[ aide before,the roote is long laſting, and 
» Ccontinucth from yeere to yeere, 
| * Thetime. | 
Y A  TIrfpringeth vp in Maie, it lowreth andis ipein 
WH Autumne,andis to be garhered at the ſame tune, 
EY to make that excellent compoſition of called 
Itis called in Greeke owe dye : in Latine Agre- 
_  fluand Erraticns Cucumie: in ſhops Carumer aſm:- 
xs : in Italian Cocomero ſaluatico: in Spaniſh Co- 
 eumbrillo amargo : in Engliſh wilde Cucumber, 
_ ſpircing Cucumbers, & Touch me not:in French 
* Concombres ſaunages. - 
11 * The temperature. 


Theleaues of wild Cucumbers,rootes & their 


FI R== | S>——E  rindesas theyare bicter in taſte; ſothey belike- 
wiſe hotand clenſing, The iuiceis hot in the ſecond degree,as Galen witneſleth, and of thin parts. It 
clenſeth and waſteth away. | 6 11 


| | |*% Thevertues. || | 

A The ivice called E/ateriwm, doth purge foorth choler, flegme, and watery humours , and that 

with force,andnort onely by ficge,buralſo by vomit. = 

B Thequantitie that is to be raken at one time, is from fiue graines to ten, according to theſtrength 

of the patient. | : i | -4:-Þt..- 

The iuice dried or hardned, and the quangitie of halfe a fcruple raken, driueth foorth by ſiege 

p_ flegme, cholericke humours, and preuaileth mightily againſt the dropfie , and ſhortnes of 

_ CER (OS Rg BY | | FAY 

D Theſamedrawne yp into the noſthrils mixed with alittle milke, raketh away the rednes of the 

cles. | - L-1 | | | 
The iuice ofthe roote doth alſo purge flegme,cholericke and wateriſh humours, andis good for 

the dropſie,burnor of ſuch force as Elareriums, which is made of the iuiceof the fruite : the making 

whereof I commend tothe learned and curious apothecaries,among which number maſter #40 

 Vp;;ok5 in Bucklers Burie my louing friend, bath raken nibre paines in curious compoſing of it, - 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 767 


bach more exactly performed the fame then any other, wharſoeuer , that I hauc had any knows - 


ledge 'of, | | | 
© | Of Gtrull Cucumbers. Chap.328. | 
1 Citrulus | inariow. | 2 Citrulus minor. 


| Cirrull Cucumber, Small Citrul, © 
| —_—— p A - ome - g oY, | 
- & V3 
By 


Go % 
\) wo AD 
EM 47) 
L VN 2X Fi 
{= EF; 
- I 
TY /; 


Po 
4 


© ; 


[ 4 . 
b; ENS 
PALF 


>7;þ) | 


IL 
14<Y 
4 | , 


% 
5 
" 
” — 5 X 
- 


————— 


* The deſcription. 


I {He Citrull Cucumber hath many longyflexible,& tender ſtalks,trailing won the ground, 
branchedlike vntothe Vine , ſerwith certaine great leaues deepely cut, and veric much 
' ngged: among which come foorth long claſping rendrels,and alſo tender toorſtalkes, on- 
the endes mhcreof do growe flowers of agolde yellowe colour: the fruire is fomewhar rounde, 
ſtreakedor ribbed with certaine deepe furrowes alongſt tne ſame,of a greene colour aboue,and vn- 
derneathon thar ſide that lieth vpon the grounde ſomething white: the outwarde skin whereof is 
very ſmooth ; the meate within is indifferent harde , more like to that of the Pompion then of the 
Cucumberor muke Melon: the pulye wherein the ſeeds licth, is ſpungie and of a ſlimie fub- 
ſtance {rhe ſeede is long, flat,and greater thenthoſe of the Cycumbers : the ſhell or outward barke 
1sblackiſh jlomctimes of an ouerworne reddiſh colour. The fruite of the Citrull dothnot fo caſily 
rot or putrifie as doth the Melon, which being gathered ina faire dry day,may be kept a longtime, 
elpecially being couered ina heape of Wheate, as Mathiclus faith, but according to my praGtile 
you may keepe them much. longer and better,in a heape of dry ſande. [1 NL 
2 Theſecondkinde of Cirrull differeth nor from the former,ſauing that ir is altogither leſler,and 
eleauesarenot [6 deepely cut or iagged. wherein conſiſteth the difference, | $ 
EE pE71 * 7 he place and time. | 
TheCitrull proſpereth beſt in hot regions as in Sicilia, Apulia,Calabria,and Syria,about Alepo 
and Tripolis. We haue manie times ſowen the ſeedes and diligently oblerucd the order preſcribed 


inplanting of Cucumbers,but they neuer came to ripenes. 


5 | | - wThe 


763. THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
\ | | 1 th Thenames. = 
The later Herbariſts Co ca!l it Angarie : in ſhops Citralxe, and CacumisCitrule : in EngliſhCi. 
ruls,Cucumber Citruls,and Pome Citruls, and is knowoe by the name of Semes Citrul; or Citrull 
ſeede But if Cacwis Citrulus be fo called of the yellow colour of the Citron, then is the common 
Cucumber properly Cacwni Citrulas, which is knowne vnto all to be contrarie, 
| % The temperature and vertues. jp 
A |Themeate orpulpe of Cucumer 'Citrull which is next vnto the barke' is caten rawe, but more 
. commonly boiled: it yeelderh to the body little nouriſhment, and the ſame colde; it ingendrech 
a waterith bloud, mitigaterh the extremirie of heate of the inner parts, and tempereth the ſhary.. 
nes and feruent heat of choler: wry. 590g and helde in the mouth, itraketh away the roughnes of 
_ thetoong in agues,and quencheth thirſt. B44 
B Thelſcedsare of like facultic with thoſe of Cucumbers. 


Of the wilde Gitrull,called Colocynthis. 


hap.y29. 


1 Colocynthis. | | 2 Colocynthus pyrifermi. 
The wilde Citrull,or Coloquintida. | | Peare faſhioned Colocuintida, 


— TY 


”" CE a 
: m—_ «Y 6 % F 
FX i __ A £ "4 
"<< 5; - 4 
. — ” NN - 6 *< h ' # * 
0 EE 4 " ' iF * "+ 
w_—_— LY ” bo _ - - 
- x 22 — A . 
- . "% 
4 


<< —_— 


I " 


+1, | t* Thedeſeription. [ | 

1 FN Oloquintida hath beentaken of many to be a kinde of the wilde Gourde, but not truely: 

it licth along creeping onthe grounde as do the Cucumbers and Melons , comming nee 

__© reſtofalltothe Muske Melons, which in theſe daics of ſome Herbariſts is called Cirrull 
Cucumber,but with the greater crrour: It bringerh foorth vponhis long braunches fmall crooked 

tendrels like the Vine,and alfo very great broad leaues deepely cutoriagged : among which cane 

foorth ſmall lowers of a pale yellowe colourgthen commeth the fruite.Founde as a boule, covered 

| witha thinne rinde, of a yellowe colour whenir is ripe , which when it is pilled or pared off, the 
i white pulpeorſpungie ſubſtance appecrerh full of ſeedes, of an oueryorne browne colour; the 


fruits. 


£ 


HISTORIE OF. PLANTS. | 769 


faire ſopared or pilled, and dried tor medicine ; the which is moſt extreme bitter, and likewiſe t 

ſkrede,andrhe whole plant it ſelte inall his parts, . oo 

> Thefecondekinde of Cologuinezdehath likewiſe many long braunches and. claſj ing tendrels, 

wherwich itzaketh hold of fuch things as are neervnro it. [c bringeth toorth the like 5H not 

ſomuch iagged. The flowers are {mall and yeilow : the fruir is fathioned like a pearc,and the other * 

Gre rounde herein the efpeciall difference confiſterh. a4 
| | *% The place. 

Coloquintidz is (wen anc commerh to pertection in hot regions, but ſeldome, orneuer inthee 
northerly and cold countries, | =» 

; | | & The time. | 

tis fowen in the ſpring and bringerh his fruire ro perfeRion in Auguſt. 

[thath becne diyers times deliuerec vnto me for atruch that they do growe in the Sands of the 
Mediterrancan ſeaſſhore,or vecie neer vnto it, wilde,for everie man to gather thar liſt, ef] pecially on 
charfide of Barbarje; as alſo without the mouth of the Sereights necre to SartfaCruxandother 
places aGtacent from whence diuers Chirurgians of London that haue trauciled thither, for the 
curing of ficke and hurt men in the ſhip,haue brought great quantities thereofat their returne: 

| __ * The names. | % 

Ir is called of the ignorant Apothecarics Co/ogurmtids: in Greeke raeripls: the Latine-tranſlators 
for Colorymthrs do oftentimes fer downe Cacaurbita ſylueſtris : notwithſtanding this differeth from 
Colocym his,or wen} pre Cucurbita ſplueſtris 18 called in Greeke ronoxibaunteie, or wilde Colo- 

uintida, whereof! thall be fer foorth a peculiar Chapter next after the Cuc#rbitz or Gourde : in 
Engliſh itis called Coloquinrida,or apple of Coloquintida. | 
| % The temperature, | | 

Coloquinrida ag it is in his whole nature and in all his parts bitter, ſo is it likewiſe hot and dry in 
thelater ende of the ſecond degree: and therefore it purgerth, clenſeth , openeth and performerh 
all thoſe chings chat moſt bitter chings do : but that the ſtrongequalitie which it hath to purge by 
the ſtoole,is, as Gafez ſaith, of more torce then the reſt of his operations. | 

| %* The wertuts, | 

Which operation of purging it worketh fo violently,that.it doth noronely draw foorth legme a 
andchole: marucilous ſpeedily, and 1m very great quanriry : but oftentimes fercheth foorth bloud 
and bloudie cxcreraents,by ſhauing the gurs,and opening the cndes of the meſeraicall veines, 

Sothat therefore rhe ſame. is not tobe viedeitherra 
rreme Giſeaſe conſtraine thereunto : neither yet at all valeſſe ſome tough and claramiec thing be 
mixed therewith, whereby the vehemencie thereof may bereprefled , rhe hurtful force dulled, and 


the fame ſpeedily paſingthrough the belly, the gurs be nor fret nor ſhaued, Meſues teacheth to 


= 


mixe with it either] Maſtich,or gum Tragacanth, | be. 
There be made of it Irochiſes,or little flat cakes,with Maſtich, gum Arabick , Tragacanth and 
Bdellium ,of theſe, Maſtich hath a manifeſt binding qualitie: but rough and clammiethings are 
much better, which haue no aſtriftion at all in them, or very little, | 
Forby ſuch bingding or'aſtringent things, violent medicines being reſtrained and bridled, doc E 
aſterwarde worke their operation with mere violence, and trouble : bur ſuch as hauenotbinding 
things mixed with rhem,do cafilier worke and with leflerpaine;, as be thoſe pilles which Rhaſis in 
lus g.booke of _A4/menzor,calleth /{;ace, whichare compounded of Coloquintidaand Scamony, 
twooftheſtrongeſt medicines tar arc: and of athirdecalled gumme Sagapene, which through his 
clamminesdoth as it were daube the entrailes and guts, anddefende them from the harme that 
mighthaue come of cicher of them; , ,, OR ont | Ls 3 ; 
tis by which compoſition,alrhough irbe woonderful ſtronge & not tobe vied withour very great F 


hece i vige thereunto,gdoth nor Fandingrally purge, and without any great trouble , and 
whe fſer rorment,then moft of the mildeſt and gentleſt medicines which hawe Maſtich » & other 
rags mixed wich them that arc aftringent. as Wh | | at 

nd for GIN is, yerylike "a. Galen inhis, firſt booke of medicines according rothepla. G 
cesatfeted, would norfuffer Maſtich and Bdellium co be.in the pilles,which are ſurpamed Cochie, 


the which notwithſtanding his-ſchoolemaſter Qz-x7me wasalſo. woont before to adde vnto the 


fame. 


Bur Coloquintida is not onely good for purgations, in which itis a remedic fot the diffines or H 
| | þ 5 Ig | the 


ily, or without ſome dangerous and ex- 


| 4$ 


779 THE SECOND| BOOKE OF, THE 
the turning licknes he megcim,continuall headach,the apoplexie ,the falling ſicknes, the fufr 
of the lungs,the gnawings and gripings of the guts.andenrrailes, and other molt dangerous diſea. 
ſes,buralſoit doth outwardly worke his opetations,which are not altogither to be reieeg,. 

[ Commonoile wherein the ſame is boiled, is good againſt the ſinging in. the cares , and deafenes; 


; 


the ſamekilleth and driverh foorth all maner of wormes of the belly, and doth oftentimes proucke 
to the ſtoole,if the nauell and bortome of the belly be therewith annointed, | | 
K Being boiledin vineger,andrhe teeth waſhed therewith,it is a remedie for the toothach, as 146. 
wes teacherth, | iy | = y 
a The ſeede is very profitable to keepe and preſerue dead bodies with zeſpecially if Alces and 
Myrrhe be mixed with ir. | FR ENF 
M The white pulpe or ſpungious pith-taken inthe waight of a (cr uple, openeth the belly mightily, 
and purgeth groſlc legme,and cholericke humours, i 
N Ithaththelike force if it be boiled and laideto infuſe in wine or ale,and giuen to drinke, 
O Being taken afterthe ſame maner it profiteth the diteaſes before remembred, that is the apo. 
plexie,fallmg ſicknes giddines of the head,the colicke, looſencs of {inewes, and places ourofjoine, 
and all diſeates proceeding of colde. "4 || 


! 
[1 
: 


P Forthe ſame purpoſes it may be vſed in gliſters. [| : | 

Q The ſame boiled in oile and applied withcotton or wooll, taketh away the paine of the He- 
morrhoides. - {| 17 1 4: 4:10.48 | 

R ThedecoCtion made in wine,and vied as a famentation or bathe, bringeth downe the deſired 


Of Mucke «Melon,or eAdlllion. Chap.32 9. 


1 | | * Thekindes, ; | & 
Here be divers ſorts of Melons found at this day,differing very norablic in ſhape and porper 
alCl- 


+ tion,asalfointaſte, according to the climate and countrie where they growe: but of 

ents there was onely one and no more, which is that Adelopepo called of Galen Cucumis, or Ga/rns | 
Cucumber; notwithſtanding fome haue comprehended the Muske Melons vnder the kinds of Ci- 
truls, wherein an 6-118 greatly erred: for doubtlefſe the Muske Melon is a kinde of Cucumber, 
according to the beſt approoued authors, | & was 


| _ *% Thedeſcription. [| 

1 Hat which the later Herbariſts do call Muske Melons, is like to the common Cucumber 
aÞ3 in ſtalkes, lying flat vpon the grounde, long, branched,and rough. The leaues bemuch 2 

= like,yet arethey lefſer,rounder,and not fo cornered :the flowers in like maner be yellowe: 
the fruite is bigger,at the firit ſomewhar hairie, ſomthing long,now and then ſomewhat round; of- 
tentirnes greater, and many times leffer-: the barke or rince is of an overworne ruſler greene 
colour , nbbed and furrowed very deepely,, having often chappes|ot chinkes, and a confuſed 
roughnes: the pulpe or inner ſubſtance which'is to be caren , is of a faint yellow colovr. The wid- 
Ulepart whereof is fill of a ſlimie moiſture , among which is conteined the ſeede , like vatothoſe 
of rhe Cucumber,butlefler ,andota aps apes 2% Prot er 9973 yy a 

2 The ſugar Melon| hath long trailing ſtalkes lying vpon the groun nde , whereon are-let im 

claſping tendrels like thoſe of t eVine- and Rp Martin, the'tonimon Cucumber, but 
of a greener colour :the fruite\cormerh foorth among thoſe leaues, ſtanding vpon {lender foote- 
ſtalkes, rounde as the fruite of Cologarntid1, andof the fame bigneſle, of a moſt pleaſaut ralte like 
Sugar,whercof it tookethe ſurname Saccharat ws. IETIP pe 


| 1 Aﬀeh 
dv. 


HISTORIES |OF PLANTS! | [ani 
2 Mele Sactharinms. . | 
Sugat Mejon, | - 


wa 


| po 26s | l__—_ 
2 Pyromele, hp 4 Melo Hiſparicus: 
| Peare faſhion Melons, | AC 2. | Svaniſh Melons. 


2514327313; — FE” 
©# 


72 THE SECOND BOOKE OF, THE 


| | l || *Thedcſeription. [if 
The Peare faſhioned Melon hath many long Vinie braunches, whereupon do grow cornereg 
| leaues liketholeof the Vine, and likewiſe greatſtore of long tendrels, claſping and taking holde of 
cachthingthat it coucheth; the fruite growerh vpon flender footeſtalkes, faſhioned lil Vita 
Pearc,of the bigneſle of a great Quince, | | +0 "9 EY 
4 The Spaniſh Melon bringerh foorth long trailing branches, whereon are ſer broade lea, 
{lightly indented abour the edges,nor deuided arall,as are all the reſt\ofthe Melons, The fruit gro- 
weth neere vnto the ſtalke, like vato thecommon Pompion, very long, notcreſted or furrowedar 
all,bur ſpotted with very many ſuch markeg as are on the backeſite of the Harts toong leafe, The 
pulpe or meate is not ſo pleaſing in taſte asthe others. ox | J' 
| e461 hi # The place, 1-14 Wh] 
They delightin hotregions,notwithſtanding I haue ſcene at the Queenes houſe at Saint.lames 
very many of the firſtſort ripe,throughthediligent & curious nouriſhing of them by a skilful Gen. 
tleman the keeper of the {aid houſe, called Maſter Fowwles and ole places neere vnto the 
right Honorable, the Lord of Sex houſcof Bermondley by London, where from yecre to yeere 
there is veric great plenty,cſpeciallyifthe weather beany thing temperate. 
14 | % The time. | 4 
- Theyare ſet or ſowen in Aprill as I hauc already ſhewed inthe Chapter of Cucumber: their 
fruiceis ripe in the end of Auguſt,and ſomrtimes ſooner, | 
| * &* The names, = (Bo 
The Muske Melon is called in Latine Meh: in Italian AMelbone : in Spaniſh Mele : in French 
Mebns: in high Durch Belatm; in lowe Dutch Melornen: in Greeke wider, Which doth fig. 
nifie an apple ;andtherefore this kinde of Cucumber is more truely called u»2ominus, or Melopepon, 
by reafon that Pepo hathahe ſmell of an apple,whereto the ſmell ofchis fruit is likez having withall 
| _ the ſmell as it were of Muske: which for that cauſe are alſo named Mehnes Meſchatellini or 
Muske Mclons, : | = | | 


i | w% Thetemperature. _ WW, |2 "Ok. 
The meate ofthe Muske Melon,is very colde and moiſt. [2 ' * 8s 
+ The wertwes. | | 57-\þ 
A lrtisharderofdigeſtionthenis any of the reſt of Cucumbers:& ifitremaine long in the ſlomack 
it putrifieth , and is occaſion of peſtilent agucy , which thing alſo LAdetiuwe witneſterh inthe firſt 
booke of his Tetrables, writing that the vie of Cucameres, or Cucumbers , breedeth peſtilent fea- 
.  Uers:forhealſo taketh Cucy to be that which is commonly called Melon : which oath 
* eaten of theIralians and Spaniards , rather to repreſle the rage of luſt » then any other Phific 
VETITBE. -.--. #18 u f | NE ' 
B Theſcedeis of like operation with that of the former Cucumber. | 


Of eMelons, or Pompions. (hap. 330, 
. j | *% The kindes, 4 | bY; _ 
T Here be founde diuers kindes of Pompians which differ cither in bignes.or forme: it ſhall be 


therefore ſufficient ro deſcribe ſome oneor two of them,and referte the reſt vnto the viewe of 
_ theirfigures,whichmoſt liuely do/expreſletheir differences; ſpecially bicaule this volume wax: 


B ; 


cth grear, the deſcription ofno moment, andI haſten toanend. 


+ T, he deſcriptvon. F 


1 Mg Hegreat Melon or Pompion bringerh foorth thicke and rough prickly ſtalkes,which with | 
| T theirglaſping tendrels take holde vpon ſuch things that are neere'vnto them,aspoles,27- 
bors,pales, and hedges which vnleſle they werencere vato them would creepe 21098): 
. . onthe grounde: the leaues be wide;andgrear, veryrough , and cut with certaine deepe Þ G, 
| nicked alfoon the edges like a ſawe : the flowers be very great like ro a bell cuppe, IO 
lowe colour like golde, hauing fiue corners ſtanding out like tecth :'the'fruite is great, rk 


3 


—_— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 773 


romd, ſer with thicke ribbes like edges ſticking foorth. The pulpe or mearewherdof which js nexr 
vndec che rindeis white, and of a meane hardnes: the pithor ſubſtance in the middle is ſpungie and 
flimic : the teede 15 grear, broade, flat, ſomething white, much greater than that of the Cucumber, 
otherwiſe not differing at-altin forme. The colour of the barke or rinde is oftentimes of anob- 
{cure grecne, ſometimes graie, The rinde ofthe greene Porypion is harder, andas jitwere of a woo. 
diefubſtance : cherinde of the graie is ſofter and renderer, © ff ES [? 

2 Thelecondkinde of Melons is like vato the former in ſtalkes andleaues, andalſoinclaſping 
cendrels : but rh< gathes of the leancs arc not fo Ceepe, andthe ſtalkes be renderer; the flowers ace 
in like manner ycllowe , gaping, and cornered at the top, as bethoſe of the former : bur the fruire 
ic ſomewhat rounder ; ſornetimes greater,and manic rimes lefſer: and oftentimes of a green colour 
with an harder barke 3 nowe and then (otter and whiter, The meate within is like the former : the 
ſeedes haue alſo the iame forme, bur they be ſomewhat lefler. | | 


I Pepo m4 ximu ovlongue. 2 Pepo mWaximus rotundas. a 
| The great long Pompion, The g:eatround Pompion, 


FrerlNcu)N 


b 
Hf 
7 
77 * 
SLIT 4 
1 77 


On 


hy 


: j fy ii Y - : 
tnng, 


' 


"mW I 


{ 
431 
mn 


WU "tu 


44 
Wy 


TAU {14 
DOS 


i 
i 


N 


by A 
MAAGAAEDY 


*\ Wi, 
Mmm" vj 


Any 
COOS FIT438) . 


Y - 
- 
_ 
Cr oa 
LL 
Of 


% 


FOCUAHr 
cf 


_ C 


: { 4 7 »>- 
} 4A 
ny 


"YAY 41 


OWN 


wr 
i LL IP 


NE 


F/ 


d 


* The deſcription. 


3 Of this kinde there is alſo another Pompion like vnto the former in rough ſtalks, and in gaſhed 
and nickedleaues: the Jower is allo gzeat and yellowe , like thoſe of the others : the fruite is of a 
great bignes, whoſe barke is full of lictle bunnies or hillic welcs , as is the rinde of the Citron, 
Which is in like manner yellow when it is ripe. | | : 
4 . ihe fourth Pompion doth verie much ditfer from the others in forme: the ſtalkes, leaves, and 
flowerSare like thoſe of the reſt :but the fruite is not long or round, bur altogitherbroade, andin a 
manner flat like vnto a ſhield or buckler; thicker in the middle, thinnerin the compaſle, and curled 
or bumpe certaine places aboutthe edges , like the rugged or vneuen barke of the Pomecitron; 
the which rinde h veric ſoft,thinne, and white : the meate within is meerely hard and durable, The 
Kedeis preater thanthat of the common Cucumber,in forme and colour allone. 
| | Gee's | 2 Pedo 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
3 Pepomaximm compreſſies. | | 4 Pepomaximin clypeatus. 
The grearflarborrom'd Porppion. | |: | The great buckler Pompion, 
<1 YN ; \ Td .A F< i 


% 4 = \ In ® L < P , 
[ 2 ”y 2 © \ Y - k 6 b C : 


I, 


5 Pepo Indicuts minor rotundus. | Lo - 6 Pepe Indicus anguloſus. 


The ſmall roun{ Indian Pompipn, | | The cornered Indian Pompion; 
| | ; + | . = F793" 4 | | 


- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 775 


# Theplace.. . 

All theſe Melons or Pompions bee garden 

planes : they ioy beſt in a fruirfull ſoile, and are 

common in England z except the laſt deſcribed, 
whichisas yer a ranger, | 

* The time. | : 

They are planted at the beginning of Aprill: 


o 


chey flower un Augult: the fruite 1s ripe in Sep- 


tember.. | 
Su + The names. 

The Melon or Pompion is named in Grecke 
mimvv: in Latine likewiſe Pepo. The fruites of them 
al when they be ripe ze called by a common name 
in Greeke ximzws;: in Engliſh Millions or Pompions. 
Whereupon cerraine Phiſttions faith Ga/ex haue 
contended, that this fruit ought ro be called awe- 
T'mwr, that is to ſay in Latine, Pepo Cucwmeralis, or 
Cucumber Pompion. Rg&2y inhis 9 booke 5.chap- 
cer writeth, that C #cumeres when they excecde in 
greatunt, are named Pepones. Itis called in high 

utch Pſtiker ; in lowe Dutch Pepornen 3; in 
French Pompons. # 

% The temperature and yertnes. 

 Allthe Melons are of a coldnature, withplen- A 
tic of moiſture : they havea certaineclenſing qua- 
licie, by meanes whereof they proucke vrine, and 
do more ſpeedily paſſe through the bodie,than do 
cither the Gourd, Citrull, or Cucumber, as Galen 
hathwrirten, k 4 = 

The pulpe of the Pompion is neuer eaten raw,bur boiled, For ſo it doth mare eaſily deſcend, ma- B 
king the belly ſoluble. The nouriſhment which commerh hereof is lirtle,thin,moiſt and colde(bad, 
fic Galen ) and that eſpecially when it is notwelk digeſted : by reaſon whereof it maketh a man 
aptandreadic tofall into the diſeaſe called the Cholerike paſſion,and of ſome the Felonie, - 

The ſcede clenſerh more than the meare, it pronoketh vrine, and is good for thoſe that are trou- C 
bled with the ſtone of the kidneies. ul | 55: 

The fruit boiledin milke and buttered, is not onely a good wholeſome meate for mans bodie : D 
butbeing ſoprepared, is alſo a moſt phiſicall medicine for ſuch as haue an hot ſtomacke, andthe 


inward parts inflamed, = 4 | 
Thefleſh or pulpe of the ſameſliced and fried in a pan with butrer,js alſo a good and wholeſome E 
- meate:but baked with apples in an ouen, it doth fill the bodic full of Aatuous or windie I 


andis foode vrterly vnwholeſome for ſuch as liuc idly; but vnto robuſtious and ruſticke people, 
nothing huzteth thar filleth the belly, | \; Þ | 


Of wilde Pompions. Chap.331. 


| | * The deſeription. . | 

S there is a wilde ſort of Cucumbers, of Melons, Citruls and Gourds, fo likewiſe there be 
=\ certaine wilde Pompions, that beſa of their own nature, Theſe bring foorth rough ſtalks, 

fer with ſharp thorny prickles. The leaues be likewiſe rough: the flowers yellow as bethoſe 

ofthe garden Melon, bur euery partis leſſer, The fruite is thicke,round,and ſharpe 98-— -78y 

a hard greene rinde, Thepulpe or meate wheregf, and the middle pich, with the ſecde are like ch 

of the garden Pompion, bur very bittcrin taſte. - 

2 ſecondislike vnto the fortner Jun it iz altogither leſſer, wherein conſiſterhthe difference. 
is | "ny Ccc 4 | i Pepo 


- 


) 


THE SECOND BOOKE 'OF//THE 
1 Pepo maior ſalueHris, | [3 
The greatwilde Pompion. 


LG | oy oF * The place. [| | | 
' Theſe Melons do growe wilde in Barbarie, Atrica, and moſt partes of the caſt and wet Indies, 
They growe not in thele partes,cxcept they be ſowen. | [41 
FW | ** Theoime. prove vi} LN 
Their time of flowring and floutithing anſwererh that ofthe garden Pompion., 
| | 12144 % Thenwnes, b-4 44 | ; 
Although the ancient Phiſitions haue made no mention of theſe plants, yer the thing it ſelfe 


| doth ſhew, that there be ſuch, and olightro be called in Grecke minnied3em:i/in Latine Pepones fib 
#eſtres ; in Engliſh wilde Melonsor Pompions. IG Roam dol a: 2 210 

4 4 | | * Thetemperature, Us 7 

Like as theſe wilde Melons be altogither of theur owne nature very bitter, ſo.be they alſooftem- 
perature hot and drie,and that in the latter end of the ſecond degree. They have likewiſe aclenting 
facultie,not infctior tothe wilde Cueumbers,”' ©) +4 (ht 4. | er008 
[| ' w%Thevertues, «\ | 


A © Thewine, which when the pith and ſeede is taken foorth, is powred into the rinde, and hath re- 
mained fo long therein till ſuch time as it hecommetrh birrer, doth porge the belly, and bringeth 


foorth flegmatike and cholericke humors, To be briefe\the juice heereof is of the ſame operation 
that the wilde-Cucumberis of ; and being dried it may be vicd in ſteede of Elaterium, 
the dried tuice of the wilde Cucumber. cf red 0D ol | f 


: ® 


; E - —_ £ - 
6 +3. , , . : ' 
|| UII $5 , td | 
| . F: S - « » P F =_ 
| /CTOHYAeS.” d l | | 
[4 FB : \& S - Wo 4 52 hes Sg 0 
: #- is 4 ; . s *« © . *%. 4 | % + - « # ' 8 a . : 
. þ 6 * i ” = £#&' # ©. > + L »*% 


; | {+8 ; Ng £ _ 
| GS 2610 3 1166 vida 2uG en 
3 kindes 
&; "8+ *# © , 


Rb rs forts of Govrds, fore wilde; and others tym& or of the Batfen; ſome bringing 


foorth fruite like vnto a bortlezothers lope, bigger at unieendgkeeping no cetraine forme ot fy 


ſhzon; ſome greater,others leſler. ' 1-1 
—— i® ; [7 a x Cucprbits 


a 


HISTORIE. OF PLANTS. 7 _ 95 


Snakes Gourde. | Bortle Gourdes. 


*% The defeription. 


1 He Gourde brin goth foarch very long ſtalks} as bathoſe of thi Vine,cornered and parted 
into diuers branches, which with hisclaſpirtg tendrels raketh holde and climeth vp vpon 
ſuchthings that ſtande neere vnto it: the leaues be very grear,broad, and ſharpe pointed, 

almoſt as great as thoſe of the Clote Burre, but ſofter, and ſomewhat couered as it were with a 

white freeze , as be alſo the ſtalks and branches'y\Jikethofe of the Marſh Mallowe : the flowers be 

white,and growefoorth from the boſome of the leaues : in their places come vpthe fruite, which 
arenotall of one faſhion; for oftentimes they haue the forme of fl:gons,or bottles, with a grear. 
largebelly,anda ſmallnecke.The Gorurtifairh Plinirin his 19.booke'5.chapte?/groweth ingBuriie 
forme ortaſhion that'lyonwould haugineeither like vato-a wreathed dragon , thetegge of a ryan,or 
anyother:thapeaccording to the: miulde whergimit ispuryhiteſt it 1s/yoong 3 being ſuffered ro 
— Eimbe yponanarbot where che fruiterhay hang;,itharh becne ſeenieto benine foote long,byrea- 
don of his great waight which hath ftrerched irour tothe lengrh :therinde wherciris ripe, is veric 
hand woody andof ayellow colour :the meate orinner pulpe is white:'theſeedelong, flar, poin- 
we, with wa peakes ſtanding our like hornes; whitewithin, and ſiwecte 
Sinite;) 3byn ti" 3d ” id 5 21 jiodn ol; hoot orange dotdier ent nai: 
2 Theſccond Ciffereth not from-theprecedent inſtalkes,leaues or flowers: thefruire heeteofihs 
tor the moſt part faſhioned like a botleor fagon, whereineſpecially conſiſterh rhedifterence. * I* 
PDE OM: 3159 visZoas to: | * The dret3317 14-24%; 7 | SOON 3173243 21 O22v?. 
- TheGourds are cheriſhedin the gardens of theſecold tegions; catherfor pleaſiifethen for 6ro- 
= Ochorcounmes wheretheycomotoriperiefſs xheyaro ſometimes earsn(blewitt ſmall de- 
ling pecially, they are: keprfor the rindes, wherein they put Turpentige, Oite,Honie, and alſo 


Erue them tor pailes toferch water in, and many other the like vics. Sink 


o 


Þ + ( 


* The 


_ THE SECOND BOOKE TJ THE 


* Thetime. 
are thebeleftodmg in Aprill,cuen as we haue raughe lanting 
_—_— Gi dounhin une and Iuly the che fun erp in he endo Angut. "my a 
* The names, , 
The Gourde is calledin Greek nite Inox in Latine Cacarbits edulis, Cucarbira ſatin; of 
Cacorbite Camergris, bicaule it climerh vp, and is a for arbors and Places, 
houſes in gardens ; he calleth the other which c not vp, but lieth craw crawling 
onthegrounde,Cacaybite plebeia: in Italian Zeces : in Spaniſh Calebazza; in French Courge ; in 
CPI Rey Carmen: in Engl Gomas. | 
3 The temperature 
OTE Er onpennmectirant Reg 


| Theverracs. 
Thee being oped into the cares with oile of Roſexjs goodforrhe Paine thereof procee- 


A 
ofa hot 
» The oxmetre mitigneettiallhor Forllings if it be laide thereon i in maner of a 
Doing tedmaiem 09 8 ahrags iu | t 4" wonrny andthe inflammation of the cies, PP oth 
affirmeth thata Gourde, or elſe a Cucumber laide in the cradlegr 
© ds the yoong infan whileſt ic is allee and icke of anague, ir ſhall very quickly made 
hol 1. J 


D The pulpe alſ i earenſodden; buicauſe ichah inira wazeriſh and chime inice, it yeele- 
.  dethfmallnouriſhmenttothe dy,and thefame cold and moiſt; bur ir eaſily p pallet hotomche 
yrs bo ſodden, which by k n of the ſlipperines and moiltnesallo of his ſubſtance 


'E Bur being bakedin an ouen,or friedin a panne, ic looſeth themoRy art ofhis naturall moiſture, 
and therefore it mote ſlowly deſcenderh,and doth not mollifie the belly ſo ſoone. 
F | 16/2 = Oy; iis Ang RE; <p 


of the + wilth Gerd Cap. 3 


nrbopn, F 


« Here bas tha foanier once.d arcatuewikdeGonederl thisis like the garden Gourde 
© rence wry. hiphagrendertpand oltlaaner,andee were downie , all andeuerie 
one of farre leſſer; this alſo climerh ypon arbors and banquerting 
houſes: wm ap doth repreſent the greatbellied Gourde , and thoſethar be like vnto botrles in 
; es itis very far inferior; for it is ſmall & ſcarſe ſo grear as an ordinary 
ee aheden compaſle of a mans hande : the outwarde rinde at the firſt is greeneafter- 
wards itis as harde as we. ng and of the colour thereof; the inner pulpe is moiſt and very fullof 
iuice,in which lieththe ſeede: the whole is as bitter as Coloquintida, which hath made ſo manie 
errours,one ef] in taking the fruit Coloquintida for the wilde Gourde. 
2 Theſcconde wilde Gourde hath likewiſe many trailing branches andclaſpi ping rendrelsgwher 
with it takerh holde of ſuch things as be neere vntoir: theTeaues be broad ,deepely cur into divers 
ſcQions, like thoſe ofthe Vine, ſoft and very downy , wherby itis eſpeciallyknowntobe oneofthe 
Gourdes: :theflowers bexerywhite,as are llorhoſe of the Gourdes :the fruite ſucceedeth grow 
— A NHS HR02s.41 roman 4.c99y —_ —_— ——— — cooke bus fut- 
Name. 
| ; 1 Cucurbits 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


dunartils Aivewaris ſrineftiris. | Caen pp _ effi Ss” 
"v 11de oo Gourde. Muſh wildeG = 


7s uh. 
2 


WY ; 
W w-} 


Theydo grow of themſclues wildei in hot regions, ws neuer come to peretion of ripenes in 

theſe cold countries. 
*% The time. 

The time anſwereth thoſe of the garden. 
% The names. 

Thewilde Gourd is called in Grecke Kexinyrle «xi: in Latine Cocuybits ft w_ ,or wilde Gourd, 
Mmnje nthis/ 20. bookethirde Chaprer, affirmerh thatthe wilde Gourde is named of the Grecians 

"=, which is hollowe, an inch thicke, not gbut among ſtones, the iuice whereof being 
chewed js ſingular for rhe ſtomacke: Bur the wilde-Gourd is nor that which is fadefcribeds 
oritis abouear! jnchthicke, neither is it hollow , burfull of juice: andby reaſon of the extreame* 
we tothe ſtomacke. -... 
Some therebealforhat rake-this for Coloquintida, burthey are {; weacdeneivnd For Colocyn-: 
wilde Cirrull Cucynierwhereobwe haue intreated inthe chap. of Citruls, 
* The temperature. 
The wilde Gourdei 15as hot and drie as Coloqumtida,thatis to fay,in in the ſecond degree, 
vt The vertues. 

Thewilde Go Gogedis extreme bitrer, for which cauſe it openeth and hum the ſtopped paſſa- A 

ge5of the bodie,it alſo purgeth downwards,as dowilde Melons. 
er, the wine which hath conrinued all night in this Gourd, doth kkewiſe prnge the belly B 
in andbringech forchebolarickeand flegmaricke humors, 
. of 


THE SECOND BOOKE OP THE 


Of Potatoes. Chap.334. | 


F 


/ | | ; 48 
SHarwnr Ferumanwn ſine Batata Hiſpano: um. 
Porartus or Porarocs, 1 fl: 


| *%'7 hedeſeription. 
- His plant which 1s called of ſome Sifarws 
FT Perunianm, or Skyirits of Pery, is gene. 
'. rallyof vscalied Poratus or Poratces, I; 
hath long roughflewble branches trailing vpon 
the ground,like vto Pompions ; whereupan are 
ſer rough hairie leaues,very like vnto thole ofthe 
wilde Cucumber. There is not any that hath 
written of this plant, or ſaide any thing of the 
flowers, thereforcI refer the deſcription thereof 
vnto thoſe thar ſhall heereafter bd further 
knowledge of the ſame:yer hauc Thad inmygar. 
den divers roots that haue floriſhed vntothe 
approch of winter, & haue growen vnto agrear 
length of branches, but they brought not foorth 
any flowers at all z whether bicauſe the winter 
cauſedrhemto periſh before their time of flow. 
ring, ot that they'be of nature barren of flowers, 
I am1notcertaine, The rootes are many, thicke, 
andknobbie, like vnrothe rootes of Pejonies, or 
rather ofthe white Aſphodill, ioined rogithergr 
the rop into one head, in mannerof the Skyrrir, 
which being diuided into diuers parts andplan- 
t:d, do make a grear increaſe, eſpecially if the 
greateſt roores be cur into divers gobbers, and 
planted in good and ſertili-ground, 
by \* Theplace, 
| B { The Potatoes grow in India, Barbarie,Spaine, 
and other hotre regions, of which Iplanted divers rootes ( char Ibought at the exchange in Lon- 
don)in my garden,whece they Qouriſhed votill A which cime they periſhed androrted, 
| ; '*% Thetime. [| (fe 
It ouriſheth vnto the end of September: at the firſt approch of great froſts,the leaues togither 
withrthe rootes and talkes do periſh, L885 = 
| | | 3% The names. 4 3s 
Clefrs callethit Battsts, Camores, Amtes, and Jenenes : in Engliſh Potatoes , Potatus, and 
Potades. | | a.& kF .| 


; 3 | ES *%* 7 he nature, | | | | | 
Theleauesof Poratoes arc hot and drie, as may evidently appeere by theraſte. The rootes xe 
of a temperate qual iric. : 8 b- 3 


7 
o i4 


: al | '% Thewvertues. [ge 19,4 * 
A ThePoratoe rbores are among the Spaniards, Italians, Indians, and many other nationscom- 
mon and ordinarie meate, which no dotthtare of mightic —_—_ do urs e1nyo 
comfort nature, whoſe nutriment is as it were a meane betwcenefleſh and fruit, though p l 
windie; but being roſted in the embers,they do loſe much of their windineſle eſpecially being cate 
ſoppedin wine. | HL, i | | 

B 5 f theſe rootes may be made conſernes,no lefſe roothſome,wholeſome,and daintie,than ofthe 
fleſh of Quinces. And likewite rheſe comfortable and delicate meares,calledinihops Mer ſells, Fla- 
centule and diners other ſuch like. | 3 Ta i conch 


C Theſerootes may ſerue as a ground or foundation, whereon thecunning confectioner or » 4 
baker may worke and frame many comfortable delicate conſerves and reſtorative ſweets me? 4 


« 


HISTORIE -OF PLANTS. _ 781 
They are vſed to be eaten roſted in the aſhies; ſome when they be ſo roſted, infuſe them, and ſop D 
them in wine: andorhers to prong rh6greater grace incating, doboilethem with prunes,and 
ſeate them. And likewiſe others drefle them (being firſt roſted) with oile, vineger and falr, cuery 
an according to his owne taſte andliking : notwithſtanding, howſocuer they be dreſſed, they 
— ,and ſtrengthen the bodie,procure bodily luſt and that with greegineſle, 


"Of Potatoes of Virema. ” (hap.335- 


n % Buttata Vir inians ſe Virginiatorum, ct P apps. 


. -, Potatoes. 0L VIrgWmia, 5 *+ The deſcription. 


Irginia Potatoes hath many 
hollowe flexible branches, 
trailing vppen the grounde, 
ree ſquare, vneuen, knotted or 
kneed in ſundry places at certaine 
diſtances ; from the which knots 
commieth: foorth one great leafe 
wade of diuers leaues, ſome ſinal- 
ler, & others greater, ſetrogither 
1 / - vpon a fat middletib bycauples; 
Ty. of a fwart greene colour tending 
7 torednes. The whole leafe reſem- 
bling thoſe of the Parſnep,in taſte 
at the firſt liks grafle, bur after- 
ward ſharp &n| the roong : 
fromthe boſome of wich leaves 
come foorth long rounde ſlender 
footſtalks, wheteon do grow very 
faire and pleaſant flowers , made 
of oneentire whole leafe, whichis 
folded or plaited in ſuch ſtrange 
& ſort, thatit ſeemeth to be a flower 
IS madeof fixe (i undrie ſmall leaues, 
which cannot eaſily be perceiued, 
except the ſame be ulled open. 
1t The colour whereof it is hard to _ 
; __ The whole flower is of a 
 lightpurplecolor, ſtrippeddown 
9 «ny  OEY 2t'S EY _ __© the middicof every folde orwelr, 
with a light ſhewof yellownes, asthough purple and yellow were mixed togirher: in the middle 
of the bes thruſteth foorth "ke Ea poincell, yellow as golde, with a {mall ſharpegrecne 
icke or paint. inthe middeſt-thercof.. ſhe fruite ſucceedeth the flowers, round as a ball, of the 
ev of a little bullefſe or wilde Plum, greene at the firſt, and blacke when ris ripe; wherein is 
contained ſmall whitk ſecde, leffer than thoſe of Muttarde. The roote 15 thicke,fat, and euberous ; 
notmuch differing eirhicr in ſhape, colout or taſte from the common Potatoes , fauing that the 
footes hereof are not fo greatnorlongz ſome of them round as a ball, ſome ouall or egge faſhion, 
ſome longer, and others ſhorter : wihichknobbie roetes are faſtencd vnto the ſtalkes with an inft- 
te number of chreddie ſtrings. FEISD 


; Ka rs rerh naturally in, America nn onuered asreporerh C.Cluſine,fince which 
tne have recgiueds - hereof from Virginia, otherwilecalled Norembega, which growe and 
Proſper in my garden, as in their ap/Ne BAUUE COUnUIE, rig "4-20 þ Ny, 


O82 THE SECOND BOOKE OF.THE 
The leaues thruſtfoorth of the ground inthe beginningof May: the flowers bud foorthin An. 
guſt, The fruit is ripe in September, fl | 44 | 
| | F: | þ *% The names. #-t | LL 
. The Indiansdocall this plant Pap» ( meaning therootes) by which name alſo the commonÞ,g. 
ray are calledinthoſe Indian countries... We haue the name proper vnto ir; mentionedin theti. 
le. Bicauſe it hath nor onely the ſhape and proportion of Potatoes, but alſothe pleafanttaſte ang 
vertues ofthe ſame,ye may call itin Engliſh/Poratoes of America,or Virginia. 
| oa | X* The temperature and vertues. | | | 
The temperature and vertues are Tteferred vnto the common Potatoes; being likewiſe 2 foode, 
as alſo a meate for pleaſure, equall' in goodnefſe and wholeſomneſſe vnro the ſame, being either 
roſted in the embers, or bolled andeaten with oile,vineger and pepper or dreſſed any other way by 
the hand of ſome cunning in cookerie, |. RS iy i 


Of the garden <M allow called Hollibocke. | Chap.3z6 2 


Here be diuers ſortes or kindes af Mallowes ; ſome of the gar : there be alſo ſome of the 
matlh orſea ſhere; others of the-ficld, and both wilde, Andfirſt of the garden Malloweor 
Hollihocke. | | ; 't | Fl: | 


x ateboloating. || | i. 2 Maln roſea ſaplex peregrine 


Single garden Hollihocke, —=|_ lagged ſtrange Hollihocke, 


<E 
| j "RL V f = | 
PF 0> \O) 
G & 4 "Dy ; 


a 
po 


| | + Theitfriptin, 
I Hetame or garden Mallow bringeth broad round leanes of a whitiſh greene £0- 


lour,rough and greater than tholepfthe wild Mallow. The ſtatke is ſtraighr,of the height 
ot tower or lixe cubirs'z whereon: doe growe von flender footeſtalkes ſingle —— 


wel 


| | RES TORIES DE SLANETS HAY :-- 783 
ot much vnlike to the wilde Mallow bur greater,conſiſting onely of five leaves, ſometimes white» 
orred; now and hen of a deepe purple colour,yarying diverily as nature litcoplay with it:intheir 

laces growerh vp a round knop like a little cake , compact or made vp of a multitude of flatſcedes 
Leh echeeſes,Theroote is long,white,tough,cafily bowed,and groweth deepe in the ground. 
}. Theſecond beingaſtrange kindof Hollihock,hath likewiſe broad leaues, rough and hoarie,or 
of an ouerwornerullet colour, cur into diuers ſeftions cuento the middle rib, like thoſe of Palma 
Chriſti. The flowers are very ſingle, bur of a perfe@ red colour, wherein confiſterh the greateſt | 
difference. || +: | {En | 

4#+:4% | | | 


| | by 5 , 
| 2 Muluapurpures multiplex, | 4 Malua hortenſis multiplici flore. 
| 5 po_oy rar''2 ? Double Scarlec Holl 


thocke. _ 


 £ : _ 
- OD \ 
\ += ” S = 
OY o- \ 


A\\ 


bo 


= 
Y 


% 
N Js Þ 
"3Þ 
7 Ve 


EY, C®: * The deſcription. 


3 The double Hollihocke with purple flowers hath greatbroade leaues , confuſedly indented 
adout the edges, and likewiſetoothed like a ſawe, The ſtalke groweth to the height of fower or fiue | 
cubits.The flowers are double,and of a bright purple colour. | y | 
4 Thegarden Hollihocke with double flowers of the colour of ſcarlet, groweth to the height of 
 fioeorfixe cubires, hauing many broad leaues cut abour the edges. Theſtalke and roore'is uſe the 
precedent. £1911 | | | Pj 
FA 4+ ed | | | 2- - We* 
5 Thetree Mallow is likewiſe one of the Hollihocks zit bri forth a grear ſtalke ofthe heighr 
oftenor twelue foote, growing ta the forme of a ſmall tree, whereon are \ Pune divers greatbroad 
leaue3 of aruſſer green colour, not vnlike to thoſe of the great Clote Burre Docke, deepely inden- 
tedahour the edges. The flowers are very greatand doablote the greateſt Roſe,or double Peionie, 
oad:epredcolourtending toblackneſle, Theroote is great, thick, and of a woodie ſubſtance, as 
thereſt of the plant, LT {1 32566" | | 220] 4 
| | 5 Mali 
. 4 


23: THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


healer barice florenigro multip{ct. i | | þ 
Tree Hollihocke with double Jovers. | © * Thep {zce. 
/ Theſe Hollihockes are ſowen in gardens , 41. 
moſt cuery where, and arc in vaine ſoughy for elle 
where, ff 3B, 
'%* The time. » 14 0 
The ſeconde yeete atter they are ſowen 
bring foorch their flowers in luly and &x, jr 
when the ſecede is ripe the ſtalke withereth)the 
roote remaineth and ſendeth foorth new ſtalkes, 
leaues and flowers,many yeeres after. 
The Hollihocke is called in Grecke waz, of 
diuers Roſa o/tramarine, or outlandith Roſe, and 
| Roſa hyemalis,or winter Roſe. Andthis is tharRoſe 
which Playin his 21, booke 4. chapter writethto | 
haue the ſtalke of a Mallowe, and the leaues of a 
otherbe , which they call Mofceuton; in high 
Durch Garten pappeln: in lowe Dutchgze 
ter Rooſen: in Frebch XRo/e # outre mer; inEn- 
gliſh Hollihocke,and Hockes, | 
| *% The temperature. (RY 
The Hollihocke is mectely hot, and alſomoiſ,, 
burtnot ſo much asthe wilde Mallowe; it hath 
likewiſe aclammie ſubſtance, which is more ma- 
niteſt in the ſeede and roote, then inany other 
_ part. a, 
2 The wertnes. | 
A | i [fl The decoftion ofthe flowers, eſpecially thoſe 
of the red colour, doth ſtoppe the ouermuch flowing of the monthly courſes, if they be boyled in 
reg wine. j | = 


[4 


mY 


Of thewilde Mallowe. Chap.337. : 


i 


' . 
my | 
fi 


+ 7 he d:ſeription. 


I He wilde Mallowe hath broade leaues ſomewhat rounde and cornered , nicktaboutthe 


| . 


edges, ſmooth, and greene of colour : among which riſe vp many {lender rough ſtalkes, 
cl5d with he like leaues;bur ſmaller, The lowers growe vpon little footeſtalks of 3 red- 

diſh colour mixed with purple ſtrakes, faſhioned like a bell: after which commeth vp a knap « 

round burton,like vnto a flat cake,compaRofmanyimall ſeedes. The roote is white, tough and 

of aſlimie iuice,as is allrhe reſt of the plant. bites [3 | 

2 Thedwatfe wilde Mallowe excepeth ypon the grounde: the ſtalkes are lender and weake, yt 

rough and fiexible, The leaues be rounder, and mare hoaric then theother. [The. fiowers are 

and ofa white colour, The roote and {cede is like the precedent, | |: | 


F-Y 


W.7.. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. , 785 


1 Aland hluetris. | ; | 2 Malua /rlueſtris penile. 
The ficlde Mallowe, The wilde dwarfe Mallowe. 


(V9. 


"a 


7 it a 2 IJ F 

3 Meluacriſþe. 4 Malus verbenaca. 

© The French curled Mallowe, Veruaine Mallowe, 
—_ SME RI v 


585 _ THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| | | w Thedeſeription. ez 
Thecriſpe or curled Mallowe, called of the vulgar ſort French Mallowes , hath many ſmall, 
right ſtalkes, growing ro the height of acubite, andſomerimes higherz whereon do growe broade 
leaues ſomewhat round & ſmooth of a light greene colour, vlaited or curled abouc the brims like a 
reffe.The flowers be ſmall and white. lhe rote periſherh when it hath perfeQed his ſeede, © 
4 Theveruaine Mallowe hith many ſtraight ſtalks,whereon do growe divers leaves deepely cur 
andiaggedcuen to the middle rib, nor vnlike to the leaues of Veruaine, whereof it tooke his name: 
among which come foorth faire and pleaſant flowers like vnto thoſe of the common Mallowe in 


forme,burt of a more bright red colgur,mixed with ſtripes of purple, which ſerterh foorth the beau. 


tie. The roote is thicke and continueth many veeres. 


s {} % The place. Et h 
The two firſt Mallowes growein! vntoiled places among portherbes, by high waics.and the bor. 
ders of fieldes, _ | | | | So 
| The French Mallowe is an excellent potherbe,for the which cauſe it is ſowen in gardens, and is - 
notto be found wilde that Iknow of | 1 | | 
The Veruaine Mallowe growethnot euery where; it groweth by the ditch ſides, on the left hand 
of the vlace of execution by London (called Tyborne: alſo ina fielde neere vnto a village fourteene 
miles from London called Buthey , onthe backſide of agentlemans houſe named maſter zobert 
!lylbrahbam;\ikewile among the buſhes and hedges as you go from London toa bathing placecal- 
led the Old Foorde; and in the buſhes as you go to Hackney a village by London m the cloſes 
next the towne , and diucrs other places , as at Baſſingburne in Hartfardjhite three miles from 
Roiſton, [| | *% The time, THIS 1208 5 nm 
Theſe wilde Mallowes do flower from Iune till ſommer be well ſpent : in the meane rime their 
ſeede alſo waxeth ripe, |! * The names. | EEC | 
The wilde Mallowe is called in Latine Mates /5/ue{ris: in Greekedzons, a5 though they ſhoulde 
ſay a mitigator of paine : of ſome Oftri4cs: in high Dutch Pappeln: in lowe Dutch Baluwe, and 
Keeſkens crutt t in Engliſh Mallowe, | | | 


j z 


The Veruaine Mallowe is called of Djoſcorides Alcea: in Greeke alſo<uia, of fome Herbs Hungs- 

rice,and Herba Simeons,or Simons Mallowe : in Engliſh Veruaine Mallowe and cut Mallowe, 
The name of this herbe Maze, Teemethro come from the Hebrewes, whocall itin their roong 

">>, Milluach,of the {almncle, bicanfe the Mallowe groweth in ſaltiſh and olde ruinous places , as 
dunghils and ſuch like, which in moſt abundant maner yeeldeth forth ſaleperer & ſuchlike matter: | 
for -5s, Melach fignifieth ſalt.as the learned knowe: I am perſwaded that the Latine worde Melua, 
commeth from the Chaldee' name Mallika, the gutturall letter n Ch, being left our for good 
foundes fake : ſo that it were bertret in this word-Maly to read was a vowell, then asa conſonant, 
which wordes are vrterced by the learned door Rabbi Dauid Kimbi,& leeme to carrica great ſhew 
of rruth :in Engliſh ic js called Mallawe, which name commeth ſo neere as may be tothe Hebrewe 

. worde, | | | "*% Ther e1per at are. 4-34 [ ] 

The wilde Mallowes haue a certaine motierate and middle heate,and moiſtnes withall : the iuice 
chereof is flimie,clainmic, or gluing, the which are to be preferred before the garden Mallowe or 
Hollihocke , as Dephiles Siphinus m Athenems doth rightly thinke, who plainly ſheweth, thatthe 
wilde Mallowe is berter then that of the garden :alrhough ſome do prefetre the Hollihocke, wher- 
unto we may not conſent,neithet yet veela vnto Galen, whois wi” thar minde, yer ſtandeth 
he doubtfull : for the wilde Mallowe withour controuerfie is fitterto be: eaten , and more pleaſant 
thenihofe ofthe garden,except the French Mallowe , which is generally holden for the whole- 
[omeſt, and among the potherbzs not the leaſt commended by Heſiodas; of whole opinion was He- 

' 1ace,writing in his ſeconde Ode of His Epodpy, | 6 FEE 
"Is += gra | Malne ſalubnes cor pore. $I 
£13.1f chat of healch voy hauec any ſpeciall care, | | 
Ws /7 VieFrench Mallowes that tothe body holſomeare, | | 
TheMallow faith Ga» dothnouriſh moderately; ingendreth' grofle bloude/:keeperh the bodie 
ſoluble, andlooſerh the belly that is bound, Ie eafily deſceadeth nor onelybicaulc it is moilt, but 


- allo by rea(on it is ſlime, | | | | 
| | + Thevomes Wl | -jþ 
A Thelcaucs of Mallowes are gead againſt the ſtinging of ſcorpions, bees, waſpes, and ſuch like: 


and 


' .HISTORIE- OF PLANTS, | 787 
andif a man be firſt anointed with the leaues ſtamped witli a little oile, he ſhall not be ſhing ar all 
us Doſcorides faith. eo df SR RG LOSIRAOKD © 
* The decotionof Mallowes wirhtheirrootes:drunken;jare good againſtall venome-and poiſon, B 
ifiche incontinently caken afterthe poiſon, forhar it be vewrited vpagaive, js 29 od 

The leaves of: Mallowes bored ti}t rheybe fotrand applied,do mollifiecumours and harde fel. C 
lngsofche mother,if they do withalbfir ouedthe fume chereot,and bathe chemſclues therewith, 

The decoction vied/in gliſtersis good againſt che roughnes and fretting of the gues , bladder, D 

andfundament.|.. *  o2190Þ7 bo 46 2pm £15 S075, yalitts 24 broth 

Therootes of the Veruaine -Mallowe do hedle the bloudic flixe and inwardburſtings, if they be E 


[| 
' 
: | ; 
b fl 
£ 
i 
J 


drunke with wine! and waterzas Dj oſcoridesand Panius AEginerateſtific. 
[ 0, f. Aarſhe Mallowe. Cha (Þ.32 g: 


| * The kindcs. | 
There be divers ſorts of Marſh Mallowes ,diftering very notably as ſhallbe declared. 


1 Althea tbiſcws, 2 Althelpalsfris. 
Marſh Mallowe, | | Water Mallowe, 
PZASDD AZ GT 


* The deſcription. 


| Arſh Mallowe is atfo a certaine kinde of wilde Mallowe :it hath broadeleaues, fmallto- 
ward thepoint,foft, white,and freezed or cottoned, and {lightly nicked-abour theedges; 

the ſtalkes be tounde and ſtraight, three or fower foore high, ofa whitiſh graieecolours 
do grow flowers like vnto thole of the wilde Mallowes , yer notred as they areur com 
hite,ox of a very light purple colour out of a white; rheknoppe or round burton wherein 


.: Whereon 
monly w 


4 


738 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
the ſcedes lie,js like that ofthe firſt wilde Mallowe. The roote is thicke, tough, whice within and 
containeth init a clammicandilimie iuice. | | iy 

2 This ſtrangekinde of Mallowe is holden amongſt the beſt writers to be a kinde of marſhMy 
lowe: ſome excellent in Herbarifnie, haue ſec it downe for Side Theophraſti, whereunto it fully uf 
ſwererh;it hath ſtalkes rwo cubits high,whereon are ſet without order many broade leaves, hoatie 
and whitiſh,nor vnlike to thoſe ofthe other marſh Mallow, of a purple colour tending to rela 
thatis of a Citrine colour, or the colout of the Pomgranate flowers : after which there come 
round bladders of a pale colour,in ſhape like the fruite or ſeed veſſels of round _451ftochia,or Birth 
woort,whercin is conteined round blacke ſecede, The roote is thicke andrough, nuch like thoſe of 
the common Mallowe, | + b: (93771 52814 


3 Althas arboreſcens, © [ 4 Althes futex Cluſi. 
| Tree Mallowe. || [ Shrubbed Mallowe, 


. : 
6 
= 


* The aeſer iption. 


3 This wilde Mallow is likewiſe referred mo thoſe of the marſh Mallow, called generally bythe 
name of Althes,which growerh to the forme ofa ſmall oo tree,approching neerer t6 the ſub- 


ſtance ornature of woode then any of the other , wherewith the people of Olbia and Narbone in 
Fraunce do make hedges, to ſcuer or diuide their gardens & vineyards(euen as we do with _ 
ſers of priuet orthotne) which continuerh long: the ſtalke whereof groweth vpri ghr,very igh, 
comming neere tothe Willowe in woodinefſe and ſubſtance. The flowers grow alongſtthe fame, 
in faſhion and colourof the comman wilde Mallowe. Fi: 419 pe 
4 Theihrubbic Mallowe riſeth vp like vnto a hedge buſh, and of a woodie ſubſtance, dinjding 1t 
ſelfe into diuers tough and limber branches, couered with a barke of thecolour of aſhes , where: 
upon doegrowe rounde pointed leaues, ſormewhar nickt about the edges, very ſoft, not vtulike t9 
thoſe of the common marſh 'Vallow,and ofan ouerworne hoarie colour; the flow ers do growe 3 
the top ofthe ſtalkes, of a purplecolour , conſiſting of fiue leaues,very like tothe common wilde 
Mallowe,and the ſcede of the marſh Mallowe. JE 6 ns on 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 589 

We haue another ſore of Mallow called of Pens Frutico/jor Pentaphylle folto; it bringeth foorth 
inmy garden many twiggic braunches, ſer ypon ſtiffe (taſkes, of the bignes of a mans rhawbe, 
cowing £o the height of ten or twelue foote : whereupon are ſet very many leaues decpc. 
Ficut, cuen to the middle ribbe, like vnto the leaues of Hempe , or rather thoſe of theredde 
Cinquefoile,called Pentaphyllum rubrwn, vhereofit tooke this additament Pentaphylle : the flowers 


and tceds are hike ynto the common Mallow : the roote is excecdin 


- ſubkance. 


g great,thicke, and of awoodic 
* The place. | | 

Thecommon marih Mallowe groweth very plenrifully in che marſhes, both on the Kenrith . 
and Eſſex ſhore alongſt the river of Thames,abour Woolwich, Erith, Greenehyth, Graveſend, 
Tilburie, Lee, Colcheſter, Harwich, and in mo falt marſhes about London; being planted Te 
oardens it proſpereth well,and continueth long, | I 

The ſecond groweth inthe moiſt and fennie grounds of Ferraria , betweene Padua in Iralje and 
the river Errdanm Athenens alleaging Theophy aſt es ſheweth that it groweth in the lake Orchome- | 
nizm,wheretheir catrle feede on the branches therof,& the ſwineon thetender buds: Theophraſtics 
ſheweth that three things do growe in this lake, S742 , Bowromen,and Phleon ,that is, water Lillie 
faie ſome authors (making this kinde ofmarſh Mallowe, a kinde of water Lillie) Recde Grafle,and 
Cats raile,orReede Mace, | F | 


: 


The others are ſtrangers likewiſe in England notwithſtanding at the impreſſion 


- 


ſowen ſome ſeedes of them in my garden,cxpecting the ſucceſle. | 
- | | * Thetime. | | 
Theyflower and flouriſh in Iuly and Auguſt; the roote ſpringethf50:th a freſh| cucry yeere in 
the beginning of March,which are then to be garhered,or in September, | Vt 
#=::6 & The names. | | 
The common marſh Mallowe is called in Greeke Arleiz, and 42x; : the Latines retaine rhe 
names Alrhes,and brews +in ſhops Bifſmalua, and Malnaniſems, as though they ſhoulde faie, ans 
Ibiſew: in high Dinch Jbifch : in lowe Dutch Unitte Baluwe , and U7Ittten Demit 3 in Italian 
and Spaniſh Ualkuaniſeo :in French Guimaulye: in En gliſh marſh Mallow, mooriſh Mallowe, and 
white Mallowe. |: | | 2 
The ſecond marſh Mallow is called of Theophraitus Sid, of the Greeke worde|=i», by reaſon 
tharthe flower thereotis like, or of the colour of Ba/a»ſtiwrm, or the flowers of Pomegranates, ©  — 
The ret ofthe Mallowes retaine the names exvreſledin their {euerall titles, 
[ [| , 3. The temperature. | 
Marſh Mallowe is moderately hor, bur drier then the other Mallowes: the rootes and ſeedes 
hereof are more drie,andof thinner patts as Galen writethzand likewiſe of a digeſting,foftning,or 


heereof, Lhaue 


mollifying nature. | | | 

| Th * Thevertues.” FEOrY 

Theleaues of marſh Mallowe are of power to digelt, {lacken, to mittigate paine, and to con- A 
Theybewith good effe&mixed with fomentations andyvlreſes againſt paine of the fides, o/ 

the ſtone, andof the bladder;ina bath alio they ſerue to take away any maner of paj1e. 


_  Thedecoctionef the Jeaues drunke.doth the ſame, which alſo doth not onely affiwage paine, C 


which proceedeth of the ſtone, bur alſo 4s ric good tocaule the ſame to defcende more eati!y, 
andro paſlefoorth. / / ,, M | dh 1 EEATICE. 
The rootes and ſeeds are profitable forthe fame purpoſe: morcouer the decoftionof the roots ! * 
:elpeth che bloudie fixe,yernort by any binding qualitic, but by mitigating the gripings andtret- 
ungs thereof: for they do.not-binde'at all,,although Galen otherwite thought; buethey cure the, 
bloudie flixe;by hauing things added vnrochem,as'therootes of 5;#ort,cailed Patience, Tonnen- 
ulthe flowers and rindes of Pomegranates,and ſuch bke, my? 4-41 
- Themucilage ar limie, juice of the rootes, is. mixed very cficctually with alloiles, ointmenrs,;}E 
andplaiſters.that{lacken and mitigate Paine; :'. 1117 4 TIE 639 
Tixerootes boiled in wine,and the decoction giuen todrinke , expc!leth theſtone and grauell, F 
helpeth the bloudie flixe, ſciatica,crampes,andconuutfions, | Hz 


The roots of marſh Mallowes,the leaues of comon malluwes and the leaties of violers boiled in G 


ater ynti! they be very foft,& that licle water rhatis left drained away, ſtamped ina ſtone morrter, 
| Ddd 3 || — adding 


799 _ THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
adding thereto acertaine quantitic of Fenvgreeke,, and Lineſecde ih powder; theroore 
blacke Bryonic,and {ome good quantiric of Barrowes greaſe,ſtamped alrogither rothe "ets. 
_ pultis, and applied yery warme; it mollifieth and ſoftneth apoſtemes and ha ſwellings;fwetl a 
- in theioinrs, and fores of the mother : ir confumerh all colde tumours, blaſtings, & wingie Doe. 
ings; itcurerh the riftes of the fundament.z jt comforteth, defendeth , and preſerueth dan ST 


greene wounds tromany maner of accidents that may happen therrozir helpe th digeſtion jn them 


* 


and bringeth old vicers to maturation, 


The fcedes dried and beaten into powderand giuen to drinke ſtopperh the bloudie Ali 
laske,andall other iflues of bloud, (5; | > 10a Xe and 


Of the yellow Mallowe. Chap.339.. 
Althealutes.| [| - fo YI: En ai 
Yellow Mallowe, [| (i * 7 he deſcription. 


I He yellowe pomet'n riſech vp with 4 
round ſtalke, ſomething hard or wood. 
dic,three or fower cubits high, couered 

with broade leaues ſomthing rounde, but ſh 
pointed,white,ſoft, ſet with very fine haireslie 
to the leaues of Gourds, hanging vponlong ten- 
der footſtalks ; from the boſor cof which leaues 
come foorth yellow flowers , not vnlike to thoſe 
of the common Mallowe in forme : the knops or 
ſeede veſſels are blacke, crooked or wrinckled, 
made vp of many ſmall cods, in which is blacke 
ſecede: the roore is ſmall, and dieth when ithath 
perfeted his ſcede. 
*% The place, | 
The ſeede heetevf 1s brought vnro vs from 
Spaine and Iraly , we do yeerely ſfowe it in our 
gardens,the which ſeldome ar neuer doth bring 
. his ſeedetoripenes;by reaſon whereof, weare to 
ſceke for newe ſeedes againſt the next yeere, | 


= Thelawne, 
It is ſowen in thewidſt of Aprill, ir bringerh 
foorth his flowers in September | 
: "7, | 
; % The names. 
- Itis called _dburtton, whereumto that agreeth 
which Caweenwritethtobe like che Gourd, that 
| | oe | | ist9fayinleafe, and/to benamedMeautiorand 
Arblutilon: divers take it to be that _Lithes or marſh Mallowe, vnto which Theophraſtarin his 
9. booke of the Hiſtoric of Plants/doth attribute Florew wiver, or a yellow flower: forthe flower 
_ of the common 'marſh Mallowe| is not yellowe , bur white yet way. Theophra##ms his copie, 
which in diuers places is faultie,and hath manvempticand ynwritren Places, alſofaulric in chis 
place; therefore ir isiard to faie, that this is Theophraſtns marſh Mallpwe!,'e ecially ſecittg that 
Thephraſtzs feemeth allo to attribute vnto'the rooteof marſh Mallowe ſo-muchſlime, as thatwa* 
ter may be thickned therewith, which the raores of common marſh Mallowe can _—_— do: bit 
the roote of Abutilan or yellowe Mallowe not at all: itmaybe called in Engliſh yellow Mallowey 


and As:cens Mallo W\ 


Theremperarure of this Mallow is referre mallow.” +” © | V4 


| ia 


— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | 791 
81-5 *% The vertaes. 2 £4 
Aicen ſaith that e Hbutilon or yellow Mallow,js helde to be good for greene wounds, and doth A 
eſently glew togither,and perfectly cure the ſame. | 
The ſecede drunke in wine preuaileth mighti] = the ſtone, | | B 
Bern ardus Paludans of Anchuſe, reporteth that the Turkes do drinke the ſeede to prouocke C 


ſleepeandreſt, | 


Of Venice *M allowe,or Goodnight at noone. Chap:340. 


1 Alcea Peregrins. 2 Sabderife,/ | 
Venice Mallowe. Thorney Mallowe. 


2 15 diF- | 131 ; Þ- j x | | 
I He Venice Mallow riſeth vp with long, rounde , feeble ſtalkes, whereon are ſet vpon long 
lender f6oteſtaikes "dah iagged leaues;deepely cut even tothe middle ribbe': among, 
-'-/  -whichcome foorth very-pleafant and beautifull lowers, in ſhape like rhoſe of the com- 
mon Mallowe,foimthing white, daſhr ouer with a thinnewaſh of purple; in the middle of which 
flower ſtandeth foocth a knap or peſtell as yellow as golde: itopeneth irſelfeabourteight of the 
Gdcke, and (hurterh vp againe at nine, when ithath recciuedthe beams of the ſunne , whereon 


tihhould ſecme rorefule to looke, whereupon it might mare properly be called <Hatus horariag or 
the Mallow of an hower, which Colume/ls\{cemeth.to call Holechen in his verſe: 7 


oo * # 


"te. Et Molothe, Prone ſequit## que vertice folem.. 
| The Venice Mallowes ly reve an gallant flower | 
| Through heate of ſunne ſprings,ſhuts,and diesin an hower. | 
| Y | | 


792 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
' Ouidſpeaking of Adonis flowers thoughtto deſcribe Anemone or Windflower,in the 10.booke 
. of his Metamorphoſis, which we rather deeme tobe thisquicke fading Mallowe; for it is evident, 
that Adonis lower and all thoſe vnder the title of Winde flowers , laſte moe then one day, but this 
is {o fraile,that it laſterh ſcarce one hower his words are theſe: WE: 56. Ei 6 


rn Sic fata crworem. | \ 


| Nettareodoyato [har ſit, qui tact ab illo 
| Intunuit,ſieat, Oc. 


þ .InEnglif thus ;.". ; - 
[This ſaide, ſhe ſprinckled Near on the bloud, 
| which through thepower . | 
'Thereofdid {well like bubbles ſheere,thar 
| _ riſeinweathercleere 
Onwatec. And beforethat full an hower 
| expired were, |. 
:Ofall our colgur withthe bloud a flower ſhe 
| there did finde, ; > 
'Euen like a flower of that ſame tree, whoſe 
j fruice in tender inde | 

\ \Hauepleaſanegraines incloſd, Howbeit 
| the vic of themis ſhore, 
[For why the leaues do hang fo looſe throngh 
| © bgktnesinſuch fort, 
|As that the winde,that all things pearce, with 


cuery littic blaſt. 
Doth ſhake them off, and ſhed them ſo,as long 
: they catnot laſt, 


| 


Bionof Smyrna an ancient Poet,in Adoaw Epitaph faith, that the Windflower ſprang of Yenw 
teares,whileſt ſhe was weeping for Adonz;bur doubrles the plant was miſtaken by the Poet, co 
{idering the fragilatic of theflower,and themarrer wherof it ſprang, that is,the teares of awomian, 
which laſt not long,as this lower'icalled Fs hor e,or the flower of an hower. The ſeed isconteined 
in thicke rough bladders wherupon Dodongre called it Alceaweſicaria, within theſe bladders or ſeed 
veſſels are conteyned blackeſeede,notvnlike to thoſe of Nigella Rowine. The roote is finall and 
render,and periſheth when the ſeed isripe, and muſt be increafed by newe apdyeerely fowingof 
the ſcede,carefully reſerued, |: 1 RE T1 Ex 
2 Thorne Mallow rifeth yp he: vu vpright ſtalke of two cubits high , diuiding it ſelfeinto & 
uers branches z whereuponareplaced leaues deepely cutto the middle rib, and likewiſe ſnipt about 
the edges like a ſawe,in taſte like Sorell : the flowers for the moſt part thruſt foorth of the trunke or 
body of the ſmall ſtalke,compadt of fiue ſmall leaues,of a yellowiſh colour the middle part wher- 
of is of a purple tending to rednefle ; the huske or codwherin the flower doth ſtand, is ſet or armed 
with ſharpe chornes: the root is ſmall, ſingle, and moſt impacient of ourcold clyware,jn fo much 

that when Thad with great induſtric nounied vp ſome plants from the {eede, and kept them vnto 
_ themiddeſt of Maiez notwithſtanding onecolde nightchauncing among many, hath deftroied | 
them all, "7c:a087 #4 Ik Fo iy 0 ono otwgy ff: yrrilick{s fo "3 ' alt 

:2 ode oben bc p! Wrpnd ook! + Eu endibiio foo aobat) 
The ſeedesheerof haue beene broughrtur of Spaine and other hot countries. Thefirſt proſpe- 


reth well in my garden fromyeere to yeerc,!:: '| wht omal, 


PF nl 


| [| + aki! is 1 '% The tome.” WINS IG RATON 0 | pe 29 
They areto beſowen in the moſt ferrilleſt gtounde and ſimnis places of the garden , n the be- 
girining of Maic,or ih the end of Aprill. {ner W087 9 SSD TH 45! 


%, 


Their names haue beene ſufficiently rouichedin-their ſeuerall deſcriptions: 'The firſt may becal- 
; led in Engliſh Venice Mallowe, Good night atnine i the forenooneggor the Mallow flowring but 
an hower,of — it Une Hypecompor Bic Poppie,but vnproperly, ei) ok 


d | 


HISTORIE-OF PLANTS. | *' 593 
| | % The temperature andvertues. | | 
There is a cetaine clammie wicein the leaues of the Venice Mallowe, whereupon it is thought 
©0 come necre ynto the temperature of the common Mallowe, and to be of a mollifying faculne: 
buchis vic in Phiſicke is not yerknowne,and therefore can there be no cerrainty  Pxtans,, 


Of Granes bill. Chap.344. 


| 18% | 119.02 \& Thekindes. #4 
Here be many kindes of Cranes bill , whereof two were knowne to Droſeorides , one with the 
þ jon roote, the other with the Mallowe leafe. b4 | 


Geranium Columbinum. | | 9 | 
| Doucs foore;or Cranes bill, en. þb * The deſcription. 
SDDH ( Ko | | 


Oues footehath manie hairie ſtalks, trailing 
; ID or leaning towarde the grounde, of a brow- 
ezraY niſh calour, ſomewhat kneede or jointed; 
' whereupon do grow rough leaues of an ouerworne 
| greene eoſour;tounde, cur aboutthe edges,and like 
-vntothole of the common Mallow: amon;, which 
come foorth the flowers of a bright purple co- 
lour : after whichis'the ſcede fer rogither like the 
head andbill of a birde , whercupon ir was called 
Pons Cranes bill, or Storkes bill; as ate alſo all rhe other 
£4 of hiskinde. -The roote isflendert with ſome fibres 
of | annexedthereto, if I 
| L | % Theplace. | 
.« Ttis found neereto common high waies , deſerr 
+ Places, vntilled grounds , and eſpecially vpon mud 


- 


\avals almoſt everic where. J 

A S- The tome. | | 
--.iIrfpringeth vpin March and Aprill : fowreth in 

May,and Gringeth his ſeedeto ripenes in Lune, 

1: 11 111-007 *%* Thenuwnes. | $4 

Itis commonly called'in Latine Pes Coluribinus : 

in high: Durch Scarter kravut + in owe Dutch — 
Duyvuen voet-tinFrench-Pred de Proven + heereup- 
oniemaybe-called Geranium Colunmbinum : in En- 
gliſh Dotesfoote,' and Pigeons foote : of D/oſcori- 
des Geranium alterwn,of forae Pulywonia and Gruime, 


| + The rermperabiarc:” | £3 
Doues foote is cold-and ſomewhat drie, with ſome aſtrictionorbinding; having power'to ſoder 
oroing togither, | -:-! | wan 45Cndeul 0353101238 OD Wey! | 
*% Thewertues. real = 


It ſeemeth,faith my author,to be good for greene and bleeding woundes,and aſſwageth inflam- A 
mations or hot {wellings. 

The hethe and rootes dried beaten intd, moſt fine powder;,and: gigenhalfe a poonefull faſting, B 
and the like quanrtitie to bedwards in red wine,or LAMA t,for theſpace of one and twenty daies © 
togither; cureth miraculoutly ruptures or burſtings,a 1 ſclfe have often prooued, wherby I haue 

ons , it ſhall be needfull ro adde thereto 
the powder of xed{nails(thoſe without (hels)dricd man oucn, in numbernine, which forgifieththe 
h c 5 greatand of long continuance: it 


* 


794 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| Of Herbe b, . Chap.342. 


Geranium Robertianun, | I} | jj 
HerbeRobert.| | | | | * The deſcription. 
F | js PJErbeRover: bringeth foorth ſlender, weake 
| and brittle ſtalkes , ſomewhat hairie and A, 
a reddiſh colour , as are oftentimes PP qa 
alſo, which are iagged and deepely cur, like vnts 
thoſe of Cheruile, of a moſt lothſome ſtinking 
ſmell. The lowers are of a moſt brighr purple £0. 
lour; which being paſt,there follow certaine {mall 
heads, with ſharpebeblies or bils of birds: the root 
is very ſinall and threddie. | 
| % Theplace. = 
Herbe Robert groweth vpon old wals, as well 
thoſe made of bricke and ſtone, as thoſe of mudde 


orcarth: it groweth likewiſe among rubbiſh,ia the 
yy 


bodies of trees that are cu ne, andin moiſt 
and ſhadowie ditch banks. 
1 * The time, | 
It flowreth from Aprill till ſommer be almoſt 
ſpent :the herbe is greene in winter allo,8&js hard. 
lyhurtwithcolde, | | 
VT _ _..- %Thewoncs. þ 
Itis calledin high Dutch Rupzcchts krauttin 
low Dutch Robzechts krutjt, and thereopunitis 
named in Latine Zuberta, and Robert; Herba: Ru- 
elk calleth it Robertiene, and we: Robertianum;of 
Taber Montanus, Rupertianwm : in Engliſh Herbe 
Robert. He that conferreth this Cranes bill with 
| : | þ '  Doſcorrdes his thirde Sideritis, ſhall plainlyper-/ 
ceiue , thatthey are both one, andthat this is moſt apparently Srder:t#s.3. Dioſtoridis; ny ar 
rides ſetteth downe three Sideritides,one with the leafe of Horehoundz the next with the leafe of 
Fearnez and the thirde groweth in wals and vincyardes : rhe native ſoile of Herbe Robert agree 
thereumto,and likewiſe the leaues,being like ynto Cheruile,and nor vnlike to thoſe of Corianders, 
according to Dzoſcorides deſcription. 1) \ | 


4» | || + Thetemperature. {| 1-6 (4 

= HerbceRobertis of remperature ſomewhatcolde: but yet both ſcowring and ſonwhar binding, 

participating of mixt faculties. |; \f ; | | 

Lok | | ' % Thevertaes. © L | | | 

.A Iris goon for wounds and vicers ofthe dugges and ſecret parts; it is thought toſtanch bloude, 
which thing Dzoſcorzdes doth attribute to his thirde Szderzris : the vertue of this ({aith he) 1s applied 

to heale vp bloudy woundes., [; p- IT'S | ot | 


His kinde of Cranes bill hath many flexible branches, weakeandrender. fat and full of moi 


ſtare whereon are placed very great leaues, cur into diuers ſmall ſe&ions ot diuiſionsgelem- 


' bling the leaues of the tuberous Ewemone, or Windflower , but ſomewhat aan: ofan 
ouerworne greeniſh colour ; among which come foorth long footeſtalkes, whereon do gre f - 6 
| WR t. : EET ol DWereg 


Ys 


\ 


— 


/  HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 395 


flowers, of abright purple colour, andlike vnto the ſinalleſt brier Roſe in forme :which being paſt, 
here ſlicceede ſuch heads and beakes as rhe telt of th Cranes bill hauc: the rootcis thicke, bum- 
pedor knobbed,which wecall tuberous. 


| Geranium tubercſuwn. 
| Knobbie Crancs bill, _ * The place. | 


This kinde of Cranes bill is 4 ftrangeri in Eng- 
land, notwithſtanding I haue | (growing in my 


parden, 
* Thetime. | 
| _ - The time anſiwereth the reſt of the Crancs 
billes. 
% The names, | 


Cranes billis called in Greeke Feeder: in La-. 
tine Graanalis commonly Ruſtrum Grais , or Ko- 
ſtrum Creonie , of the likenes ofa Cranes. bill; or BY 
\ Storkes bill: of ſome Acas mſerta, but that name 
doth rather belong to another of this kinde:1t is 
alſo called Ac Paſtoris: in Ital Roſtro dt g7u:in 
| French Bec de Grue: in Spaniſh Ptco dt Ciquera pt- 
co del grou:in high Dutch wStoxekenſchnable: in 
low Dar Dieuaers beck ; in FngliſhStorks 
biil,Cranes bilt;Hearons bill ,and Pinckeneedle; 
it is alfocalled of ome Ger Fuberoſum, and 
Geranium bulboſwm : it is likewiſe Ger anium Djsf- 
coridrs primun , Of Diefeorides his firſt Cranes 
_ bill whichis founde tobe called by certaine ba- 
ſtare names, as x or 2 
macoper's, and ſuch like. + 
* The temgeraturd, 
The rootes of this Cranes bill have a little 
kindeof heatin them, 
| vThevertues. | 
Dinkarides ach that the rootes may be earer,, and that a dram weft of chem drunke in wine, A 
doth waſte and conſume away the windines of the matrix. 
Allo Plante affirmerh,that the roote heereof is lingular good for ſuch as after weaknes craue to B 
be reſtored to their former ſtrengehz. | BD \\.b 
thefameaurthor afirmerhhac the waight r a SF. of i it =, in wine three Limes in a daic, is C 
excellent good againſt the Prilicke ,orcon{umprion of the lungs. 


- 


eu q..5 Colm bill pz 344 


7 Thedrt,) = _—_— Der, 
Mi Cle bilharh wany weake ami dif MEE AV 


on.do growelong leaues,made of many pengbrroos ſet vpon _ nb, = *y or cut 
: |; Aoatgheed fa pleaſantfwcere finel},nor vnliketorhatof Muſke: among which © 
ofared c & of fineſirrallleanes aper re 


lowers fooreſtalks, | 
after which appeere ſmall heads and pointed beakes or bils like the other kindes of Cranes kites I 
the roote is = theeddie. 


s Fi. | Geranmme 


wy THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Geraniammnoſchatun. Tx 10 | joE | 
Musked Cranes bill, | us * The place, 


It groweth in barren high waies, angis plan 
ted in gardens for the ſweete fel] tia. 
whole plant is poſſeſſed with, [ 
.} 2\S LE NE S—=3" | *& The time. | 
SE AR AE GRE 7 It flowrerth and flouriſheth all the ſormer 

ESE Wet wet long, i LS: | 

0/0 PU % The names. 4” I 
| 3 It is called XMrrrhide Plng, Roſtrum Ciconia, 
Arn meſeata in {hoppes, and Acusp. ;ſtoris and 
likewiſe Geranium moſcatum : in Engliſh Muſ. 
ked Storkes bill, and Cranes bill, cA@eatur 
andofthe vulgar ſort Muſcara, and allo Pind. 


needle. 


This Cranes bill hath not anyof his facul. 
ties found outor khowne: yet it ſecmerh to be 
coldand a little drie, with ſome aſtriction or bin- 
ding, Wt: 


The vertues aret ed vnto thoſe of Doues Q 
foore, andare thoughr of Doſcorides ro be good 
_ forgreeneandbloudy woundes , the ful 


* 1} 


lings thatare newly begun, - 


5 ® 
& 


Of Crowe foote Cranes bill, or Gratia Dei.  Chap.345- | 


* Thedeſeription. 


: % £ > 
v7 ? 


' 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
| x Geranium Batrachioides. 2 Geranium Batrachioides albiom. 
Crowfoote Cranes bill. White Crowfoote Cranes bill, 


| EY % The place. 

Theſe Cranes bils are wilde of their owne x ene = grow in barren places, andin valleies ra- 
ther then in mountaines 3 both of them do grow in my garden.” | _ 

| *% Thetime. 

They flower, flouriſh and growe greene moſt part of the ſommer. 

| [45 ve The names. _ 

It is called in Greeke Barg2400lts, and Gerammmn Batrachioides , which name it taketh from the 
likenes of Crowfoote: of ſome it is called Ranancu/us cerulews , or blew Crowfoote : Fach/ius cal+ 
leth it Hottes gnad, that is in Latine Gratia Dez: in Engliſh allo Gratia dei, blewe Cranes bill, 
or Cranes bill with the blewe flower,or blewe Crowfoote, 

* The temperature, 
Thetemperature is referred to the other Cranes bils. Ke 
_w%Thevertues. DE 

Neither of theſe plants are found goodin Phiſicke ; yet Fuchſaw ſaith, that Cranes bill with the A 

blew flower is an excellentthing to heale wounds, 


L 


Of Candie (Jranes bill. Chap.346. 


% The deſcription. api cinta. 
l He Cranes bill of Candie hath many long tender ſtalkes ſoft,and full of ivice : dividing it 
ſelfe into diuers branches, whereon are ſer great broad leaues, cur, or iagged into duers 
{eions or cuts: among which come foorth flowers,compoſed of fiue leaues a peece, of a - 
dlewiſhor watcher colour , inthe middle part whe:eof come foorth a fewe chiues,, and-a ſmall 
pointellof a purpliſh colour : the head and beake is like ro the reſt of the Cranes bils, but greater: 
the roote dicth when it hathperſeced his ſeece. bs Rs . i 
- > by 6 2 | 


793 THE 'SECOND'BOOKE OF: THE 

2. This Cranes bill, beinga baſtardkindeof the former, hath long flender branches Mowing to. 
the hight of two or three cubirs,ſerabout with very great leaues,nor vnlike tothoſe of Hollihocks. 
but ſomwhat lefler,of an ouerworne greene colour, among which riſe vp ire poteltalkes bn the 
endes whereof do grow ſmall flowers,much lefſerthen thoſe of the precedent,and of a murrey co. 
lour :the head and feedes are like alſo, butmuch leſſer: the rootes do likewiſe dic arthe fult ap- 


_ prochof winter, 


1 GerantunCreticum. | _ 2 Geranium Malicoides, 
| | | Baſtard Candie Cranes bill, .., 


zl 
RP N= 
4 7 SIS 
, fp. 


- i 
CA 


4 
* " 
| 


Theſe are ſtrangers in England,exceptin the gardens of fome Herbariſts :the which do growe 
in my garden very plenritully, | 1 ; | 
| | i!  % Tre time. ; | | 
The time anſwereth the reſt of the Cranes bill ,yerdoth that of Candice flower forthe moſt patt 
with mein Maic, FF 2:F1 | j 
|  % The names. = 
There is not more to beſaid of the names thehath beene remembred in their ſeuerall titles. 
They may be called in Engliſh Cranes bils,or Storkes bils. * Bt « 
| 5 4 . The tempera ſWre. 
Their temperature anſwererh that of Doves foore, 
CY $ Thevwertnes, | + 
Their faculties in working are equall ro thofe of Doues foote , and vſed for the ſame purpoſes, 
(and rightly)eſpecially being vſedin wounde drinks , forthe which itdoth farre excell anic of rhe 
Crancs bils;and is equall with any other herbe wharſocuer for the ſame purpoſe, T 


Of 


G IJ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 799 


b Of diners witde Cranes bils, Chap 347+. | AB 


+ The kindes. 


Tere be divers forts or kindes of Cranes bils which haue nor beene remembred of the anci- 
ent, nor much ſpoken of by the later writers , all which I meane to © ende vnder this 
Chaprer,maaking as it were of thema Chapter of wilde Cranes bils, although ſame ofthem haue 
acein our London gardens, andthat woorthily , eſpecially for the beautie of che flowers, their 
rs ſhallbe expralles in their ſeuerall ticles,their natures and faculties are referred to the orher 
Cranes bils,or if youpleaſe toa further conſideration. | Ls 


" _— 


I Geranium maculatums  fige fuſca | 2 Geranium {11 nindrium. 
Sporred Cranes bill, | Bioudic Cranes bill. 
* 


_. *% Thedeſeription.” 


rt (© Ported Cranies bill, or Storkes bill, the which LO0beh:as deferiberh in chetidle thus, 'Gerans- 
J wn Fuſcum, fore linide; purtmrante, &> medio Candieamte , is the farvie that Dodmmewcal- 
Tet Ger aniaymentenien, or mountaine Storks bill, whoſe leaues arefikevnro Crowfoote, 
(bemga kindedoubrlefſe of Cranes bill,called Gratis d-i)of a0 onetworne duſtic colour, and oF a 
ong fatour, yer nor altogither vnpleaſant: the ſtalkes are dryand brittle, at the tops whetof doe 
vepleafant flowers of an excceditig faire purple cglour, the middle part whercof tending to 
theſe or poinrelIthereof, co 


cof, commeth foortha tit of ſmall. purple hairie threds. 
ingic ſelfe foorth of theground, inſomuch that many of the 
ike without carthr;-everi asthe rootes of Flower Deluces 


-—© = 


- 


2 The 
-, 


no AF wavy Sax; ee... vw DAM res 


4 nth "vs 


$20 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


2 Theſecondof thefe wilde ones riſeth foorth of the ground to the height of a foote fomtim 
more: the ſtalkes are ow and brittle,with many knees or knobbed ioints of a bloudie colo "y 
call | 


of it rooke his name, called for the moſt part Homethodes : the leayes, lowers and "00 Watt 


vntothoſe of Gratia Dei,or blew Cranes bill, wherin eſpecially ic differeth from the precedent, 


3 Geranium moſchatum inodorum. 4 Geranium gnodorum album, 
Vnſauoriemuske Cranes bill. ns White flowred Pinckneedle. 


5 
_— 


. 


3 / This wilde of musked Cranes 
bill, being akogither without ſauour or jnicl], 
is called of Fhiny Myrrhida invderum, ot Gerert- 
am moſchatuwn inodorun, which hath manic :12d 
leaues ſpread flat ypon the grounde, cuerc lcaic 
mace of diuers [ivaller leaves , and thoſe cutur 
iagged about the edges, ofno ſmell at al: among 
which riſe vp ſlender braunches , whereon Coe * 
growe ſmall lowers of alight purple coluuy:: the 
roote is long and fibrobs, | 
4 This is alſo one ofthe wilde kindes of mul- 
ked Cranes bils, agreeing with the laſt deſcribed 
incach reſpeR, except the! flowers, for as the 0- 
ther hath purple flowers,this plant bringeth forth 
white flowers,other difference there is none atal, 
5 The Cranes bill with violet coloured flowers, 
hath a thicke woodic roote, with ſonic fey {tings 
annexed thereto : from which riſc inmediatclic 
foorth of the grounde Ciucts ſtiffe ſalkes, which | 
divide themſclues into ocher ſmall braunches, 
whereupon are ſet confuledly broad leques,made 

_. of three leaues a pecce, and thoſe iag| ed or cut - 
abourth< edges: the flo wers Frowec It the top of 
the braunches of a perſeAvoler colout,»herof it 

1 ket ae Mer come heh keckt 
'N * *bils, as the other of hisLinde, | of 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS: 3ot 


Oftheſe wilde ones Lhaue another fort in my garden, which C/x/win his Pannonicke obſcruati- 
ons hath called Geranmn Hem atodes or {. anguine Cranes bill, and ZObelins Geranium Gruimum, or 
Gre/ngle: it hath many flexible branches creeping vpon the grounde: the leaues are much like vn- 
to Doues foote in forme, but cut euento the middle rib: the flowers are like thoſe of the wildemal- 
lowe,and of the ſame bignetle,of a periect brighe purple colour,which if they be ſuffered ro growe 
and ſtande vncill chenext day,will be amurrey colourzand itthey ſtand vntothe third daie,they will 
eurne into a deepe purple trending to blewneſle z their changing is ſuch; that you ſhall finde at one 
time ypon One branch , flowers like 1n forme , but of diuers colours, x he rooteis thicke and of a 


woodic ſubſtance, | 


I havelikewiſe another ſort that was ſent me from Robinas of Paris , whoſe figure was nener 


ſet foorth, neither deſcribed of any: itbringerh from athicke tough roote many branches,of a brow- 
niſh colour : whereupon do growe lcaues not valike to thoſe of Gratia det , butt nar fo deepely cut, 
ſomewhat cornered,and of aſhininggreenc colour : the 'flowers grow at the top of the tendet bran- 
ches, compoſed of fixefinall leaues,ot a bright icarlet colour. | | | 
| [þ. *= Tye place. | ; 
Theſe Cranes bils do growe of themſclues about olde wals,the borders of fieldes , woodes and 
copſes,and moſt of them we haue brought into our gardens, 
W T he tre. \ 
Their time of flowring and ſeedinganſ{wereth the reſt of the Cranes bils, * *. | 
—_ *%* Thenames. 
' Theirſeuerall circles ſhall ſerue for their names , referring what might be ſaide more to a further 
conſideration. *% 1 henature an1vwertues, | et 
There hath notas yer any thing beene founde either of their temperature or faculties , bur may 
be referred vnto the other of their kinde. | 


Of Sanicle. Chap 348. 


| Sanicula ſine Djapenſia. | 
' Sanicle, | * The deſcription. 
Anicle hath leaues of a blackiſh greene co- 
lour, ſmooth and ſhining, {oinwhat round, 
diutded into *fine parts like thoſe of the 
' vinegor rather thoſe of th: maple: among which 


toppes wheteot ſtande whiremoflic flowers, in 
their places come yp rounde ſeede, rough,clea- 
uing to mens garments as they paſle by , inma- 


kreddieftrings. 
*% The place. 


, almoſt euery where ,jtioieth in fat and fruitefull 
' moiltſoile, | 
*& The time. 
+, Irflowrethin Maie and Ine: the ſeed is ripe 
in Auguſt; the leaues of the herbe are greene al 
the yeere, and arc not hurt with the colde of 
win ter, 


| *% The names. 
It isxcommonly called San/cu/a,of divers Dia- 
penſa: inhigh & low Dutch Santketzin French 
Sante : in Engliſh Sanickle , or Sanifel :itis fo 
called 4 Sanendis Vutneribus , or of healing of 
woundes as Rxel{ize ſaith : there be alſo other 


Ecc 1 Sanicles 


riſe yplender ſtalkes of a browne colour; on the 


ner of little burs : the roote is blacke and full of 


It rom in ſhadowie woods and copſes - 


4 


$02 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 

> Sanicles ſonamed of moſt Herhariſts,as that which is deſcribed by the name of Dextar;c.or Cora! 
woort,and likewiſe Auriula orjj, or Beares care, which is akinde of Cowllip,and likewiſe anothe 
ſer foorth bythename of Saxiew/a gattata, wherof we haue intreated among the kindes of dens 
cares. | | | bil 

] Rs | & The temperature. kt] 

Sanicle as it is in taſte bitter, with a cerraine binding qualitie; ſo beſides that it clenſeth, and 
the binding qualirie ſtrengthnethi, it is hotand dry, and that in the ſeconde degiec,and attcrſome 
authors hot in the third degree,and aſtringent. | Wie 1 | | 

| 7 | *% The vertues. 
A Theiuice being inwardly taken is good to heale wounds, pu | 
B Thedecoctionofitalſo made mn wine or water,is ginen againſt ſperting of bloud,and the blo 
flixe z alſo foule and hilthie vicers are cured by being bathedor wathed with it. The hetbe boilegin 
water,and appliedin maner of apulris,doth diflolue and waſte away cold fivellings; it is viedin po. 
tions, which are called Vulneraxic potions,or wounde dripkes , which maketh whole and ſound all 
2+ inward wounds,and outward hurts : it alſo helpeth the vicerations ofthe kidneies, ruptures or bur« 
ſtings, | iN | | [ | 


Of Ladies mantle,orgreat Sanicle. Chap.34.9. 


Alchimilla. | | | 5 LEN! 
Lions foote,or Ladies mantle. | * * The deſcription. 


{25 


Adies mantle hath many round leaves, with 
five or ſixe corners finely indented aboutthe 
edges,which before they be opened are plai- 
. ted and toulded togither, not vnlike to the leaues 
of Mallowes,but whiter and more curled; among 
which riſe vp tenderſtalks ſet with the like leaues,, 
but much lefler : on the tops whereof do'growe 
{mallnofſic lowerscluſtering thicke togither of a 
yellowiſh greene colour, The ſeede 15 {mall and 
yelloive, incloſed ih greene huskes. Theroote is 
thicke and full of thredie ſtrings. 
% Theplace. 

Ir groweth of it ſelfe wilde in divers places,asin 
the towne paſtures by Andover, and in many pla- 
ces in Barkſhire,and Hampſhire, in their paſtures 

. and coplesor low woods, and alſo vpon the banke 
ofa motethar incloſeth a houſe in Buſhey called 
Bourne hall fowerteene miles from London, and 
in the high way from thenceto Watforde, a {mall 

* mile diſtant fromie, = + Bro 
% Thetme.” 
It flowreth in Maie and Lune,it flouriſherh in the 

. winter as well as in fommer, ur 


 %* The names. TE: i 
I is called of the larer Hetbariſt® Alcbimilh, 
| EH '- andof moſt Srellaria, Pers Leonts, Pata Leon, © 
Saniculamaior : in high Dutch Synnauw, and DOnler Frauwenmantel: in French Pied Ade Lien: 
in Engliſh Ladies mantle,grecat Sanicle, Lions foote, Lions pawe,and of ſome Padelion. | 
= | *% Thetemperature; [| | Se. 1 Fake 
p Ladies mantle is like in temperarure to little Sanicle , yer is it more drying and more bin- | 
| : «: The 


—E 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | Boz 


| (57-54 F224 * The vertues. | { my 

Iris applied towounds after the ſame maner that the ſmaller Sanicle is,being of ike efficacie: it A 
topperh blecding,and alſorhe ouermuch flowing of the natural ficknes : itkeepeth downe mai- 
dens paps Or dugs, and when they be too great and flaggic,it maketh them lefler and harder. 


Of Neeſewoort Sanicle. Chap.350. 


Alina Elleborane. FEY 
Neekewoort Sanicle, &* The deſcription. 


* Hen I made mention of Heleboywe a/- «. 
bus , I did alſo ſet downe my cenſure . 
concerning Elkeborine or, Epipad7es : but 
this Elleborine of the alpes I putin this place bi- 
cauſe it approcheth neerer vnto Sanicle and X4- 
nunculus, as participating of both; irgroweth in 
the mountaines and higheſt parts cf the alpiſh 
hils, and is a ſtranger as yer in our Engliſh gar- 
dens: the roote is compact of manic ſmall twiſted 
ſtrings, like vnto blacke Hellebore : from thence 
ariſe tinall tender ſtalks, ſmooth and eaſte to bend, 
in whoſe tops growe leaues with hue diviſions, 
ſomewhat nickt about the edges like vnto Sanicle: 
the flowers conſiſt of ſixe leaues, ſomewhat ſhi- 
ning, in taſte ſharpe, yet nat vnpleaſanr. Some 
would account this plant ro be that He/{eborws nj- 
ger which Pena found in the forreſt of Eſens, not 
farre from Iupiters mount, | 
I hauenot as yet found any thing of his nature 
or ofhis vertues, 2 


CG 
WJ 
f 


Of (rowfootes. Chipiasr, 


% The lindes. 


"Jie bediuers ſorts or kinds of theſe pernitious herbes com rehended vnder the name of 24- 
ihr nemcgry Crowfoote,whereof moſt are very dangerous to bo raken into the body, and there- 
meyrequire a very exquiſite moderation, with amoſt exact and due maner of tempering, not 
any of them areto betaken alone by themſelues bicauſe they arc of moſt violent force,and therfore 
tthe greater needeofcorreQtion. j EE 
neknowledge of theſe plants is as neceflarie to the Phiſirion as of otherherbes, to the ende 
theymayſhun the ſame,as Scribonzus Largw faith,and not take rhem ignorantly: or alſo, if necefſi- 
ue any time require, that they may viſe them; and that with forme deliberation and ſpecial choiſe, 
andwith their proper correQiues, For theſe dangerous ſimples are likewiſe many times of#them- 
| hciall, and oftentimes profitable : for ſome of them are not ſo dangerous, but tharthey 
me fort,and oftentimes in fit and due ſeaſon profit and do good, if remperature and mo- ; | 


may info 
Ece 2 deration | 


84 THE SECOND" BOOKE! OF THE 
deration be ved ; of which there be fower kindes as D#ofeortdes writeth , one withbroade lea 
anorherthatis downie; the thirde very imall; and the fourth with awhite flower: the laier Herb, 

; niſts haue obſerued alſo many mo: all theſe may bebroughr into twoPprincipall kindes, ſo thatons 
beea garcen or tame one, andthe other wilde: and of theſe ſome are\common, and others o 
or foraine. Moreouer there is a difference both in the rootes and in the leaues: for one hath x hon, 

pedor knobbieroore , another a long leafeas Spearewoortz and firſtof the wildeor fielde Crow 
footes,referring the Reader vnto the ende of the ſtocke and kindred of theſame , for the tem "1 
ture and vertues, - | [1 "7 TY Fs 


1 Ranunculus pratenſic,etiomb, Hor tenfis, 2 Renuncalus ſurrettic caulicula, 


Common Crowfoote. Right Crowfoote, 


\t 
- Sill / 


& 


U==;" AN 

4 FEji ; N 
FAS. \ 
: "« 13 ; , 


— SW, 

— 
WW 

WAN 


* The deſcription. 


He common Crowfoote hath leaues divided into many git Hinge three, ſomrimes 


fiue , cutheere and there inthe edges, of a deepe greene colour , in which ſtande divers 
whitiſh ſpots-: the ſtulkes/bee rounde , Peat bu haitie , fore of them boive downe 
towarde thegrounde, and pur foorth manie little rootes , whereby ir raketh holde of the grounde 


as it traileth along: ſome of them ſtande vprighta foote high or higher; on.the ws heercof prone 
{mall flowers with hue leaues a peece,of a yellow glitteriagcolgur like golde; in the middle partof 
theſe flowers ſtande certaine ſmall threds'of like colour which being paſt,the ſeedes follow, wrap 
ped vpina rough ball: the rootes are white and threddie, Ai Hake d (bile tic 
2 Theſecond kind of Crowtoot is like vnto the precedentyſauing that his leaves are fatter ,thic 
ker, and greener, and his ſmall twipgic ſtalkes ſtand ypriglit, otherwiſe it is hke : of which indent 
chanerd.that walking in the fielde next vnto. the Theater, by-London, in pry) 182 ofa worthipiu 


marchant named maſter Nchols Lete,l tqunde one gf this kinde there with double fowers, which 


before that time Thad nor ſecne., 


THISTORIE OF PLANTS!" $05 
| 3 The place, © | 
| ofthemſelues in paſtures and medowes almoſt cuery where. | 
They growe ; a % =_ time, Js 
= in May.and many monetkes after. C7 P 
They flower in Maya | y + Thenoner, es a 6. rt 
| is called of L'Obelrus Renunculus pratenſie : Of Dodoneus Ranunenlus hortenſis, but vi 
Ce plies Polyanthemum , which he faith x divers name Batrachion: in bigh Durch 
achmalkbluom: in lowe Dutch Boter bloemen: in Englith King kob, Golde cops, Gold knops, 


Crowfoore,and Burter flowers. \/ pr 
| 3K aunt lus arworwn, 4 Kanunculus CAlpinus albus. 
*. Crowtoote of the fallowed field. White mountaine Crowtoote, - 
7 1D 4 N -G "Y Oy P. v2 | | 


V, "= \\1 
| V3 A 


| 6 
Ur > JW » 
DJ 


k 3s 
. i / LN 4 A. 
of , . \ | w—_ F WV 
= dt, —_ \ 
\8 
4 
\ 


; "4 W7 
: 


UULE I > { 
. "<A _ 
| , Pd 
/ 0 , VS \ 
| | 
1 


\ ; 
V 


> 
W2- . 
7s 
W SP; 


[3 | wht * The deſeription. © + 5, 6 os . 
3 Thethird kinde of Crowfoote called in Latine Raruncalzs arwrwn, bicauſe it growerh com 
monly in fallow fieldes, where corne hath beene lately fowen,and may be called Corne Crowtfoore: 
Ithath for the moſt part an vpright ſtalke of a foote high, which diuxdeth it ſelfe into other bran- 
»whereon do growe far thicke leaves very much cur and iagged, reſembling the leanes of Sam- 
peep nothing ſo greene, but rather of an ouerworne colour, The flowers growe atthe top of the 
raunches compact of fiue finail leaues, of a faint yellowecolour; after whichcome in place, clu- 
ſtersof rough and ſharpe pointed ſeedes, like thoſe of Hounds toong. The roore is ſmall &threddie, 
4 Thefourth Crowfoote which is called Kanunculus Aldinus; bicauſe thoſe that haue fr{t written 
hereof, haue not found it elfe where, but vpon the Alpiſh mounraines : notwithſtanding it groweth 
plentifully in England wilde, and brought from thence into gardens, eſpecially in.a wood by Lons 
doncalled Hampitecd wood. Irhath diuers great fat branches, two cubites high Jſerwithlarge 
lewes like the common Crowfoote, bur greater,of adeepe greene colour, much l:ke rothoſe ofthe 
ligw Aconite, called _dcomtur lutewn Ponticwn, The fiowers growe confilting of fiue white 
es,with ſmall yellowe chiues inthe middle ſmelling likethe lowers of May or Haw thorne bug 
more pleaſant, The roores are greatet than any of the ſtocke of Crowfootes, ga | 


Eec 3 | * The 


_, whichrile 


Bos —_ THE SECOND'BOOKE OF THE 
Theirplaceof Ot | {rx 5 SOR PRION cand 
err place of growing is touched mn their deſcriptions: their timeof flowring and {+ 4; 
ſwereth the other of their kindes. 17 | ' i. Edingan. 
The white Crowfoote of the; Alpes and French mountaines,is the fourth of Dieſcor idesdeſcti 
on; forke deſcriberti/his fourth ro baue |a white flower : morehathnor-beene (4id couching the 
names ,vert Taber Montenm callethvir Batrachiun album: in Englith white Crowfoote . | 


5  Ranuzenulus Iiyriens, | 114 G& Ranuncylin 0/0 
Crowſoote of Ulyria.- | = Round rooted Crowſoote, 


"TFT - *% The deſcription. Ges | 
Among the wilde Crowfogtes therejs one tharis ſurnamed 7Hrjews, which bringeth foorth 

bender ſtalkes,round, andot a meane length : whereupon do growe long narrow leaues , cutinto 
many long gaſhes, ſomething white, andcoucred with a certaine downynefſle. The flowers be of a 
pale ycilow colour, The roote confitteth of many ſmall brumpes, as it were graines of corne,or little 
long bulbes growing clole togither, like yntothole of Pilewoorr. Itjs reported, thatit was firſt 
brought our of Lilyna into Iralie, and from thence imo the lowe countries ; notwithſtanding we 
haue it growing very common in England, [11 2] 
6 The no kinde of Crowfootcalled Ranunculus —_— or Oinionrooted Crowfoot,and round 
rooted Crowfooteharh a round knobbie pr Oinion faſhioned roore, like vnto a ſmall Turnep,and 
ofthe bignes of a great Olive bernie : from which riſech vp many leaues ſpred ypon the ground, like 
thoſcof the fielde Crowtoore,, bur linaller, and of a ruſticor ouerwgrne greene colour , among 

vp ulender ſtalks of the heighrof a foore, whereupon do growe flowers of a faint yellowe 
colour. | BY | ith 

| | 11% Theplace. j 5p 

Iris alſo reported to be found not onely in ilyria and Sclauonia, bur alfo in the Iland Sardint, 
ſtanding in the micland, or Mediterraneat fea. -:#- 1 b o 


HISTORIE /OF PLANTS. | op 
wy 2 RE De * The names. - Lo 
© -Fhis Iſlyrian Crowfoot is named in Grecke 9rragucy, thatis Apia pore ye Smallage: 
alſo Herb4 Sar dox,it may be, faith my author, that ki nde of Crowfoote called Apin , riſus, and yau- 
-e:3, and this is thought ro be that Gelotophyllis,of which P4ny maketh mentionin his 24- booke 17, 
* chapter: which being arunke, faith he, with wine and wyrrhe, cauſeth amanto ſee divers range 
Gohts,and not to ceaſe laughing till he hath drunke Pine apple kernels with P per in wine of the 
Nate trec,(I thinke he woulde haue ſaid vntilthe be deac)bicauſe the nature 0 aughing Crowe. 
Gore is thought to kill Jaughing but withour doubt rhe thing is cleanc contrary; for it cauſech ſuch 
contulſions,crampes and wringings of the mouth and tawes , thatithathſecmed to ſomethar the 
parties haue died laughing,whereas in truth they haue died with great torment, | 


, 
. 


R 1nunculits aur iCOmm, $ Ranunculius nemoroſia. 


Golde haire Crowfoote, Wood Crowioore. 


\# __ Z7-\; 
4 SY, 
, . 
| Fo \ 
- \ by 
it m \ 


| "* ' 
£7 + Y\ _acKÞ} ao. 
"Av TAS \(6>®; 

wy, Le] 


_- - 
— ; 


TI ms 4 
| aj 
US 

TH y TRE | 
> j4 W \ 


% The d:ſeription, 


7 The ſeventh kinde of Crowfoote, called _£wricomus of the golden lockes wherewith the 
flower is thrummed, hath for his roote a great buſh of blackiſh hairie ſtrings 3 from which ſhoote 
{mall jagged leaucs, not vnlike to Sanicle; among which riſe vp braunched ſtalkes of a 
e high,whercon are placed the like leaues bur ſmaller,{er about the top of the ſtalkes like thoſe 
Woodrofe: the flowers are ſinall and yellow, © £ © | 

| Theeight Crowfoote hath likewiſe abuſhey roote, compa of a multitude of hairie ſtrings, 
from which riſe vp leaues ſet vpon long lender footeſtalks , diuidedin three parts, in maner of the 
iſh Trefoile, ſomewhat ſnipt abourthe edges : among which riſe vp {lender ſtalkes of a foote 

h gh,and ſometimes tigherzat the tops whereof do.ggrow yellowe flowers,{weete ſmelling,of whic h 
Wiath beene called Ranuncalus dulcis Tragi,ol Tragus his ſweete Crowefoote, | | 
| WES 7 


9 Ranunculus 


4 


308 THE;SECOND/ BOOKE' OF /THE 
9 Renenculm Batrachinidet. || 70 las gr ominew L'Obelj 
Frogge Clovioote. 1 | |  Graflie foore, 5. 


+ T he deſeription, | ; 7 


9 Frogge Crowfoote called of Pere Aconitum Batrachioides, of Dodonew Batrachiow Apuli, it 
groweth to the height of two cubirs : the leaues arc broade,deepely cut or iagged, cuen tothe mid: 
dle rib: on the top of the ſtalks ſtande ſmall yellowe flowers,conliſting of five little leaves: the mids 
dle part is of a deepe yellowe, as it were of a ſaffron colour : the roote is rough and threddie. 

10 The tenth Crowfoote hath many graflic leaues, ofa deepe greenetending to blewnes, ſome- 
whatlong,narrow and ſmooth, yery like vnto thoſe of the ſmall Biſtort,, or Snakeweede: among 
which riſe vp {lender ſtalkes, bearing at the top {mall yellowe flowers like the other Crow footes: 


the roote is ſmall and threddie. | | | 
11 The autumne or winter Crowfoot, hath diuers broadleaues ſpred ypon the ground, ſnipt about 
the edges, of a bright ſhining green colour on the vpper ſide, and hoarie vnderncath, full of ribs or 
ſinewes, as ace thoſe of Plantaine , of an vnpleaſant taſte at the firſt, afterwarde nipping the toong: 
among which leaues riſe vp ſundrie tender tooteſtalkes; on the rops whereof ſtand flowers, 
conſiſting of ſixe ſmall leaues apeece : after which ſucceede little knaps of ſeedelike vntoadrie or 


withered Strawberie, The roote is compa of anumberot limber rootes, rudely thruſt rogither 1n 
manner of the Aſphadill. i] | | | | 


12 ThePortingale Crowfoote hath many thickecloggedrootes, faſtened vnto one head, very 


like vato tho!e of the yellow Aſphodill: fromwhich riſe vp three leaues ſeldome more,broad,thich, 

and putted vp indiuers places,as if it were athing thatwete bliſtered, by meancs whereof it is very 

vneuen. From the middle of which leaucs rifſeth vp a naked ſtalke, thicke, fat, butyet render, wy 

very fragilc,orcafie;to breake: on the end whereof ſtandetha faire ſingle yellow flower, hauimgn 

the middle a naked rundell of a golde yellowgtending toa Saffron colour, = ts 
| | | | ES 2 11 RANT 


HISTORIE 
11 Ranunenlus auturmnali Clury, 


N LC 
AN Vt 


13 Renunculus globoſus. 


Locker Goulons,or globe Crowfoote. 


OF PLANTS. || 


12 Rananceule LuſtenicuCluh, 
= Poningale Cromfores 7 1 


* Thedeſeriprion. 


13 The globe Crowfoote bath verie . manie 


leaues deepely cut and iagged,of a bright green 
colour,like thoſe of the field Crowfoot : among 
which riſeth vp a ſtalke, diuidedrowarde the top 
into other branches , furniſhed with the like 
leaues of thoſe next the grotinde,bur ſmaller: on 
the tops of which branches growe very faire yel- 
lowe flowers,conſfiſting of a fewe leaues, folded 
or rowled vp togither like a round ball or globe ; 
whereupon it was called Xanumen/ts elboJis or 
the globe Crowfoote, or globe flower , which 
being paſt, there ſucceede rough knaps, where- 
in is blackiſh ſeed:theroote is all and threddy. 


l + The place. - 
This kinde of Crowfoote groweth in molt 


 - places of Yorke ſhire,and Lancaſhire,and other 


thoſe bordering ſhires of the North'countrey, 
almoſt jn every medowe,butnot found wilde in 
theſe ſoutherly or weſterly parts of Englande, 
thatI could cuer vnderſtand of. pay 
| *+ The time, 
It flowreth in Maic and lune, The ſeed is ripe 
in Avguſt, tra ak 
| | * The 


8 THE SECOND BOOKE OF! THE 
; |. % The names. 


The globe flower i, called ventrally Rannneulu globo lue.of ſome FlesTrallas,and Retantalan 4) 
pinue: > Engliſh Globe Crowfogte, Troll flowers,and 20d gowlons, | "7 


. 


* Of zellow Batchelers Buttons. Chap 352. 


1 Ranuwtculmu Wa x m2 Anelicus. | 2 Ranwiculus maximus multiplex, 
Double Crowtfoot,or Batc helers Buttons, Double wilde Crowfoote. 


5 4 - 
(AY { 
Gd / k 
Ge LAN 
- ; 
< *h NS 
4 -A. _- VI % Y 
—_ - p Cd 


|  »The deſeription. 


B. He great double Crowfqote or Batchelers Burtons, hath manje iagged leaues of a deepe 
| greenecolour: m_es which riſe vpſtalkes, whereon do growe faire yellow flowers cx- 
cceding double, of a ſhining yellow colour, oftentimes thruſtivg foorth of the middeſt of 
the ſaid flowers one other ſmaller lower, which the Grauer hath omitted, as alſo the rounde or 
Turnep roote ; the forme whereof hath cauſed ir to be called of ſome Saint Aritonies Turnep, of 
Rape Turnep.. The ſecede is wrappedin acluſter of rough knops as are molt of the Crowfootes. 
2 Thedouble ycllow wilde Crowfodte hath leaucs of a bright greene colour, with manic weake 
braunches trailing ypon the grounde, whereon do grow verie double yellow flowers like vnto the 
precedent, but alropgither letler. [The whole plant is likewiſe withour anic manifeſt ge 1a 


uing that thele flowers do neuer bring foorthanie ſmaller flower out of the middle of the greate?, 
as the other doth; andalſo hath no'Lurnep or knobbed roote atall, wherein conliſteth 


e grea-. 
rcſt difference, 


VOOR} oY beplacs Lt 4,1 
The ficſt is planted in Gardens for the beauty of the flowers,and likewiſe the ſecond,which =. 


| HISTORIE| OF PLANTS... >. $14 
| flatebeene brought foorth of Lancaſhire vnto our London Gardens, by acuriqus gentlemanin 
he ſcrching footth of Simples Maſter 7 hows Hesketh, who found it growing wilde inthe towne 
Gelds of a ſmall village called Heskerh,not far from Lathain in Lancaſhire. -1 
| ; 9 * Theta. 
| They flower from the beginning of May to the end of Iune, 


*% Th: names. 


| Dioſcorides hath madeno mention hereof: but Apule;xs hath ſeparated the firſt oftheſe from the 
thers,intreating ot it apart, and naming it by a peculiar name Zarrechion, whereupon it isallocal- 
d Apuley Bo? Machion, Or Apulejus Crowfoote. | 1 | 

 Itis commonly called Rzpam D.Anthong,or Saint Anthonies Rape : ir may be called inEngliſh, 
ape Crowtoote ; it is called generally about London Batchelers buttons,and double Crowtoote: 


% The temperature. 
| Theſe plants do bite as the other Crowfootes do. 


* The vertuts. 


| Thechiefeſt zertue is in the roore, which being ſtamped with ſalt is good fot thoſe that have a A 
plague (ore, if itbe preſently inthe beginning tied to the thigh, in the middle berweenethe groine 

5 1 OY the knee : by mcanes whereof,the poiſon and malignitie of the diſeaſe is drawen from 
the inward partes, by che emunQtorie or clenſing place ofthe flanke, into thoſe outwarde partes of 
lefſe accoung, For it cxulterateth and preſently railerh a bliſterto whar pareof he bodie ſocuer it 
is applied. And ifit chancethat the fore happenerth vnder rhe arme , then itis requifite ro applic ir 
tothearme a little abouc the elbowe : my opinion is, that any of the Crowfootes willdo the fame : 
myreaſonis , bicauſe they all and euery of them do bliſter , and cauſe puny whereſocuer they be 
applied,and paine doth drawe vnto it ſelfe more paine : for the nature of paine is,toreſortvnrothe 
weakeſt place, and where it may*hnde paine; and likewiſe the poiſon and venemous qualitie of that 
diſcaſe,is to reſort vnto thatpainfull place. | 4 | 
- Cpultimsfaith further, thatif it be hanged in alinnen cloth about the necke of him that is luna- B 
tike in the waine of the moone, when the figne ſhall be inthe firſt degree of T; 1469 OT Scor pro, that 
then he ſhall fogrthwith be cured. 'Moreouct, the herbe Batrach:on ſtamped with vineger, roote 
andall,is vied for them thathaue blacke ſcars, or ſuch like marks on their skins, i catceth them out, 
and leaucth a colour like that of the bodie. | FE» 


3 © Ofmwbite Batchelers Buttons,or double 
q! | . Crowfoote. Chap.353. 


16 He white double-Crowfoote hath many greatleaues , deepely cur with great gaſhes, 
{ and thoſe ſhipt about the edges. The ſtalkes diuide thernſclues into diuers brittle 
' > branche, on » whereof do growe very double flowers as white as ſnowe, and of 
bir our yellow Batchelers Button, The roote is tough, limber, and diſperſerh it ſelfe far 
vroad whereby it greatlyencrealeth, | c | 


| 16 Ranwneulm 


832 THE SECOND/BOOKE OF THE 
| DoublewhiteBarchelers Button $,0f double white Crowfoote. 


—__—_ 


* Theplace. 

. It growethinthe gardens of Hetbarift 
and louers of ftrange plants, whereof we 
| hanegoodplentic, but rgroweth not wild 

any where, HSE | | 
*% Thetime. | i 
It flowreth from the beginning of May 
vnto the end thereof. £ 

2 Thenanes. | 

Itis called of ZObelrus Ranunce/ns ni. 
wens Polyanthes, of Taber Montuns Ranun- 
culus albas multiflorus : in Engliſh Double 


J white Crowfoore, or Batchelers Buttons, 
| The temperature and werines, 
The temperature and faculties in wor. 
king agree withthe wilde Crowfoots. 


| Of Turkie Crowfootes. Chap 354+ 


4 Wi LAS | P51 | (i 2 Renwnculus ripolit , +] 
ZFASSS No Crowfqote of Tripolic. | 
1 Runumeulus ſanguineas multiplex. 

The Jouble red Crowtoote, 


; 


Sou 


. 


* The deſcription. 


: He double red Crowfoote hath a fewe leaues riſing immediately foorth of the ground,cut 
| | # in the edges with deepe gaſhes, ſomewhat hollow, and of a bright ſhining greene coluur, 
| The ſtalke riſech vp to the height ofa foote, ſmooth, and very britrle, diuiding ir ſelfe into 

 otherbranches,ſometimes rwo,ſeldome three; whereon do grow leaues confuſedly fer withour or- 

der: the lowers growe at the tops of the ſtalks very doublegand of great beautie, of a perfe@ſcarler 
colour tending to rednes, The roote is compaCt of manylong tough rootes like thoſe of the yellow 
fphodill. | * pr 

Tie Crowfoorteof Tripolis or theſingle redRanunculus, hath leaves at their firſtcomming vp 

like vnto thoſe of Ground(well: among which riſethwpa ſtalke of the height of halfe a cubire,ſom- 

what hairie yhereon do growe broad leaues deepely cut,cuento the middle rib.Jlike thoſe of Hen- 
1ocks: the lower groweth atthe rop of the ſtalk,conſiſtingof hue leaues, on the outſide of adark or 
ozerworne redcolour,on the infide of a red leadTolour, orPhoeniceus colour, in ſhape like the 
wilde corne Poppie, the knop or ſtile in the middle whichconteineththe ſecede , js garniſhed or be- 


deckt with very many ſmall purple thrums tending to blacknes: the roote is as it were a bundell of 
little bulbes or graines like thoſe of the ſmall Celandine or Pilewoorrt. | 
| *% The place, | : 


'Thefirſt growerth naturally in and about Conſtantinople,and in Aſia, on the further ſide of Boſ- 


phorus,from whence there hath beene brought. plants at diners times, and by divers perſons, bur 
they haue periſhed by reaſon of the long tourney,and want of skill of the bringers , that haue ti{- 
{cred them ro lie in a boxe or ſuch like ſo rv when we haue received them, they haue beenc 
a5drie as ginger; notwhichſtanding C&/iwsſaith he recciued a plant freſh and greene., the which a 
domeſticall rheete ſtole foorth of his garden; my Lord and Maſter the right Honorable the Lorde 
Treaſurer,had diuers plants ſent himfrom thence which were driebefore they came as aforeſaide. 
The other growethin Alepo and Tripolis in Syria naturally, from whencewe haue recciued plants 
for out gatdens,where they flouriſh as in their owne countrey. £ 
| | *% The time. | | 
| They bring foorth their pleaſant flowers in Maie andIune, theſeedeisripein Avguſt, 
*% The nones. £24: | 
The firſt is called Ranwunculms Conſtantinopolitanuuof L Obelims Ranunculus ſanguineus multiplex , 
Ranunculus Bizantimus fine Aſiaticus : inthe Turkiſh toong: Tarobolos Catamer late : in En oliſh the 
double red Ranunculus,or Crowfoore, HT {Se | 
 Theſecond is called Ramwnewlns Tripolitenas, of the place from whence it was firſtbrovght into 
theſe parts : of the Turkes T arobolos Catamer, withour that addition lale, which is a proper words 
vnto all flowers that are double. | | 
|  " u% The temperature and vertues. bp 
ther ag huog and ertues ate referred tothe other Crowfootes, whereof they are thought 
w CS. | | | F | 


i : 
I 

l 

1 


1 Of Spearewoort,or Banewoort. * Chap.355. 


%* The deſcription, FE iS 
1C Pearewoort hath an ho!lowe ſtalke full of knees orioints, whereon do growe long ſmooth 
leaues, not vnlike thoſe of the Willow, of a ſhining greene colour: the . 70 4s grow atthe 
tops of the ſtalkes conſiſting offiue leaues,ofapale yellowe colour,very like vnto the field 
_ pol cup,or wilde Crowfoare : after which come a. knops or ſeede veſiels, wherein is the lecd? 

te rote is compact ofdiuers bulbes or long clogs, mixed withan infinite number of hairy threds, 


& »Thecommon Spearewoorr bcing that which we callthe leſſer hath leaues, flowers and ſtalks 
| the precedent, but altogither leffer : the roore confiſterh of an infinize number of chuedcie 


1 Kanuncus 


— — 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. — "8. 


814 'THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
1 Ranuneulus flommeus major. | 2 Ranunculu flommem mingr. 
Great Spearewoort, | | Thelefler Spearewoorr, 


A. 


3 Ranunenlus flommens ſerrate. | | 4 RaPmunenlus Palaſtris. 


lagged Spearewoort, | 1 Mariſh Crowfoote,or Spearewoort, 
Wo,  * Qs | YT 7. oP - 


HISTORIE OF/PLANTS. 815 
*% The dſeription. | A}. ; 


{a2ged Spearewoort hatha thicke fat hollowe ſtalke, dividing it ſelfe into! diuers branches, 
{rereon are ſet by couples at euery iointtwo long leaues,ſharpe pointed and cut about the edges 
like the reerh of a ſawe. The flowers grow at the top of the branches of a yellow colour, in forme 
like thoſe ofthe fielde Crowtoote :the roore conſiſterh of a number of hairie ſtrings. 

Marſh Crowfoore, or Spearewoort (whereofit is akinde, raken of the beſt approoued authors 
tobe the true Ap/w” Riſms, aſthough divers report that Pulſatillais the fame; of ome it is taken to 
bee Apiuom Emorodrarum ) ritern foorth of themudde or waterifh'mire from a threddie'roore , to 
the height of a cubite,ſomerimes higher, The ſtalke diuiderh it ſelfe into diuers branches, where- 
upon do growe broade leaues deepely cut.round about like thoſe of Doueg ſporeppnd pot vnlike to 
the cut Mallowe,but ſomewhat greater, and of a moſt bright {huning.greene colour : the flowers 
grow at the top of the branches of a yellowe colour,like vnto the other water Crowfootes, 

b | | | % The pace. ; 2 ' | 

They growe in moiſtand dankiſh places , in brinkes or watex courſes ,-and ſuch like places al- 
moſt eucry where, ; , 

% The time. 

| They flower in Maie when the other Crowtfootes do. 
| * 7 he names, x. | EY 
| Spearewoort is called of the later Herbariſts F/ammula,and Ranunculus Flammeus, of Cordus 4. 
nunculus +4r:ces, Platyphyllos,or broad leafed Crowſoore, others Remnuneulus longrfolius , or long 
leated Crowfoote :1n lowe Dutch Egecicolen: in Englith Speare Crowfoote, Spearewoort, and 
Banewoortbicauſe it is dangerous and deazly tor ſheepe; and thar if they feede of the ſame it in- 
fancth their livers, fretteth and bliſtercth their guts and entrailes.,- | | 


% The temperature of allthe Crown foctes. 24 | | 
Spearewoort is like to the other Crowtfootes in faculties it is hotin the month or biting,it exul- 
cerareth and raiſerh bliſters,and being raken inwardly it killerh remediles.Generally all the Crow. 
footes,as Galer (aith, are of a very ſharp or biting qualitie,inſomuch as they raiſe bliſters withpain: 
andare hot and dric in che fourth degree, ; ? | / 
| & The vertues of all the C rouwfootes. | 
Theleaues or rootes of Crowfoote ſtamped and applied vnto any part of the body, cauſeth the A 
$in to lwell and bliſter, and raiſeth wwheales, b!adders,caufeth ſcars, cruſts,and vglie vicers: it is 
hide vpon cragged warts,corrupt nailes,and fuch like excreſcence, to cauſe themto fall away, 
Theleaues {tzamped and applied vnto any peſtelentiall or plague fore, or carbuncle , ſtaieth the B 
ſpreading nature of the ſame,and cauſeth the venemous or peltilentiall marterto breath foorth, by 
opening the pores and paſſages in the skin. | 
| Itprevatlerhmuch todrawe a plague fore from the inwarde parts , being of danger, vnto other C 
_ places further from the hart,and other of the ſoirituall parts, as hath beene declared inthe 
cleription, | 
Many do vſetp tie alittle of the herbe ſtamped with ſale vnto any of the fingers againſt the paine D 
 ofthereeth,, which medicine ſeldome failech; for it cauſerh greaterpainein the finger then wasin 
the tooth, by the meanes whereof, rhe greater paine taketh away the leſſer, .. .,;,. || 5113/4, 


ing x 
- Cunning beggers do vero ſtampe the leaues,and lay it ynto their legs andarmes,which chuſerh E 


luchfilthy vicers as we daily tee(among ſuch wicked vagabondes)romovuc'ths people the mire ro 
Thekinde of Crowfoote of Illyria,being takemto be. Apinrm Reſwsof ſore, of others uconitum F 
 Barachwades, This plant ſpoileth the lences and vnderſtanding, and draweth togither the finewes 
andmuſcles of the face in ſuch ſtrange. manner , that thoſe who. beholging ſuch. as died by the 
taking heercof, haue ſuppoſed that: they died laughing zo forceably hath it drawne and contrac- 
xe the nerues and ſinewes , thattheir, faces haue beene drawne awty, as though they laughed, 
whereas contrariwile they hauc dicd with great torment. | {2 | 


of 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Of W oolfes bane. Chap.356. 


& T: he kingdes. 


T» Here be diuers ſorts of VV oolfes bane :moſt of them bring foorth flowers of a yellow c ORE 
L others with ablew,or tending to purple: among the yellow ones there are ſome greater others 
leſſer,ſome of broader [eaues,andochers of narrower. | | 


x Thors Paldenſis mas. | | | 2 ThoraValden is farming. 
Broad leafed Woolfes bane. _ 'Broadleafed female Woolfes bane, | 
li | | | \ ; © Mp 
4 Oe 


Fi My W-, v» 
. 


ZO! 


A _ 
Ny = 
# \ 


1 
vw 
WL 


#771 + The deſeription. 


*Hefirſt kinde of Aconzre,of ſome called Thora,others adde theretothe place where it gro- 
wethin great abundance,which is the'Alpes;& call ir Thors Ya/denſnon. This plant rooke 
| ' his name ofthe Grecke worde ef», ſignifying corruption, murther , __  ordeath, 
which are the certaine effe&ts of this pernicious plant: for this they yſe very much in poiſons, and 
when they meane to inferheir arrowe heads, the more ſpeedily and deadly to diſparchthe wilde 
and ſauace beaſts, which do greatly annoy thoſe monnraines of the Alpes tro whic purpoſe alfoit 
is brought into the marr townes neere vnto thoſe places to beſolde ynto the hunters, who prepare 
the juice thereof by prefling it foorth in hotnes and hoofes of beaſts, reſeruing it for the molt ſper- 
die poiſon of all the CHeomtes; for an arrowe touchedtherewith , leauerth the wounde vncureable 
(ifitferch bloude where it entreth) except rounde abour the wound the fleſh be cur away in great 
uantitie : this plant therefore may rightly be accounted as firſt andchiefe of thoſe that be called 
Gagicar or Aconites,by reaſon of the malignantqualities aforelaide, This that hath beene = 
| | | argue 


; 


[1 
: 
, 


HISTORIE' OF: PLANT $: |: 1 $17 


- atoverhallo that Muthiolus hath vnproperly called it > ſeudoaconitumn that is, falſe or baſtard Aco. 
te; for without queltidn there is no woorſe qr more ſpecdie venoine in the world,nor no Aconite 
- toxicall plant comparable heereunto; And yet let vs behold thefatherly care and ptouidence of 
God who hath prouided a conquerour and triumpher ouer thisplant ſo venemous,namely his .4x- 
teak "7 tithora, or to ſpeake in ſhorter and fewer (yHables, _Lrthora, which is the very antidote 
&remedie againſt the kinds of Aconires. 1 he ſtalke ofthis plantisſmalland ruſhje, veric ſmooth, 
wohandfuls high , abautthe middle whereof, and towardetherop , commeth forth often one 
kafe alone, forties wwo,and very ſeldome three or tower, which are ſomewhatrounde of com- 
vaſſe,anda little nickt about the edges, like rhe combe of acocke. The leafe is ſtiffe and forawhar 
{nooth on the vpper {ide,and nor much vnlike the leanes of Cyc/amen : the flowers grow ar the top 
of the ſtalke, in colour and faſhion like the flowers of Cinkefoile, or fiue leafed graſſe: therootes 
are ſmall, hauing many round and thicke truncheons,ſharpe and lender at the bottome , bur next 
the ſtalke it is knottie,not vnlike the roores of Antboras,or Aſphodelus, Dodonews hath more truclie 
deſcribed this plant in his laſt edition,then Per hath , who hath faulred in two notable rel pects; 
kc in the :ootes ,and ſecondly inthe flowers,both which are much varying, yea nothing necce the 
picture. = Z *} - 
hs ſecond broad leafed Woolfes bane of the Valdenſes (or of thoſe people ſometimes called 
Sclauonians)hath one onely ſtalke,and the ſame rounde, two handes high: whereupon do growe 
three or fower leaues,ſeldome more,which be ſomething harde , rounde,ſmooth, of a light greene 
colour tending to blewnes,like the colour of the leaues of Woad, nickedin the edges. The flowers 
grow atthe top of the ſtalkes, of a yellow colour, leſſer then thoſe of the fielde Crowfoote,other- 
wiſe alike : in the place thereof growerth a knopor rounde head,wherein is the ſeede: the roote con- 
liteth of nine or ten clogs3 faſtacd rogither with lictle ſtrings vnto one head, like/thoſe of the white 
 Aſphodill, ; rt} \'- | | 6-31 36 


L 12095 O10 DL | 14 © ;I1R91 1} 
2 Thoramonti Baldi. [- 4 Thora Sabaudzcg. 
Mountaine Woolfes bane.:-- 24a, 1. Sauoic Woolfes bane: 


( 


% 


- 


A, \ 
6=+/ 


oy; 


8: 


%. 
. 


/ => - '-" 


ITY 


* 


% 


$1B THE SECOND /BOOKE OF THE 


% The deſcription. 


3 Woolfes bane ofthe mount Baldus hath one ſtalke,ſmooth and plaine, in the middle whereof 
come foorth two leaves and no more,wherein it differeth from the other of the Valdens hauin 
likewiſe tliree or fower ſharpe pointed leayes, narrowe and ſomewhar iagged at the place whete 
the ſtalke diuderh ir ſelfe inro linaller branches 3 whereon do growe ſivall yeilowe flowers like the 
precedent,butmuch leſſer. _ "WE {| F 

4 Tharof Sanoie hath likewiſe an vpright ſtalke, ſmooth, and ofa greene colour, in the midd[e 


. Whereof growe two leaues, of an ouerworne blewiſh colour: the flowers are lomewharbigger 


, 


then the precedent,and of the ſame colour, 
* The place. 


Theſe venemous plants do grow on the Alpes, and the mountaines cf Sauoic and Switzerland: = 


| The firſt grow plenrifully in the countrey of the Valdens, who inhabirepart of thoſe mountaines 


| rowards ſabe. Theocheris foundon Baldys, 2 mounrane of laly, Theyare ſtrangers in Eglnd 


* Thetime. | 
They flowerin March and Aprill,cheir ſeede is ripe in Tune. 


t* The names. < 


= Thiskindeof Aconite or Woolfes bane is called 7 hors; Tawre,and Twrs, it is firnamed Valdew. 
fos,chat it may differ from Nepelze,or Munckes hoode,which is likewiſe named Thors, -.. 
uicen raaketh mention of a certaine deadly herbe in his fourth booke , ſixt Fen, called rur- 
feun;it is harde ro affirme this ſame to be They Yaidenſis,of Munkes hoode of Valdenſia: in Engliſh 
we may Call it round leafed Munkes hood,and fo of the reſt,as is ſer downe in their ſeuerall tides. 


5 v uy} BPO 41 % The temperature and vertues.” 


Theforce of theſe Woolfes banes , are moſt pernicious and poiſonſome, and ( as itis reported) 
exccederh the malice of X apes,or any ofthe other Woolfes banes as we haue ſaid, 

B Theyfay thatitisot och forcethar if a man eſpecially , and thennexr foyer foored beaſts or 
any other wilde beaſt be wounde( with an arrowe or other inſtrument dipped inthe iuice heereof, 
doth die within halfe an hower after remedilefle. WF 


os 


Oo winter Woolfes bane. Chap.357: 


Fed 


* The deferiptiim. |. 


His kinde of Aconite is called © Aconitum hyemale Belgarams, of Dedonews _Aeconitum luteum 

- minis, in Engliſh Woolfes bane, or ſmall yellowe Woolfes bane}, whoſe leaues come 
foorth of the grounde in the dead time of winter, many times bearing rhe ſnowe ypon tne 

heades of his leaues and flowers; yea the colder the weather is, and the deepex that the ſnowe 1s, 
the fairer and larger is the flower; and thewarmer that the weather{ is, the leflcr is the flower, 
 andwoorſe colouted : theſe leaues I faic come foorth of the grounde immediately from the roote 
with a naked, ſoft, and flender ſtemme, deepely cur or vivons onthe leaues, of an exceeding faire 
greene colour, in the midſt of which commerh foorth a vellow flower, in ſhew or faſhion like vt- 

_ tothe common fielde Crowfoore , after which followe fundrie cods tull of browne leedes like 
the other kindes of Aconites : the roote is thicke, tuberous , anddknottie , like totic kindes of 
Ancmone. | I | |/ zh 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


Aconitum hyemale. b | : | 
Winter VV oolfes bane. | &% The place. 


., It groweth ypon the mountaines of Germanic : 
we haue great quantitic of it inour London gar- 
dens. 

| * Thetime. 
5 ; It flowreth inIanuarie; the ſeede is ripe in the 
.endofMarch, 
= j &* The names. 
\Itis called _Hconitum hyemale, or Hibernuwmn, or 
... winter Aconitc: thatitis a kinde of Aconite or 
' Woodlfes| bane, both the forme of the Jeaues and 
F522 cods,and alſo the dangerous faculties of the herbe 
MS itſclfc do declare. NP 

S=>- Ir is much like ro Aconitum Theophraſts, which 
>... he deſcribeth in his 9. booke ſaying , iris a ſhore 
herbe, having nome, orfuperfiuous thing gro- 
wing on it, and is without branches as this planr 
is;:the roote ſaith he is like to xz2v5, or to anut, or 
elſe to 9px, a driefigge , onely the leaſe ſeemeth 
to make againſt it, which'is nothing at all like to 
- thatof Succory,which he compaterh ic vato. 


| % The temperature and vertues. 
'» |: This herbe is counted to be very dangerous and A 
| deadly :hot &driein the fourth degree, as 7 heoph. 
|.” implainewordes doth teſtifie concerning his owne 
'UMeonite;zfor which he fairhthatthere was neuer | 
founde his antidoreor remedie:; whereof Athe- 
.  -naw and Theopomprus write, that this plant is the 
| Fc} 5th 05.5 SHY, . - moſtpoiſone hetbe of all others, which mooued 
Owidto faic Ons quia Baſcuntar dura vinacia cante : notwithſtanding it is not without his peculiar 
vertues, /oachimas Camer arizes now living in Noremberg faith ; the water dropped into the eyes 
ceaſeth the paine and burning : itis reported ro preuaile mightily againſt the birings of ſcorpions, 
andisof ſuch force; that if < ſcorpion paſſe by where it growerh and touch the ſame , preſent- 
ly he becommeth dull, heauic , yer ner ſe, andif theſame fcorpion by chance touch thewhite 
Hellebor js preſently delivered rom his drowſines. 1 * :- 


Of Mitridate Woolfes bane. Chap.358, 


WET Woe | 
WEN Thedeſeription. 


is plant called; _A»thors , being the; antidote againſt the poiſon of 7hors, CHeonire , ot 
. Woolfes baue, hath ſlender hollowe ſtalkes,very brittle, a cubite high , garniſhed with fine 
cut or jagged leaues,very like to N/gel/a Romana,orthe common Larkes ſpurre; called Conſoli- 
Ma Regain: at Te top. of the ſtalkes do growefaire flowers,faſhioned like alictle helmer,ofan over- 
erg rye: colour ; after which come. {mall blackiſh cods, wherein is contcined black ſhining 
leede ike thoſe of Oinions : the roote conliſteth of diuers knobs or tuberous lumps,of the bigneſle 
ofa mans thumbe, ke ; 
F ff 2 Anthera 


— 


| 
| 
| 
| 


$2» THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Anthora ſue Atonitun ſalutiferun. | | 
Holſome Wootes bane. | 


| 


7. The place. 


This plant whichthe Grzcians terme arne4.y,. 
roweth abundantly in the Alpes, called Kbetict.in 
auoic,& in Liguria. The Ligurians of Taurinun 

and thoſe that dwell necre the lake Lemanus babe 
founde this herbeto be apreſent remedie againſ 
the deadly poiſon of the herbe T hora, andthe reſt 
ofthe Aconites , prouided that when it is brought 
into the garden, thereto be kept for Phiſickes 1 
it muſt not be plantedneere vnto any of 'the Aco- 
nites: for through his artraCtive quality, it wil dra 
vnto it ſelke the maligne and vencmous poiſon of 
the Aconite , whereby it will become of the like 
qualitie,that is, to becgme poiſonous likewiſe : bur 
being kept farre off, itietaineth his owne natura!! 
qualivie ſtill, | 3} | | 

*% The time, | 

It lowreth in Augult,the ſeed is ripe in the end 

of September. | 


, _ % Thenames, 

The inhabitants cf the lake of Genena, and the 
Piemontoiſe do call it Anthora, andthe common 
people AHnthoro. Auicen callerh a certaine herbe 
which is like to Munkes hoode, as aremedy againſt 
the poiſon therof,by the name of Napelm. Mey/is 
inthe 500. chapterof his ſecond booke, andinthe 
745. chapter, be ſaith, that Zedoaria doth growe 


POR | | i] | with N ave/wsor Mnnks hoode,and thathy reaſon 
of the neerenes of the ſame ghe farce and ſtrength therof is dulled and made weaker, and that itisa 
Treacle,thatis, a counterpoiſon againſt the viper Munks hood,and all other poiſons:and heerupon 
it followeth,that it is not onely Moy/i Napelize, but alſo Zedoaria Anicenne, notwithſtanding the 
apothecaries do ſell another Zedparradittering from Amthere, which.is a roote of a longet forme, 
thatnot without caule.is thought tobe 1idurcens and Serapios Zerwitbeth,ot Zurwnbeth. 

Itis called Azthore,as though|they ſhould ſaic Antichors; bicauſe itis an'enimie to Thops, anda 
connterpoiſon tothe ſame, Thoye and Anthors, ot Tura and Anturs,{ceme tobe newe wordes,but 
yet they are vied in Marcellus Empericus,anlold writer, who teacheth a medicine to be made of Tu- 
74 and Anturs,againſtthe pin and webbe in the cies: in Engliſh yellowe Munkes hoode, yellowe 
Helmet flower,and|Aconites mithridate, | | 


E= *%* The vertues. ey X | PET 
A Therooteof Anthors is woonderfull bitteryit is an enimie toall poiſons : it is good for purgats- 
ons 3 for it voideth by the ſtoole both waterie and {limy humours, killeth ane driuerh foorth allma- 


I 


ner of wormes of the belly. Fit 


B Huge Solerins ſiith,thatthe rgotes of Amthora do largely purge notonely by the ſtoole, but alſo 
by vomite: and that the meaſurethereof is/raken to the quantitie of Faſe/as, (which is cqmmonty | 
called a beane)in broth or wine | and is given to ſtrong bodies. © | REP | 

C &Cantonims Guantrims doth ew, that Amthorg is of great force, yea and that againſt th Jaguc, 

in his creatie of the plague ; the ſeconde difference, the thirde chapter ; and the roote is of; ke ver- 
tues,giuen with Ditranie,which|Thaue ſeene faich he by experience: and further ſaith,it isan herbe 
thatgroweth hard by that herbe/Thora,of which there ismade a poiſon, wherewith they|of Sauey 
and thoſe parts adiacent,do emieno! Ir arrowes, the more ſpecdily to kill.rhe ri Goates, 
andotherwilde beaſtsof the Alpi nNtaines. And this roote ,Anthora is the Bezo47,07 cur 
terpoiſon to that Thora,which is of ſo great a venome, as that it killerh all liuing CICAtures with Iu 


poifonſome qualitie,and thus mych Guaneriue. j-.-\. ela 
; | "LF" N : my 


* AISTORIE OF'/PLANTS. 77 $21 
' 2 gimon Januenſs hath atſomademention of Anthora,and (Arnoldum Villanouanw in his treatic of D 
| poiſons: but their writings do declare that they did not well knowe Anthora. | 1377 

Of yellow Woolfes bane. Chap.359. 
| | w% Thekindes, : | 1 
| ere be diuers ſorts of Woolfes bane, moſt ofthem bring foorth lowers of ayellowe colour, 
y Kerb blew,or tending to purple: among the yellowe ones there isBne greater, another leſler, 


Aconitum lutewn ponticur. | 
Yellow Woolfes bane. * The deſcription. 
He yellowe kinde of Woolfes banecalled 
| Aconauniucumponticum, Ot according to 
Dodoneus, i Acontwn LycotFonon luterwn ma- 
| #w: in Engliſh yeilowe Wooltfes bane, (whereof 
- this our age hath founde our ſindrieforts nor 
known to Diofeorides , although ſome of the forts 
ſeeme to ſtande inditferent berweene the kindes 
of Renuncn/ue Helleborus, and N apelius:) this yel- 
lowe kindel faic hath large ſhining greeneleaues 
faſhioned like a vine, and of the ſame bigneſle, 
deepely indented or cur, nor much vnlike the 
leaves of Geranium Fuſcum,orblacke Cranes bill, 
the ſtalks are bare or naked,nor bearing his leaues 
vpon tle fame ſtalkes, one oppalite againſt ano- 
ther, as m the other of his kind this ſtalks growvp 
rothe hight of three cubirs, bearing very hine yel- 
low flowers,fantaſtically faſhioned & in ſuch ina- 
nerſhaped , thatIcan very hardly defcribe them 
- vntoyou, They are ſomewhat like vntothe hel- 
met Munkes hoode, open and hollowat one end, 
firme and ſhut vp at the other: his Fooresare ma- 
nie, compact of a number of threddie or blacke 
ſtrings, of an ouerworne yellow colour,ſpreading 
farre abroade every way , foulding themſclues 
one within another very confuſedly. This plane 
| | OPEN: 6 inthe darke hillieforreſts,and 
Br. WES, |  ſhadowie woods , which ate not rrauclled nor 
| hamntedburbywilde and ſauage beaſts, and is thought ro bethe ſtrongeſt and next vato Therain 
| hispoiſoning qualitie,of all che reſt ofrhe Aconites,or Woolfes banes; infomuch thatif a fewe of 


| the flowers bechewed in the mouth,and ſper foorth againe preſently, yetfoorthwithir burneth the _ 


| hawesand toong,cauſing them to ſwell, and making a certaine ſwimming or gots in the head. 
| Thiscalleth tony remembrance an hiſtoric of a certain gentleman dwelling in Lincolnfhire,called 
Maheove,the true report whereof my very good friend maſter N;jchots Belſon, ſometimes fellowe 
| otKingsColledgein Cambridge,harh deliuered vnto me: Maſter Mchevue dwelling in Boſton, a 
| ftodentin Phiſicke, hauing occaſionro ride through the Fennes of Lincolnſhire, founde a roote 
that the hogs had turned yp, which ſeemed vnto him very ſtrange and vnknowne , for that it was 
| mtheſpringbefore theleaues were out: this roote he taſted, and it{o inflamed his mouth , roong, 
, andlips,thatitcauſed them to ſwell very extremely, ſothar before he coulde get to the towne of 
| Doftonhecoulde not ſpeake , and no doubrhadloſt his life, iftharthe Lord God hadnotdlefſed | 
| thoſe good remedies which preſently -he procured and ved. Thauc heere thoughtgood ra exprelle. 
| thshiſtorie,for twoeſpecially cauſcs zrhe firſt is, that fome induſtrious and diligent obſeruer of 
| . haturepnay beprouoked to ſeeke foarth that yenemous plant, or. ſome of his kindes: forT am-cer- 
| Kanlyperfiyaded thatit is either the Thoys Y aldenſiuwor Acontum lutewnvehereof this ge _o___ 
| | p LC Fit 3 | caltea, 


$22 THE $1 COND: BOOKE, on 'THE 


: taſted, which twoplants haue not at anytime beene thought to. growe naturally in | 
other cauſe'is,! oa I would waine ops on bythan rs ra . blah: ihe 
'*+ The place. 
This yellowe Woolfes banc roweth in my we ma bur norwilde in \Engande , Orin \O A 
of theſe northerly regions, | P ' 'u% The time, + FS." | 
5 Ic fowreth in the cnd of Iune,fomew bar afterthe ocher Aconites, | 
+ The names, 550 h 
- This yellow Woolfes batt igcalled of L' Obelins, Aconitum lnteum rtirwn or Ponrick! Woalfs 
bane, There is mention made'i | Dioſcorides his copies of three Wool fes banes, of which|rhe hun- 
ters vie one, and Phiſitions the qther two, Marcellus Vergrltzs holderh opinion chat the Wie of this 
plantis vrrerly ro be refuſed inmedicine. | * The terperature and verrnes. I's 
A Thefaggltieofthis Aconite,as allo of the other Woolfes bancys deadly ro man, ang likewiſe 
ro all orher living ercatures. | 
B | Itis vied among the hunters which eld Woolfes, thei ivice whereof they pur M 
 feſh,whichrhe Woolfes deuoupe and are killed. 


| 


OT > IDES Exe. 


7 


Of other Woo ifes bones that are not ngellow Chap. 16c 0. 


\ The kindes.. 
"Pew! be alſo other kindes of Woolſes hane anes, which differ from the former in colour of the fo- 
wers; amongſtthe which 7 common Manks hoode "—_— be | 9 bur itis mekyiN apart, 


| forgood and eſpeciall cauſes, © ld 
1 Lycodtonos flore Delphinil 45-16 "| Lycoflonty is Caraloun peru, | 
_ Lackes hee Wooltes __ | | Small blew! Wooltes bane, 


£743 


- a —_ 
, 4 ” 
Til 1% - 
S ” - ” 
& / L1 k a 
» . JV 
Y . 
«a "WT -/ 4 ou 


=_41 SUN 
I 


7 
TS 


Wl 


A 


my anos bore | 

His =_ of ing bane (called Aro; ects, and of Ag pies De 
= by reaſon of the ſhape and1 enes that the lowerhath with Detphinium, or Munkes' 
prmereom oy reel ic zcalled blacke Woofes Vane: ) hath many ſarge leaues, 0f ave 
ric No hecke ercene,or | ew 210 nad cut __ Gs riferh "m4 take; 


wo 


: 


4 WW: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ IP 


| . 1: whereapon do grow flowers faſhioned like an hoode,of a very ill fauoured Iewith 

[ —_—_ Xe _ within the hoode are blacke , the ſeede alſo blacke and three 

g5y kc growing n fall huskes: the roote thicke and knobbie, | 23+} 

k This kinde of Woolfes bane,called e—_— Cerulenum parumwm facie Napell;,uo Engiuilii nall 

Woolſesbane,or round Wooltes bane, many ſender brittle italkes rwo cubits higlt, beſer 

ich leaues,very muclyiagged andlike vnto Napellwscalled in Englith Helmet flower : the Qowers 

growe at the top of the ſtalkes,of a blewiſh colonr, faſhioned allo like an hoode, bur wider. open 

Then any of the reſt : the cods and ſeed are like vnto the other:the roore is rounde and {mall;,taſhio- , 
nedlike a Peare,or finallRape, or Turnep, which mooucd the Germaines tocall the ſame Kapen- 


- bloemenztbar is in Larine, Flos YAPACEUS * in Engliſh Rape flower, ' 
Joe thus wverus Ceruleus. > itz / 
T , Blew Helmet flower. | | 1. T'he deſeription. 7 1 St 
Ty 3 This kind of Voolfs banecalled Natelus 22- 
185,in Engliſh Helmet flower,or the great Manks 
hood,bearctlr very faire and goodly blew flowers, 
in ſhapf like an he!mer , which are fo beautifull 
that a man would thinke they were of ijome excel. 
lenc vertye,bur Nox af ſemper fides habends fronts.” 
This plant is vniverfally knowne in our London 
gardens,andelſe where ; butnaturally it exoweth: 
inthe mountaines ofRherica , and ſundrieplaces = 
of the Alpes,vhere you ſhall hnde the grafle that 
groweth round it caren vp with cattle, butno part. 
of the herbeitſelfe rouched , except by certaine 
flies,who in ſuchabundant meaſure fwarm aborr 
the ſame, that they couer the whole plant : and 
(which is very ſtrange) although thele flies doe 
with great delight feede hecereupon , yer of them 
there is confeted an antidoteor moſt auaileable 
medicine againſt the deadly bite of the heaſt or 
worme called Taranta, or any other venemous 
beaſt whatſocuer; yea, an excellent remedic not 
, onely againſt the poiſonof the Aconites, bur all 
other poiſons wharſoeuer:the medicine ofthe fore 
ſaid flies is thus made. Take of the flies which have 
fedde themſclues as is aboue __ tioned, innum- 
| ber twenty, of Ariftolochea rotunds, and bole Ar- 
| | ln" cw. SEV ———_ ech a —=_ oy | 
| There isakinde of Woolfes bane, which Dodenewreporterh he foundin an old written Greeke 
 booke inthe Emperours librarie at Viennagvnder the title of ©Aconitum Lycortonwn, that anſwereth 
mall points vnto D/o/corides his deſcription, exceptinthe leaues. It hath leaues ſaith be like vnto 
thePlane tree, butlefler,andmore full of iagges,and diuiſions, a {lender ſtalke ys Ferne, of a cubite 
high, bearing his ſeede in long ceds: it hath black roots,in ſhape like Creauiſes. Heerunto agreeth 
theEmperours pifture in all things fauing in theleaues,rehich are neither fo large, nor ſomuch di- 
\Uidedbutnorched or toothed like the terth of a ſaw, 
BS % Theplace, | | | 
| Allthekinds of Woofes bane do growe in my garden,except Aconitum Lycottonon,taken foorth 
ofthe Emperours booke. * The time. | 
©| Theleplants do lower from Maie vntothe ende of Auguſt. | 
| | | | *% The names. eb Say 6 
| Thefirſtis Lycotfors ſpecies,ot akind of Woolfes bane,and ises hurtfull as any of che reſt, & cal. 
ledof L'Obelins Atonitum Delphiny,or Larke ſpur Woolfes bane: Awicenſpeaketh heerof mhis fe- 
cond booke,and afterwards in his 4.book,Fen.6.the firſt treatiſe, hauing his reaſons why and wher« 
\|forehe hath leparated this fro Chanach «d;pgbatis to ſay, the WO” ſtrigler,or Wooltes _ 
is F| h þY”" PREM b. The 


4 Hf 
GG / AZAE) 


? 


$24 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE | 
The later and barbarous Herhariſts decall this laſt Woolfes banein Larine Napellu | of thek 
gureand ſhape ofthe roote of Np, or Newer, or Nauewe gentle, whichthegrauer hah onlte. 
ted 1n the figure: it is likewiſe LycocFonz ſperies, or a kinde of Woolfes bane which is alſo called 
Toxrcuwn; tor Toxiewn is a deadly medicine as che hunters poiſon their ny darts.and 
arrowes,thatbring preſentdeathi:1\o named! arrowes which the Barbarians call Toxeamars, and 
Tox#. Dieſeor ides ſetting downeithe fymptomes or accidents to Toxicwn , togither with there 
medies, reckoneth yp almoſt the very ſame that Awcen doth concerning Napells : notwithſtan. 
ding Auicen writeth of Napelius and Toxicwm ſcucrally, but notknowing what Toxicumis (ashe 
himlelteconfeſlerh) ſo that it isyorto be maruelled thar hauing written of 27 apelias, he ſhoulde 

afterwards intreate againe of Tox/ewm. || 11386 ri in 
| fa | Y The nature and wertues. FR | 

A Alltheſeplants are hot 3nd dry inthe faurth degree,and ofa moſt venemous qualitie, | 

B Theforce and factihtic of Wopltes baneis deadly both to man and all kinds of beaſts: the ſame 
was tried of late in Anwarpe,andis as yer freſh in memorie by an cuident experiment, butmoſ1:. 
mentable, for when'the herbes heereof were by certaine ignorant perſons ſeryed vpin (allades all 
that dideat thereof, were pteſently raken with moſt cruell ſymptomes, and fo died, as we haue (a; 
in the former chapter. + | {| | E1 | 
C Theſympromes that followe choſe that do cate of theſe deadly herbes arc If. their lips and 
roongs ſwell foorthwith, their cjes hang our, their thighes are ſtiffe, and their wits are taken from 
them,as Luicen writeth inhhis 4.booke, The force of this poiſonis ſuch, as if the points ofdarts or 


S 


arrowes be touched with the ſamg;it bringeth deadly hurtto thoſe that be wounded therewith, 

D Againſtſo deadly a poiſon, Aujcer reckonerh vp certaine remedies which helpe after the poiſon 
ir ſelf is vomited vp,8 among theſe he makerh mention of the Mouſe (as the copies euety where 
hauc)nouriſhed andfted vp with Napellws, which is altogither an enimie to the poiſonſome nature 
thereof, and deliuereth him that hath taken ual all perill and danger, | 

E Antonius Guanerius of Pavia afamous Phiſicion in his age,in hisrreatie of poiſons is of opinion, 
that ir isnota mouſe that Awicer ſpeaketh of, but a Fic: for he telleth of a certaine Philoſopher 
Thar did very carcfully and diligently make ſearch after this Mouſe , and neither coulde fingdeat any 
time either Moule, pr the roote of Woolfes bane gnawne or bitten, as he had read; but inſear- 
ching he founde manie flies feeding on the leaues, which the ſame < 13" gm tooke, and made of 
them an antidote or counterpoilpn, which he tounde to be good and effeCtuall againſt other poi- 
ſons, bur eſpecially the poiſon of Woolfes bane. b:- Ly | 

F - This compoſition conſiſteth off two ounces of Terra /ern/r, a5 many of the berries of the Baie 
rree,and the like wh: ap of mirhridate, 24. of the flics thathaue takentheir repaſt ypon Woolfes = 
bane, ofhony and oile Oliuea ſufficient quantirie. [- TH 

G Theſameopinion that Guameritis of, Petriws Pere, and Mathias de L' Obel, do alſo holde: who 
affirme that there was neuerſcene at any time any Mouſe feeding thereon , bur faie that there be 
flies whichreſort vnto it by [warmes,and feedenot onely vpon the flowers, bur on the herhe allo. 

| þ +14 + Thedanger. | ; nh 
There hath heen little —_— ſer downe var Fg the vertues of the Aconites,bur much 
might be ſaid of the hurrs that hayecome heereby, asthe 'wofull experience ofthe late lamentable 
example atAnwerpe,yet freſh in memorie doth declare ,as we haue aide, | | 


| Of blacke Hellebor. Chap.361. Godt 
&* The de ſeription. 


I He firſt kinde of Blacke Hellebor Dada ſerteth foorth vnderthis title Veraprum ni: 
| gerwnmias voficly and vnproperly, as if aman ſhould call Inke Atramentin nigrwn, whereas 


» 


** mdeedthis word Atramentum doth import his blacknes: ir might haue beene called Yers- 
tramonely without this epithete Nygrw” ,/and may properly be called in Engliſh Blacke | ellebor, 
which is a name moſt fitly agreeing vnto the truc and vndoubred Blacke Hellebor: for th _ 
and other ſorts thereof which heetcafter follow, are falſe or baſtard kindes thereof. This plant bat 1 
thicke and far leaues; of a deepe greene colour : the vpper part whereof is ſomewhat bluntly NO : 


| 


_ 


— Oe 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 25 
 ortoothed,bauing ſundrie civiſionsor cuts zin ſomeleafe manie, in others fewer, like vnto the fe. 
| male Pconie;or Smyrnium Creticuni, Ttbearcth Roſe faſhioneFflowers vpon flender ſtemmes,pro- 


| wing immediately ourof the groundean handful high; likethe flowers of Cydamen , ſometimes * 


| verie white , and ofren mixed with a little ſhewe of purple, which being vaded, there ſiicceede 
' nallhuskes full of blacke ſcedes : therootes are manic with long blacke ſtrings comming from 
| af The ſecond kinde gf Blacke Hellebor called of Pens Helleboraſtrums, and of Dodonews Veratrum 
| {ccundum : in Engliſh Baſtarde Hellebor, hath leaves much like vnro the former, but narrower and 
 blackerzcach leate being much lagged ortoothed about the edges like aſawe. The ſtalkes growto 
' the heighrof a foote or more,diniding themſclues into other branches towardes the top ; whercon 


| dogrow flowers notmuch vnlike ro the former inſhew, ſaue that they are of a greeni herbie co- 


| lour. Therootes are ſinall andthreddie, but nor ſo blacke as the former. 


1 Helleborus niger vers. PT OI 2 Helleboraſtrum, 
The truc blacke Hellebor. Wilde blacke Hellebor. 


A114 


; - YH 
I's ” w / $ | #; % a 
a % oe 4c [ i 
NIEVD 


* The deſcription, 


3 Thethird kind of Black Hellebor called of Pens Helkborafter maximm ich this addition Fhre 
| CO ſeminepregnans, thatis bearing both flowers and ſecede ( which the reſt of the ſame kind donor 
| Nall, orverie little) and may be called in Engliſh the great wilde Blacke Hellebor : hath leaues 
|  fomewharlike the former wilde Hellebor, fauc thatthey be veric much greater, more iagged, and 
more deepely cut. Theſtalkes grow vp to the height of two cubirs, dividing themſclues at the top 
intoſundrie imall braunches, whereupon grow little rounde and bottle-like Folle w greene flowers : 


ofmanie ſmall blacke ſtring; jinuolued or wrapped one within another veric intricately, | 
4 Thefourth kinde of Blacke He!lebor called of Pex and 7: Obelins (according to rhe deſcrip- 
ton of Cordes and Rnellixs) Seſamo;des magnum,and Conſitzgo : in Engluth Oxehcele ,or Setterwoort: 


which 


» after whick.comefoorth ſecedes which come to perfect maturitie and ripenes, The roote confiſteth 


OO _ 


[1 
FF VE 
18 


; Wiz 
' | 
4 A | 
i 

: 

[] 


3265 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
which names aretaken from his yertues, incuring oxen and ſuch like catrell, as ſhall bee 
afterwardin the names thereof : it is ſo well knowen vnto the molt ſortof-people , by the fame of 
Bearfoote,thar I ſhallnot haue cauſe to ſpend much time about the deſcriprion, | 


4 Conſiligo Ruelly & Seſamoides mag nan 
Setterwoort,or Bearfoote, ROTOR 
; j Do | - 


« 
: 4 - 


X . gt ' 


7g 


3 


Theſe Hellebors growe vpon _— and craggie monntaines : the two laſt dogrow wildein ma- 
ny woods and ſhadowic places in England: we haue them all in our London gardens. 


WHY! 4:44] *% Thetpme. þ | 
The firſt flowrerlfabour Chriſtmas jif the winter be milde and warme: the others later. | 
HH 41 *+ 7 he names. I 
Itis agreed among the later writers, that theſe plants are Yeratre nigra: in Engliſh Blacke Hel. 
lebors : in Greeke i ralian Elleboro nero : in Spaniſh. Yerde gambre negro : of diucrs 
HMelampeodion, bicaule 1 rſt found by] Melampos, who was firſt thought to purge therewith 
Pretas his mad daughters, andto reſtore them to health. Dioſcorides wtiterh, that this man was a 
ſhepherd: others a ſ9othſayer. Inſhigh Dutch it is called Chziftwurtz, that is,Chriſtes herbe, or 
Chriſtmas herbe: in low Dutch Heplich Kerft crutt,and that bicauſe ic lowreth about the birth of 
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, BE 8; |. | | 


The ſecond kind was called of Fuch/aus P} endohelleborus, and Veratrum nigrun 1dulterinum,which 
is in Engliſh, Falſc 0 baſtard blacke Hellebor. Moſt name it Conſuigo, bicauſe the husbandmen of 
our time do herewith cure theircatte!}, no ptherwile than the olde Fartiers or Horſelceches were 
wont todo, thatis, they cut aflirqr hole in|the dewlap, as they terme it (which is an empticskin 
vnderthethrote of the beaſt) wherein they pur a peece of the roote of Setterwoort, or Bearfootey 
ſutfering it there to remaine for certaine dais togither:which manner of curing they do call Serte- 
ring of their carrell, 1% is amanner of rowelling, as thefaide Horſeleeches i their horſes wit 


horſe haire twiſted, of ſuch like, and as in Chirurgerie we do vie with ſilke, which in ſteede of rhe 
word Seton, a cempuny Phiſicion called it by the name Rowell; a worde very vnproper!y (poken of : 
. s | þ TL | 5 | | [ Icarnes 
+ S i c : | | : 24 | 


. | 
7N 


| learned tan, bicauſe there would be ſome difference betwixt men and beaſtes. Thismaner of Ser-' 
eczing of cartel helpeth the diſeaſe of the lungs,the cough,and wheefing, Morcouergnhe tiniegf 


#+HISDORIE OF BUANTS19 Wh 


Aifence or murraine,or any other diſcaſc affefting cantell; cheypur theroore into theplace afore 


| {aidgyhich drawerh vnto it all the venemous matter and yoideth it {oorghat the wound; The which 
| Abſyrtus and Hierocies the Greeke Hoz{eleeches haue at large ſcr downe:* And is called m Engliſh 
| Reaifoote Serterwoort,andSettergiafle,: .. ” 2» | 

| .  Thethirde and fourthare namedin; the Germane toong Lowt(3krant, that is redwrrnlaris, or 
| | Lowſiegraſle : foruts thought rodeſtroyand killlyce, and not ouclylyce, bur. ſheepEInd other 


| canell:andmay be reckoned among the Bearfoores,as kindes thereof. | 
[86 Blacke Hellcbor,as Ga/ex holderh opinion, is hotter and bitterer than the white Hellebor: inlke 
| ED (4 


+ The temperature. | 0 


manner hot and drie in the thitd degree, | | | 

On [ | * Thewertues. \. a | | 
Blacke Hellebor purgeth downwardes lege, choler, ahdalſoblacke cholereſpecially; and all A 

melancholike humors,yer not withour trouble and cifficultie. Thereforc.iris nor t9 be giuen butts 


zobuſtious and{trong bodies,as Meſfuestcacherth, A purgatiorof blacke —_— ood for mad 


and furious men, for melancholike, dull, and heauic pertonsg for thoſe thatare t oubled with the 
falling ſickneſle, for lepers, for them thar arceficke of a quartaine ague and briefly for all thoſe thar 
are woubled with blacke choler,and moleſted with melancholie. | |; | 

The maner of giuingit ( meaning the firſt blacke Heltebor) faith A#uarinsin his firſtbooke, is B 
thiceſcruples ,lirtle more or lefle. ' | Fe 11 - FO} 

ltis given with wine of ratſons and oxymel, but for pleaſanrnes ſake, ſome ſivcere and odorife- C 


rous ſeedes muſt be pur vnto it: but if you would haue it ſtronger,adde thereuntoa graine or two of 
Scamonie; Thus much Auarias. JE 
The firſt of theſe kinds is beſt, then the ſecond ; the reſt are of leſſe force. | | FER D 
 Therootes take away the Morphew and blacke {pots in the skin, terrers, ringwoormes , lepro- E 
fies,and ſcabs. _— | | | | 
Thpgots ſodden in pottage withfleſh,openeth the belljes of ſuch as have the dropſie. F 
£ root of baſtarde Hellcbar, called a our Englith women Bearetoore, ſteeped in wine G 


and dfrenken ,looſerh the belly,cuen as the true blacke Hellebor,and is good againſt all the diſeaſes 


|  whereunto blacke Hellebor ſeructh,and killeth wormes in children. 


ltdoth his operation with more force and might,if irbe made into powder, and adram thereof H 
betecriued in wine. - A IT Þ. P3T276S 20 . 
Tac ſame boiledin water with Rue and Agrimonie,cureth the jaundiſe, and purgeth yellow ſu-1 
Theleaucs ot baſtard Hellebor dried in anouen after the bread is drawn our; and the powder K 
thereof taken in a figge or raiſon, or ſtrawed vpona peect of bread ſpred with honie and caten, kil- 
lethwonnes in childcen excccdingly. V2; | F360 | 


Of Divfeorittes his blatke Hellebor.” Chap.362... 


13h | - % The defription.) 2dr 26-,ilona | 
| [1 mdri Igind mob 00: brig ptr 2 200 fat) 2c þ7 Hel 

* His kinde of, blacke Hellebgr ſer foorth:by. ZObrtime vader thie'nawe <Aftrantia niers, 

| Agreerh very wellia ſhape with the true wdfrantre, whichis allocalled imperatoria; neucr- 
+. theleſle bythe conſent of Dooſearides and authors-who hatic expreſied| this plane'for a | 
kindofYeratrum #igrum or black Hellebor, it hath,many blackith greene leaves, parted or cut into- 
ſower or five deepe cuts, after the manex gf the Vine leategvery-ike vnto thoſe of Sanickle, both in 
gcennes of colour and'alſo in proportion, The ſtalke is cuct andplainearthe top where- 
ot grow flowers in lzleafts or vmbles.ſer togitheddike thoſe af Seabious, of a whitiſhlight greens 
colour,daſht over(as it were) with a little darke "ey : after which come the ſeede ke 'vnito Cortes" 
mas, orbaſtard Saffron. The rootes are many blackiſh chreds faſtned vnto one heade , or maſter 


| | There | 


= pee te IEA in a4 ety ae nn eo os has 


(7 
=_ THE: $3coN OOKE OF THE 
| 


| [3 


F4 '4 nier i | | 
_ Meare m _ Mack Hellebor, %* rr 


\Zs | 


- " 
'* 
8 
x7 ” 


Thee i is ; another! plant which hack aa 
coungy of ſome to be a kinde of blacke Helle- 
bor , whoſe figure we haue far foorth for one of 
berry mo go called of fome Imparrens Herl, 2nd 
hers' N oli me tangere, deſcribed rhus, [t hith 
dave 5 leaues ſharpe pointed, not wnlike tothole 
of Engliſh Mercurie, verie tender, andof light 
greene colour. The ſtalke is ſmall, full o _ 
ioints 3 on the ends whereofſtande ire yetlyre 
flowers Faſhioned like a ſpaniſh Carell ll; broade 
at oneende , and —_ the other like alirr!e 
horne, which being there ſucceede ſmall 
cods,}1 the {mall ndine, | | 

* The place, EST0 

Blacke Hellebor is found in the mountainies of 
Germanie, and in other vntilled and rot pl 
ces: itproſpererh in gardens , Droſeoridey writeth 
that blacke Hellebor groweth alſo n roughhigh 
and dry places: and that is beſt which is tiken 
from ſuch like places as is that ſaith he, whichis 
brought out of Anticyra,acitic in Greeet icy 
weth in my garden. | } 

* The time. | 
| This blacke Hellebor flowreth nor in winter 
bur in the ſommer monerhes, The herbe/is greens 
all the four thorow. | | 


jo 


| . The names, 4 JIOUD FI | 
| Tris calledof the Jater Herbatiſts Aftrantia nigra; others Sanjcull farming ;notwithſtznding it 
differeth much from Aftrantie,anherbe whichis al ondaied capri, or Maſterwoorrt': the yul- 
gar people call it Pellitorie of Spaine, bur vntruly z it maybe called blacke Maſterwoort, yerdoubt- 
lefle a kinde of Helleborzas the purging facultiedoth : for iris certaine thar diuers expert 
Phiſitions can witnes,that the r heereof dopurge lacke and other humours , and thatthey 
themſelues haue perfeatly cured mad melancholicke people being purged heerewith: and thatic 
hath a purging qualiric. Conraduus Geſnerus doth likewiſe teſtific in 4 certaine Epiſtle _ ro 
bus Occo, in which he ſheweth that Aſtrentia ziergis almoſt as ſtrong as white Helleborzand ; 
== himſelfe was the firſt thar had ccof the purging os thereof by liege , which 
tings confirme thar itis Dio torrdes his blacke Hellebor. 
Dioſeorides hath alſo atrribured to this plant all thoſe names, that a are aſcribedtothe other black 
Hellebors. He faith further,thatthe ſeed therof in Anticyrai is called Seſamoiaes, the which is vedto 
urge with, if ſo be that the rext be true andnot corrupted, burir ſeernerh not to be alto Here 
fed. For if Seſamordes,as Plinie faith and thewordicialfe doth ſhewhath his-name ofthe 
Seſamwn, the (cede of this blacke Hellebor ſhall properly be called;Seſamvoides, not Hetotharpf 
;burof Cnicw or baſtard 7 pin apr os Knee $ 7.enech thartheſe wordes 2 
brought inco Difterades from ſome other | 
17 CO Folger Tt 5 
The faculties of this plant nu end nem ey land thoſe ofthe other 
blacke Hellebor : norwithſtandang thoſe tt tbe A es ni Rn ERR Lag 
tedofgreaterforce.-! >| 14 3 | otlo tþ fie: SG 22 | , 
of 


k T 
Sis | 


 - HISTORTE OF PLANTS. © | © 825 
| © Of berbe Chriſtopher. Chap.363- 


C hriftophortans. Li = þ 
Herbe Chriſtopher... © * The deſcription. © 

- W Lrhough herbe Chriſtopher bee none of 

the Bindweedes, or of thoſe plants which 

' haue neede of ſupporting or vnderprop- 

ping, wherewith it may clime or rampe; yet bi- 

caule it bearerh grapes, or cluſters 'of berries, it 

might haue becne numbred among the dura, or 

thoſe that growe like Vines. It bringeth fourth 

little tender ſtalks, a foote nn not much lon- 

h 


V7 OWe 


er; whereupon do growe fundrieleaues ſet y 
tire footeſtalke , which do +4 
ſomewhat iaggedor cut aboutthe edges, of a 
light greene colour, growing at the top of the 
ſtalkes, after the manner of a ſpikie lower, or 


is ripe, hauing vpon the one 1 le a ſtreaked fur- 

row or hollowneſſe growing necre togither, as 

do the cluſters of grapes. The roote 1s thicke, 

' blacke withour, yellow within like Boxe,with ma- 

ny trailing ſtrings annexed thereto, creeping far 
creaſe,and laſteth long. | | 

; | % The place. 4 
Herb Chriſtopher groweth'm the north parts 
of Englande, necre vnto the houſe of therighr 


worthipful! fir iam Bowes. | I have receiued 
plants thereof from Robinms of Paris for my gar - 


den,wherc they flouriſh, 
| | % The time. | - 
It foureth and flouriſheth in May and une andthe fruit is ripe in theend of ſommer. 
| % The names. 4+ 


 riscalled in our age Chriſtophoriana, and S.Chrittaphori herbs : in Engliſh Herbe Chriſtopher, 
Some there be that name it Co#ws niger,others had rather haue it Hronitwn baceferwn:itharh no 
likeneſie ac all,nor affinitic with Coſtws,as the {ſimpleſt mayperceiue that doknowe both. Bur doubr- 
lefleitis of the number of 'the Aconnes,or Woolfes bane, by reaſon of the deadly and pernicious 
qualicie thatit hath,like vnto VVoolfcs bane, or Leopards bane; - 5s 
3 4s: fil % The tenperature.. | | | 
- Thetemperature of hetbe Chriſtopher anfwereth thoſe of the Aconites,as we hane ſaid. 
zones - % Thewvertaes: | jo | 


findelitle or nothingexrant inthe ancient or later writers, of any one good propertie where- A 


with any partof this plant is pofleſſed,, ſauing thatthere may begiuen of the leaves orfruit hereof, 
smuch at one timetnwardly,as of Rea/ger,or Rats bane. Therefore I wiſh choſe that love new me- 
dicines, totake heede thatthis benoneof them; far bicauſe the venemous quialitie thereof is moſt 
ccadly and remedileſle. 1 | | m 


Of Peronie. © Chap364- 


| *% The kindes. | | - 

"P'iler ebethree Peionies,one male, and two females deſcribed ofthe ancients, the later writers 

* haue found out fower more, one of the female kinde called P2onia Pwmila, or dwarfe ys 
| | aa 


do make one leafe, 


carc of corne:: which being paſt, the fruit ſiiccee- * 
deth round, ſomewhat long, and blacke whenit © | 


abroad in the earth, whereby it doth greatly in- 


\ 


| 


$30 THE SECOND BOOKE OFTHE 


and another called P eonia promiſcus eu neutra, Baſtarde,Misbegorten,or neither of both = 
were a plant $15751/>08 hm TW 0 and female ; one double Peionie with white Rowe; = ” 
fourth kinde bearing ſingle white flowers, | f y 


ISSN 

SOOSA 

Ws $ 
J 


\\ 
JJ 
WY 


vMi;N( 


; MVP n 
AWE SEL) 


| 


* Thr deſeription. k 


x 7p Hefirſtkinde of Peionie(being the male,called Pcomemas; inEngliſh male Peionie)hath 
1 thickered ſtalkes a cubite long: the leaues be great and large, conſiſting of diuers leaues 
growing or ioined togither vpon one ſlender ſtem or ribbe, not much vnlike the leaues of 
the Walnut trec,borh in faſhionand greatnes zat the top of the ſtalks grow faire large red fiowers 
veric like roſes; hauing alſo in the midt yellow threds or thrums , like them inthe Roſe called 4*- 
thera; which being vaded and fallen away, there come in place three or fower great coddes ©r 
huskes which do open whenthey be ripe ;/the inner part of which cods are of ataire redcolour, 
wherein is containeU blacke ſhining and poliſhed ſcedes , as big asaPeaſe, and berweene cueric 
blacke ſeedeis couched a cedorcrimſon ſeed, which is barren and emptie.The roote is thicke,great 
and tuberous like vntothe cormmon Peionie, * F.1cwentl daft BEE $154 
2 There is akinde of Pcionie;called of Dodenexs Peonia famine prior,of I Obelius Þ eoniufemink, 
in Englith female Peionie,whichis ſo well knowne vnto all that it needeth not any deſcription. | 
3 The thirdekinde of Peiqnie (which Peng ſetterh foorth vnder the name 'P £9174 famine ny 
anthos, Dodonemus Peonia famins flos multiplex, in Engliſh double Peionic)harh leaues, rootcs, an 
flowers like che common female Peionie, faue that his leaues arenorſ9 much iagged , and arc ofa 
lighter greene colour: the roptes/are thicker and moretuberous; and the lowers much greater — 
cceding double,of a very deeperedcolour, in ſhape and faſhion very like the great double Roſe w- 
Proucace,butgreater and mere double, | | Buhl 314 nan ih p There 


|  HISTORIE OF PLANTS. BR 
There is found another ſort of the double Peionie not differingfrom the precedent in ſt:]kes, 
oy" orrootes: this plant bringeth foorth white dowers wherein conkifteth the diftcrence, 


3 Pena famin: multiplex, 4 | 4 Pammnia {anina polyamthos floxe albo. 
Double red Peiomie. | The double white Peionie. 


Z* 


ALF == 
f 1 8 
>< -jf 0 
7; ; = , 
TIS I "I 
*. 


_ %* Thedeſeription, | 
There is another kinde of Peionie ( called of Dodowews P conia farming alters, but of Pena Paonid 
Promiſcas feiinentra: in Engliſh Maiden or Virgine Peionie ) thats like vntothe common temiale 
Peionie,fauirig that his leaues and flowers are much ſmaller , and the ſtalkes ſhorter , andbeareth 
tedflowers,and ſeede alſo like the former. wks | & ; | |: 
| Wehavelikewiſe inour London gardens another fort bearing flowers of a pale whitiſh colour, 
veryſingle.reſembling the female wildePeionie.in other reſpe&s like the double white Peionie. 
a The place. | F 57424 
Allthe ſorts of Peionies do grow in our Londen gardens,except that double Peionie with white 
flowers, which we do expect from the lowe countries of Flaunders. 4544 | 42 
The male Peionie groweth wilde vpon a conie berrie in Berſome, being inthe pariſhof Senth- 
flecte in Kent,two miles from Graneſend, and'in the grounde fomerimes belongingro a Farmer 
there called fohr Bradley. | | | | 
"OY | - w%Thetime, 
' They owerin|May,the ſeede is ripe in Tuly, 
BOK | | % The names. yg | 
The Peionie ts called in Greeke Triorie: in Latjne allo P £0714, and Dale ifida - n ſhops Pron : int 
high Dutch (ory wenrblumen : in low Ducch Baſt bleemen : in French Pr7mvixe : in Spanith Roſa 
delmome: in Englith Peionic: it hath alfo many baſtarde names, as R-ſ faturna, Herba Caſta, of 
ſome Laneritot Lunaria P conia : bicaule it cureth thoſe that haue the talling ficknes, whoni moſt 
en do call Lawaticos, or Lunaticke. It is called 7dews Dafiylus : which agreeth with the temale 
| | 14 | Peionie, 


232 "THE SECOND BOOKE OF 'THE 


Pcionic.the knobbie rootes gf which be likero Dat#yl; Id ei, and Dadtyli Idei are certaine Precious 


ſtones of the formepta mans finger, growing inthe land Candic: itis called of divers Aztaopheti 

Or Brightly thining,taking 14S NAJnNC of the ſhining and glittering gratnes , Which are of the cal 

of ſcarlet. | HEL | | | Es: 

 Therebefound two Azlaaphatides, deſcribed by AEljanzsin his 14.booke zone of the ſea, inthe 

24.chapicr: the otlier of thecarth, in the Ch chapter, 'Thar of the ſea is akinde of Faw” or $ 
MI 


1 


moſle,which groweth vpon high rocks,of the bignes of Tamarisk,with the head of Poppirs which 
opening in the ſominer Solſtice doth yceldin the night time a ccitaine fieric, and as it were (park. 
ling brighrnes 01 lighr. | EL #5 | | | 
 thatoftheearth,faith he,which by anothername is called CynoſpaFfws, lieth hid inthe daytime 
among the other hetbes, and is notknowen art all, andin the night rime ir is calily ſcene : for: 
| ſhimneth like a ſtar,avd glittereth with a firic brighrneſle, | 


f ; 
[1 D i 


And this Ag/zopherisof the earth,or Cynaſp ts, is P eonta; for CApaleing ſaith, that the ſeedes or 
grammes of Pcionie ſhine in the night time like a candle, and thar plentie of it is in the night ſeaſon 
tound our and gatheted by the ſhepherds.Moreouer,7 heophraſtws and Plinie do ſhew ,thatPeion 
is gathered in the night,which Arlanzs ally aftirmeth concerning Aglaophotis, | ! 

This Az/asphoris of the earth,jot Cynoſpaitre, is called of 1oſephms hl writer of the Ieweswar, in 
his ſeuenth booke 25. chapter lw,of the place wherein it is found; which thing is plaine tohim 

' tharc6ferrerh theſe things which Ae/zanws hath written of Aglaophotuof the 5. Or Cymſpatim 
with thoſe which /4/ehus hath ſet downe of Baaras: for Aelranwſaith,that Cywoſpaitm is nor pluc- 
ked vp without danper; andthariris reported how he tharfi:ſt touched it, notknowing the nature 
thereof, perithed. 1 kerfore a myngenu be faſtned roit in the night, anda hungrie dog tied there. 


bh 


to,who being allured by the ſmelſ'ot rofted Reth ſer towards him, may plucke it vp by therootes, 
Toſephwes alſo wrireth,that Bara doth ſhineinthe euening like the day far and that they who come 
neere,and world plucke it vP,C at) hardly doit, EXCePt thateirther a wolnans vrinc,or hir menſes be 
powred vpon it,and thar fot may de pluckt yp atthelength. , | {| | | 
Morcouer,it is {exdowne bythe ſaid author, as alſo by Plinie and Theophreftm,that of neceſſitie 
ir muſtbe garhered/inthe night; for if any man ſhall plucke of the fruit inthe day time, bcing ſecne 
_ of the Woodpecker, he is indanperto loſe his cies ; andif he cut theroate, itis achaunceif his 
fundament fa!lnot/out. The like fabulous tale hath beeneſet foorth of Mandrake, thewhich Thaue 
partly tonched inthe ſame Chaprer. Bur all cheſe things be moſt vaineand friuolous: for the roote 
. of Peionie, as alſothe Mandrake, may be temooued at any time ofthe yeere, day or howerwhat- 
focuer. 13 | = Uh | | 
Burit is no marye}l,that ſach kindes of tfifles,and moſt ſuperſtitious and wicked ceremphiesare 
found inthe bookes ,of the moſt ancient atthors; for there were many things in their time very 
yaialy fained and cogged ip for ofteniatiby-lakey as by the Aegyptians and other counterfer 
mates,as Pmnie doth truly reftifie, an imitatorof whom 1n times palt,was bne Andreas a Philiwion, 
whoas Galen ſaith, tonucied into the act)of: phyſickelies, and ſubtile deluſions, For which cauſe 
Galen commanded'his ſcholers rÞ refraine from the readingof him, and ofall ſuch like lying and | 
deceitfullſycophants. It isreported that theſe herbes rooke the name of Peionic, or, P.ean;of that 
excellent Phiſicion of the ſatne name, who ficlt found our and raughtthe knowledge of this here 
ynto poſteritie. | | BENE || [-.. 'F 
Theroote of Peionie ,as Galen ſaith,doth gently nd with a kinde of ſweeteneſle: and hathalſo 
joined with it a certaine birteriſh ſharpnefle :'it is in temperature not very hor, lirtle' more than 


$ 


' 


candy hot ;bur irjs dric and of ſubtile partes. 

[1 - | b+1 *% The vertnes. Lo ltd \ bo] | 

A Dioſeorides writeth, that the roote of the male Peionie being dried, is giuen to women thatbee 
nor well clenfed atter their deliverie, being drunke in Meade or honied water to the quaiFFitie of 2 
beane; for it {cowreth thoſc;parts, appeaſeth he griving throwes and torments of the belly, and 


p 1 


: 
x 


bringech downe the defired ficknes. Mt | | | 7 Lk 

B Glenadderh, thar it is good for thoſethar haue the yellow jaundies, and painc in their kidnees 
 andbladder,itclentarh che liker and kidncies that are ſtopped,,, | NEC 

C Iris found by flire and eudent cx2crience made by Galen, that rhe freſh roote tied aboutthe 


necks of claidren , is an cftgctuail 1emedie againſt the falling ſickneſſe; bur vato thoſe thatare. 


© | growneg 


 HISTORIE OF. PLANTS. | $33 
wen vÞ in more yeeres, the roote thereof muſt alſo be miniſtred inwardly, =-| I 
[tj5alfo given faith Plznze againſt the diſeaſe of the minde. Theroote of the male Peionicis pre- D 
ferredinthis cure | : | F | [ 
Ten or twelue of thered berries or ſeeds drinke in wine that is ſomething harſh or ſower, and E 
red.do ſtaie the inordinate fluxe,and are good for the ſtone in the beginning. | 
The blacke graines(thart is the feedc)to the number of 15.taken in wine or meade , helperth the E 
ftranglingand paines of the matrix or mother,andis a ipeciall remedic for thoſe that are troubled 
inthe night with the diſeaſe called Epbialtres, or night Mare, which is as though a heauic burthen 
were laid vpon them,and they opprelled therewith, or as if they were ouercome of their enimics, 
or ouerprelt with ſome great waight or burden;zand are alſo good againſt melancholike dreames. 
Syrupe made of the flowers of Peionic helpeth greatly the falling icknes , likewiſe the extraQi- ; 


*  onoftherooresYoth the ſame, 


o 


Of toothed Violets,or (forall woorts. Chap.365. 


te The kinaes. | | 
Herebe diuers ſorts of toothed Violets, or Corall woorts XKitfcring in diuersreſpeCts , as ſhall 
bedeclared, SE $6 WE 


1 Dentariabalbifers, © | 2 Dentaria Coralbide radice ſue Dentaria Eneaphylion, 
- Toothed Violer. 4 The Corall toothed Violet. 


-_. 
Q 
P32 


| *% The defer iption. 


IT "F*Hefirſtkinde of Dentaria (calledin Latine Dertaria baccifera,of Dodonem Viola Dentar is 
prior in Engliſh Dogs tooth Violet ) hath a tuberous and knobbie roote, toothed, or as it 

were kneed like vnto the crags of Corall,of an vnpleaſant fauour,and ſomewhat ſharpe jn 

talte: from which pring foorth certaine ſmall and lender ſtalkes a foore high , which haue leaues 


| Ggg I very. 


' 
: | 
} . 6 


- 834 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE | 
very much ct or iagged, like vntothoſe of Hempe, of the forme and faſhion of Aſhen lemies: o: 
the top of the ſtalkes do grow ſinall white flowers,in ſhapelike /7ol.emarronates, tharis , Queenss 
Gilloflowers orrather like ſtacke Gilloflowers, of a white colour, laidouer with a light !pr nklne 
of purple: among which come fofth {mal knobs growing vpon the {talks among the leaue 17 *:. 
are to be ſcene vpon the Cyniſts Martagom,which being ripe, do fall vponthe groung, whereofma. 
nie other plants areiingendred, | [-1it METS | [f- 
2 The ſecond kinde of Dogsrooth Violer/bringeth foorth ſmall round ſtalkes, firme and Rig * 
foote high,beſet with leanes much broader. rounder, and omen theri the former, bearin j na the 
trop many little Aowers conf ago fower {mall leaues, of apale herbije colour; which being paſt 
there ſucceede long andflender cods,fomwhar like the cods'of Queenes Gilloflowers, wherein "p 


contained finall blackiſh ſecede: the roote is like the former, but nor in every refpe@' much te. 
ſembling Corall,yet white and tuberous notwithſtanding. ak oil f 1 Ton 


3 Dentaria Hepraphylls Clusy. | 4 Dematia Pentaphylhs Clus "= 
' The feauen Jeated rogthed Violet, |» Five leafed toothed Vioct, 


| 1-3 Þ * Thede ſcription. | 
The third kindot Dogstovth/Violer,is called of C/n/11 Deptaria heptaphylhs, that is, conſiſting 
of ſcuen leaues faſtened vporrone rib,finew,or ſmall ſtem; of T7 Obeliaewith this title Alabeftrites 
altera,or Dentaria altera : but Coraus callerh it Corallozdes altera + in Engliſh Corall Violet; ichath 
ſtalkes, flowers androotes like voto the firſt of his kinde, ſauing that the Bowers are much fairer, 
and the rootes haue a greatetreſtwblance of Gexall than the other, | , | 
4 The fourth kingde ot Dogs tgoth Violer, ny in Englith Codded Violet, which Cla//us ſer- 
teth foorth vader the title D&rta#74 Mathiols Pentiphylles, which Pere doh allo extrefſe vader the 
title of N.emoralis _Alpima; Corduscalleth it Alaba#rites Cora lbides, andway very well bec alled 
in Engliſh Cinkfojle Violet:ith ath leaues ſo like the greater Cinkfoile,char it is hard ro knpwe one 
from another ;therefore it might very well haue beene reckoned among the herbes callefl Pex'e- 
- phylathat is fiue ica;ed herbs. This plant groweth inthe ſhadowic forteſt about Taurinum and the 
| - , EI it E- |- mquntane 


= ; 
—_ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. \/. 4 


mountaine Sauena,called Calcaris, and by the Rhenenor far from Baſill, The ſtalkes growe to t!1e 
height of a cubite, beſer with atuft of flowers at the rop, like vnto Sopewoort, which bein g vaded 
there ſucceede long and fatcods like vntoRocket, orthe great Celandine, wherein iz contained 2 
{mall ſeede. All the wholeplant is of a hor and bitter taſte. The rootes arelike vnto Corall,of a pale 


iriſh colour. | 
—_—_ % The place. 


They growe on diuers ſhadowie and darke hils. Yalerius Cordus writeth, that they-are founde 
about the forreſt Hercinia,nor far from Northuſium, moſt plentifully in a fat foile, that hath quat- 
ries of ſtone init. The firſtI haue in my garden, eye | *0*30 
= | * Thetime. | | 1 
They flower eſpecially in Aprill and May: the ſeede commethto perfeionin the end of Auguſt, 
| 4 | *% Thenanes. bt] ; ja 
The Toothed Violet, or after ſome Dogs tooth Violet, is commonly called Denterie, of Cordus IT 
Corallbides,of the roote that is in forme like to Corall. Afathiolms placeth it inter Sotidagmes & Sy 
phrt« among the Conſounds and Comfreies, Ve had rather callthem Yofe Dextarre, of rhe like- 
neſſe the lowers haue with Stockgilloflowers, They may be called inEngliſh Toothed Violets, or - 
Corall woorts. | ; 


1 ; 


| % The temperature and tertues. | 
l have readof feworno vertues contained in theſe hetbes, ſaving thoſe which ſome women a 
have experienced tobe inthe farſt kinde thereof, and which Ilathijo/ws aſcribeth ynto Pertephylia 
dertaria the fourth kinde, in the fourth booke of his Commentaries vpon Diofſeorides, and m the 
chap.concerning Symphytwa,where he ſaith that the root is vied in drinkes which are made again(t 


Enterocele and inward wounds, bur cſpeciallythoſe wounds and hurts, which haue entred intothe 
hollowneſle ofthe breſt, | 


Of Cinkefoile,or Fine finger graſſe. Chap.366. 


& The kindes. 
T Here be divers ſorts of Cinkfoile,ſome greater ,others leſſer ;ſome wildeor ofthe ficld, others 


tame or of the garden ; ſome ofthe woods and ſhadowie places, others of the mountaines and 
ſtonie rocks. Likewiſe there be ſome of the water or marriſh ground, and others of the champion 
and barren ſandie grounds,which ſhall be comprehended in this preſent chapter. 
| . % Thedeſeription, | | 
I Hefirſt kinde of Cinkfoile or Quinquetoile, hath round and ſmall ſtalkes of a cubite high : 
the leaues are large,and very much iagged aboutthe edges, very like the common Cinke- 
©. foile: the flowers grow atthe top of the ſtalks,in faſhion lice the common kind, butmuch 
greater,and of a pale or bleake yellowe, the roote is blacke without, andfull of ſtrings annexed 
thereto,and of woodie ſubſtance. 
2 Theſccondkind of Cinkefoile,is fo common and (2 vniuerſally knowne,that I thinke it a nced- 
lefſerrauell to ſtand about the deſcription. ; : 
3 Thethirdekinde of Cinkefoile I have named Album & Purpureums , (not that it is two kindes 
comprehended vnder one figure)bur bicauſ his Jeaues are whitiſh vnderneath, and his flowers arc 
' ofapurple colour; which being paſt,there ſacceedeth arounde knop of ſeed like a Strawberrie,be- 
fore itbe ripe: the (talks are creeping vpon the ground: the roote is of a woodie ſubſtance, full of 
blacke ſtrings appendant thereto. | 3 
4 Thefourthkinde of Cinkefoile is verie like vnto the other, eſpecially the firſt and great kinde : 
the ſtalkes are a cubite high,and of a reddiſh colour:the leaues confiſt of five parts ſomewhat ſnipe 
abour the edges: the flowers grow at the top of the ſtalkes like vnto the other Cinkefoiles , ſaving 
that they be of a darke red colour: the roote is of a woodie ſubſtance with ſome fibzes or thredd:s 
ſtings banging thereat, | | | 


Geg 2 Qningnefciptur 


ID BOOKE OF THE 


4 Pent 
Mari 


byllum rubrum paluſl 
Cinkfoile, - 


Th s 
: - - 
3 - 
; 1 ,, 
3 JS - 
bl 4 - 
- ” * -- 
bo 4. i 
* 
3 ”"y 
5 
2 | 
4 b] . 
, —___ 
_ ” 
1 
. 
g , 
. 


: 
A 
þ 


W__ 


» 


12 £5 
GL £ 
W Jo Mu 


yk 


LL. 4 ( _— KS, A yo 
TE" AR Mk "TN 
rs BLW,), 
' _- : '% 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, $37 
The fift kinde of Cinkefoile groweth vpon the colde mounraines of Sauoie, and in the valley 
of Auſtenſic,and in Narbone in France ( and if memonrie faile not) I haue ſcene the ſame rowing 
on Beeſton caſtle in Cheſhire the leaues heerof are fewe and thinneſer,confiſting of fine pares 
Pe other Cinkefoiles, oftentimes ſix: or ſeauen ſer rounde abourthe ſtalke like Madder, nor 
ſnipt abour the edges as theothers,bur plaine and ſinooth ; thar fide of theleafe whichis next the 
ade, is of a ſhining whe colour, bur che vpper pare greene, reſembling Saniclet the flowers 

ow like ſtars vpon {lender ſtalks,byrutrs and bunches,of a white colour, and lomerimes purple, 
*\ faſhion like the flowers of Aichimulla, or Ladies Mantle : the roote is full of ſtrings , and of a 
brownepurple colour, | ; 6h | | 
5 Thefixckindeof Cinkefoile growing commonly in moſt barren groundes, called Supinwn, is 
alrogither like the common garden Cinktoile, ſaue thatir is muchleſler, which Pexs ſerterh foonth 
with this addition, Tormentale facie, bicaule it doth very much reſemble Tormentill, 
| AER 

Pentaphyllun petroſum Heptaphyllum Clusy. | 6 Pentaphyllum ſupinum. 
f CS Cinkfeit, 4 4 ph : 4 | Vprig t —— "Y 


IE t* The deſeription, | 
7 Theſeuenth kinde of Cinkefoile,Pexathar diligent ſearcher of Simples, foundein the A'pes 
ofRhetia, neere Clauena , andatthe firlt ſight ſuppoſedit'to be a kinde of Tormentills, or Penta- 
Phillem,aue that it had a more threddie roote,rather like Geranjumgit is of a ruſhie colour outward: 
ly,hauing ſome ſweere linell,repreſenting Gariophylats in the ſauor of his rootes, in leaues and flo- 
weTs Cinkefoile and Tormentals, andin the ſhape of his ſtalkes and rootes Awens or Gariophiliate, 
paicipating of them all: notwithſtanding it approcherh ncereſt vato the Cinkefoiles , having 
ſtalkes a foore high, whereupon grow leaues diuided into fiue parts; and iagged rounde abour the 
ecpes like the tecth of a lawe, hauing the pale yellowe flowers of Peataphyliuns or Tormentilla; 
| f Geg 3 « Hh within 


| 


| 


| [1 — we | 
$38 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
within whichare lirrle moſlie or downie threddes,of the colour of ſaffron, bur leſſer then the com. 
mon Auens. | E* i] | of F 
$ Theeight kinde of Cinkefoile(according to the opinion of diversearned men, who have hag 
the view thereof, and haue ipdged it tobe the true Leucas of Droſeorides, agrecable to Dyſcor1de; 
his deſcription) is all hoaric,whereupon it ce the addition /zcane. The ſtalkes are thicke , WOO. 
dic and formwhar red, wrinckled 4lſo,and of a browne colour , which riſe vnequally from the roore 
109 hs. ryamen + into many branches, ſhadowing the place where itgroweth, beler with thick 
and notched leanes like Scordiwm,or water Germander, which according tothe iudgemenr of the 
learnedis thought to be ofng lefle force againſt poiſon then Pentaphyllon, or T ormentills eing of a 
aſtringent and drying qualitie. Hcerupon it may be that ſome trying the force heereof, haue yeeldeg 
it vþ tor Lewc4s Deoſcoredes. This rare plant Incuer founde growing naturally, but inthe hollownes 


of the peakiſh mountaines,and dric grauellie vallcies. 


'S 


, 


'F Conga oljum Tormentills facte. | S Incana Pentaphylles, 
Wall Cinkfoile, | | 1] Hoarie Cinktoile, | 


. 

. : 
Ds  - _— 
Ay Is 


\ 


*+ The deſeription. 


s Thewood Cinkfoile hath any leaues ſpred vpon the ground,conſiſting of fiue parts : 20g 
_ whichriſe vpotherleaues, ſer vpon very tall footſtalkes, and long m reſpec of thoſe that did grow 
by the ground, and ſomewhar ſnipt about the edges. The flowers grow vpon ſlender ſtalks, conliſt- 
' ingof faue yellow leaues. The rqote is verie threddie, = 4 | gs 
There is oe ofthe mountaint Cinkefoiles that hath diners lender brircle Rake eg 
ately foorth of the ground;zwhereupon are ſer by equal diſtances certaine iagged leaues,not vilike | 
rothe ſmalleſt Icaues of Leens : the flowers prowear the rop yellowe of colour, and like to the 
other Cinktoiles,bur alrogither lefler : the rooteis thicke, tough, and of a woodie ſubſtanct. | 
C9 NO ' | | | x | 9 Quin\que) olzum 


g— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS.: | ' - 839 


olium ſluaricwn, | . 
9 Quingore -nkfoile, FT: % The place. 


The firſt groweth in my garden , bur nor 
wilde jn England; the ſecond groweth | inlowe 
and moiſt medowes. 

* Thethirdgrowethin the woods of Sauena 
and Narboen. but not in England: the fourth 

roweth in aimarriſh ground adioining tothe 
Find called Bourne pondes, halfe a mile from 
Colcheſter 3 from whence I brought ſome 
plants for my garden, where they fouriſhand 
proſper well, 

The fift groweth vpon Beeſtone caſteilin 
Cheſhire: the fixt ypon bricke and ſtone wals 
about London,efpecially vpon the bricke wall 
in Liner lane. 

The place of the ſeauenth and cight is ſer 
foorth in their deſcriptions, 

*% Thetime, 

Theſe plants. do flower from the vegin ning 
of May to the cad of Iune. 

* The names. 

Cinkfoile is called in Greeke myrieer: in 
Latine Quinguefo{1an : the Apothecaries, vic 
the GT Pentaphylhn, and ſometime. 
the Latine name, There be very wany baſtard 
names,wherwith I will not trouble your cares: 
in high. Dutch Tunff fingerkraut : tin Lowe 
Durch Gif Ciingerkrutir t in lralian Cimque- 
foals: in French Quinte 6k weille : in Spaniſh Cinco en yam: in Ergliſh CUTE dar finger graſle, 
Five leafed grafle, and Sinkfield, 


* The remperatire 

The roores of Cinkfoile,efpecially rhe wo laſt do vehemently erie and thatin the third degree, 

but wirhour biting : for they haue very little apparant heate or ſharpnes. 
% The vertues. 

The deco&tion of the rootes of Cinkfoile.drunke,cureth the bloodie flixe, andall other fluxes of A 
the bellie,and ſtancheth all exceſlwe bleeding. 

Theivice ofthe rootes while they be yoong and render, i is giuen to be drunken againſt the dif: B 
ealesot the liuer and lungs,and all poiſon, 

Theſamedrunke inmeade or honied water, or wine wherein ſome pepper hath beene mingled, C 
 Exrerh the rertian and quarraine feuers : and being crunken afcer the ſame manger for thirtie daies 
tovither,ic helperh the talling ſicknes, 

The leaues vſed among herbes a2propriate for the ſame purpoſe, cureth ruprures and burſting D 
of the rim, and guts falling iato the cods. / \ 
The inice of: the leaues drunken dothcure the iaupdies;and comforteth the fomack and liver. E 
 Thedecoftionof therootes held inthe movrh, doth mitigate the paine of the teeth, ſtaterh pu- F 

tifation,and all putrificd vicers of themouth helpethrhe inflamwations of the almonds noch, 
abd rhe parteSadioining,it ſtaierh rhe laske;and helpeth the bloodie fliixe, 
|  Theroote boiled in vineger i is good agnaſt the ſhingles, Po the rage of fretting; fores, G 
| andeankerous vſcers. k 
| Itis reported;that fower branches hereof curethquartaine 2pues;chree 736] ha onebranch H 
i quotidians: which things are moſt vaine and frivolous, as likewiſe many other ſuch like which are 
 hotohelytound:n Djoſcerrdes; but alſ>in orher a uthors;which we will: ivgly withſtand. = 

OY Aorolto a learned Puuon commended leave being bled with water, and Grie I 

Gee 4 | 8 Lignum 


840 THE SECOND\BOOKE OF' THE 


Lignwn vite added thereto, agai {t the falling ſicknes, if the paticnt be cauſedto five; tewonn 
taking thereof, He likewiſe co derh the extraCtion of the rootes Jagainft the bloogic ou - 


Of Serfoile,or Ti ormentill. Chap.367. 


1 


Tormentilla. | 118 * | 
Scrfoile., [ny - {{j{+ |® * The deſeription. 
7 ID Pore YT His herb Tormemiill or Scrfoile is one ofthe 
Cinkfoiles , irbringeth foorth many talk: 

ſlender, weake, fcarſc able to lift itſelf vp bur 
rather lieth down vpon the ground. T leaves 
be leſſerthan Cinkfgile, but mo in number, ſom. 
times five, but commonly ſeuen, wheri upon it 
rooke his-name Setfoilez which is ani leaues 
and thoſe ſomewhatſnipr about the edges, The 
flowers growe on the tops of lender ok ofa 


yellow colour,like thoſe of the Cinkfoiles. The 
roote is blacke without, reddiſh within 
tuberous ,orknobbie, | 
" * Theplace. 
This plant loueth woods and ſhadoyiepla- 
ces,andis likewiſe tound in SINrs bite open 
to the ſunne,almoſt euerie where, 


Qthicke, 


* The time. | | 
It lowreth from May tothe end of Auguſt 
* The names. | 
It is called of the later Herbariſts Faris : 


ſome name ir after the number of the leaues 
tapunur, and Septrfaliwm : in Eigliſh Serfoile, 
and Tormentill : in high Dutch Birkwurtz: 
moſt take it to be Chry/oganon, whereof Dyoſecoris 
_—_— made a briefe deſcription 7 m _ 
Bg e\, comparing Chry/oganon and Tormentil 
| | EF 4:45-4:80 es ws ig Ho 4 mn the ſcifc ſame 
plantzwhereas intruth they are no more like, than thoſethings that are moſt vnlike, 
| $1 | - | " *% Thetemperature. | PER <4 
The roote of Tormentill doth mighrily drie,and that in the third degree; andis of thinne parts: 
' ithathiniryery little heate,and is of a binding quality, | | | |. 
| ; | | *%\ Hſe vertues. | 
A Tormentill is notonely of like vertue wiFCTinkfoile., but alſo of greater efficacie : it is much 
_ » vſedagaiuſt peſtilent dilcaſes : for'it ſtrongly reſiſteth purrifaftionand procureth ſweate. | + 
B -- The leaucs and rogtes boiled inwine,or the iuicethercof drunken prouoketh,ſvcare,andby that 
meanes driueth out all venome frgm the harr,expelleth poiſon,and preſerueth the bodice injime of 
peltlence from the infeCtion thereot,and all other infeRious diſeaſes.'| | ; 
C Therootes dried, made into powder and drunke in wineyhath the fame vertuc. q 07-50 
D Thelamepowdertaken av atoreſaid,or in the waterofaſmithes forge,or ratherthewatct wher- 
in ot ſteele hath beep often quenched of Ak PS the laske and bloudic flixe,yca although 
-  thepaticnt haue adigined vnto his{couring a greeuous feuer. rotufoaRtnny tie bio ogpe 
E rſtoppeth the {pitting ofbloud piſſing of \ arg all other iflues of bloud , as well in men as 


F The decoction of the leaves and ak 54 , or the ivice thereof drunke, is excellent goodfor al 
wounds,both outward and -inwarde: it alſo openeth andhealcth the ſtoppings of the liver & lungs, 
and cureththezaundiſe, -.} - -/ Wow Hos i vrdes |: 
| or kneaded withthe white of an cgge andeaten,ſtaicth 


of 


G Theroot beaten into powder,r peredpr 
| the defire to vomite,and 1s good againſt chpler and melancholic, 


1 
| 


| 


© +. HISTORTE: OF PLANTS: $41 


Of wilde T anjie,or Siluerweede. Chap.36 & 


Argentina: 


Siluer "oc witde Tankie. : £ * The deſcription. 


Ilde Tanfte creeperh along vpon the 
grounde with fine lender ſtalkes and 
© claſping tendrels: the leauesarelong, 
 madeypofaany jmaller leaues, like vto thoie 
of the garden Tanfie,but lefſer,on the vpper fide 
grecne,, and vnder very white, The flowers bee 
yellow,and ſtand vpon ſlender ſtems, asdo thoſe 

_ of Cinktelle, 


|  *FTheptace. 

It grower i in moiſt places neere vnto high 
waics and running brookes euery where, 

* Thetme, 
It Rowreth in Time and Tuly, 
>, op Themes} © 

Thelater Herbariſts do call it Sr gemtins, of 
the filuer drops that are tobeſeene inthe diltil- 
led waterthercof when it is put into/a glaſle, 
which you (Hill caſcly ce rowling and crumbling 
vp & down in the bottomzit is likewiſecalled Po- 
rentilla,ol diuers Agrimonta fylueſtris, Arſerima, & 
T axacetion Flacfres inhig in high Durch > 2; Sung 
in lowe Dell Ganfſcrick : Tn Argentme: 
in Engliſh wilde Tanfie,and Siluet weede, 

* The temperature. 

It isof temperarure moderately cold, and drie 
| | almoſt in the thirde degree , hauing withall a 
binding facultic, F «24.434 vaD 72 

: *% Thewertnes. 
Wilde Tanſie boiled in wine and drunke Hopper the lacke the bloudic flixe, andallother luxe A 

of bloud'in ma n orwoman. 


The-ſame boiledia water and ſalt and Jnptie; diſſoluerh cores and \congealed bloud i in ſich. B 


as are hurt or bruſed with falling from ſome hi place. Ft2 OIent © 
|  ThedecoGtion heerofmade in waterzcur the vicers andcankersofthemourh if ſoine honie C 
and allome beadded thereto.in the boiling, 152 1 411 2.105 

. Wilde Tanſie-hath many other good vertues;ef} peciallyaga inſt thetone;inwarde wounds and.D 
Fe ts ofthe privic or ſecret parts,and cloſethvp al reene Sabi freſh wounds, 


| The diſtilled water rakerth away freckles ſpors;pi Fifrrhe faceand fimburning, burthe herds ww 


aide infuſe, or ſteeped in white wineis farre bearobin the'beſt of all is'ts' os inſtrong 
mm TORE 7 bw rene taterg rt; ores = = WOTQOD MT 


4 


{| *} biy to 36:1 notls 15:1 O11 
| T3467 9 Py COLNE 19 thidkw 2 + 


Of Ac Hens, nor brke Beni, ” ia. ay qt 
#YQnNYI 2112 21UC 


Ny e279 + Theinks: OY 1 29 126 batt: 11] _ : | 


| [2 ogmo oth Aoev Waoky 


Ts pe 2 rel of Auens,ſome of he gardeti others of By fete andamplot ppounis, 
Fi _ of the mountaines, as ſhall be declarcd in their ſeuerall titles. 
bogs I-C aryophyliata, 


_—_— — 


Bas. THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 


I arable, "bs 1 2 comple 
Auens or herbe Benner, | ? ron 21; "ooo 


8H bt 
7D 


N — 

4 . Y 
0 6 x 

j WW. 
Ts wryy n 


AS) 


DO 


One 


: , 
w JN , 
ER: 
Wo 


* The defeription. 


i” 


He commndy garden Avens hath leaues not vnlike to Agrimbnie, rotph, _—_ oy 
' much clouenor deepely cur into divers gaſhes: the ſtalke is rounde and hai ry,a foot high, | 
dividing itſelfe ar the top into diuers branches, whereupon do x dogrowyellow flowers, wo 
— thoſe of Sinkficlde otwilde Tanſie,which ingpaſt there followe vl wx rough heads 

'* fulloffeede: which being ripe will hang n garments as the Burs do, m__ roote is thicke 

; i) within,wich certaine yelldwe ſtrings fa fa thereto,ſmelling likeynro cloges or the ro or 
yperus, | 

., 2! Themountaine Auens hath 6k andehicer leaves then'the pricedent; (omg, ani more 
© hairie,notpanted intothree, but ther round, nicked on the edecs:amongwhich riferh wplleide 
flalks, whercon do grow ve ves like thoſt of Chickweedez69thexdp of che -doth 
grow one flower, Heuer then that of the former, which conſiſteth of anumberof lirrle leaues as 
yellow as golde; after whichigrowerh vp a round circle, conſiſting as : were of little feathers, The 
roote 1s long,growing a lope efomwhar thickegwith firin s arnexcd there | | 
3 Fivefinger Acta many ſinall leayes pre#vpon the ercvihdea; wk dinto fiue 2 xt 
whatſnipr To the _— ke Tinkefoil , whereof it rooke his- name: among which. ri le vp 
 flender ſtalkes diuided at the rop into diuer$s-branches wehcrecon do growe ſmall yellow flowers like 
thoſe of Cinkfoile: the roote'is compoſed of many tough ſtrings,of the ſmell of Cloves,» hich m ma- 
keth it akinde of {abr 1 np re ic muſt of necefiric be one ofrhe Cinkfoilek | 


101 
| 2 compli 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | B43 


3 Caryophyllata alpina pentaphylles. 
Fine leated Auens, 


us - 
Up A T6" 
.» "4 *S 


L * 7 he place. 


Theſekinds of Anens are found in high moun- 
taines and thicke woods of the north parts of 
England:we haue them in our London gardens, 
where they flouriſh and increaſe infinitely. 
oh * Thetome. 

They flower from the beginning of Maie , to 
the endof Iuly, 2 2:2 
| | % Th: names. 

Auens is called C:ryophyllata, fonamed ofthe 
ſinell of cloues which is in the cootes : and diuers 
callit Savamunda, Herbs Benedifta, and N ardus 
reſtica : 1n high Dutch Beevicten wo2tz 2 in 
French Ga/zet: of the Walons Glorea falra : in 
Engliſh Auens and herbe Benet? itis thought to 
be Geun; Pling, which molt do ſuſpeR , by rea- 

| fon he is ſobriefe : Gewn ſaith Plriein his 26. 
booke 7, chapter, hath little flenger roots, black, 
andof a good imell, : 4 

The other kinde of Auensis called of the la- 
ter Hcrbariſts,Caryophylleta montane, mountaine 
Auens : it might agree with the deſcription of 
Baccharks, it the flowers were purple tending to 

_ whitenes,which as we haue faide arc yellow, and 
\ likewiſe differ in that, that the rootes of Auens 
do ſmell of cloues , and thoſe of Baccher haue 
| | | the ſmell of Cinamom, Spotted Auens hath 
| | beenecalled Saniculs gutters, or ſported Sanicle, butnot properly it hath alfo beene called Saxicu- 
| le Alpma, ormountaine Sanicle: of L'Obel Geum A'/pinmn : and of vs Caryophyllats Alpina guttata, 
orſbotred Auens of the mountaines, peg 
[ *% The temper ature. x 
: Therootes and leaues of Auens arc manifeſtly dric, and ſomthing hot,with a kinde of ſcowring 
| qualirie, | 3 | | 


* Thewvertues. OM 
The decoCtion of Auens made in wine, is commended againſt cruditie or rawneſle of the ſto- A 
macke,paine of the collicke,and the biring of venemous beaſts, 

| Thefameis likewiſe a remedie for ſtitches and griefe in the fide,for Ropping of the liver itcon- B 
coRerh rawe humours ; ſcoureth away ſuch things as cleaue to theentrailes,waſteth and diffolueth 
winde,efpecially being boiled with wine : but if it be boiledin potrage or broth, it is of —_—_— 
eb of all other pot herbes is chiefe , nor onely in phiſicall brothes, but commonty:to be vied 
'inall, Þ ids | | 
| Theleaues androotes taken in this maner,diffolue and conſume cluttered bloudin any inwarde C 
' partof the body : and therefore they are mixed with potions,which are drunke of thoſe that be bru- 
| fed, that are inwardly broken ,and that haue fallen from ſome high place. i eh 

The rootes taken vp in Autumne and dried, dokeepe garments from ogenn with Mothes, D 
and make them to haue an excclicnt good odour: and ſeruc for all the Phificall purpoſes thar 
Cinkefoiles do, % | | | ITE 

NI Wa eg 7 of 


Sy 


JH be divers ſorrs of Strawberrrieszone red,another white, a thirde fort greene, and likewiſe 
a wilde Strawberrie,whichis altogither barren of fruite, | | 


1 Fragaria > Frag. 
 RedStrawberries. 


D ae ** 


{| 
[1 
q | 

| 


COND BOOKE OF THE 


Strawberries. Chap.370. 


| 51  % The deſeription. HD: ws 
1 p*HeStraw berrie hath leaves ſpred vpon the ground, ſomwhat ſmipr abour the edges,three 


| '*% The kindes. 


| 
j 
[| 
x 
[] 


y - Fragaria & Fraga ſubalba, 
White Strawberries. | 


ſertogither vpon one ſlender footeſtalke like the Trefoile, greene on the vpper ide, and 
on the neather ſide more "ia among which riſe vp flenderſtems , whereon do! growe 


ſmall flowers,conliſting of five lit 


commeth the fruit not vnlike to the Mulberie, orrather the Raſpis, redof colour,havingt 


le white Jeaues, the middle part ſomewhat yellowe , after which 


heraſt of 


wine,thc inner pulpe or ſubſtance whereof js moiſt and white, in which is conteined little ſcedes: 


the rooteis threddie, of long continuance ſending foorth many ſtring$,which dif perſe then:ſelues 


 farreabroad whereby it greatly increaferh. 


2 Of theſetherets alſoa ſecon d kinde which is like to the former in ſtemmes,ſttings Jeabes and 
flowers. The fruitejs ſomething gxeater,and of a whitiſh colour,wherein is the difference.| | , 
Thereis another ſort which bcingerh forth leaues flowers, and ſtrings like the other ot his kind, 


The fruire is greenewhen ir is ripe 
uing faſter cotheſtems,and is of 2 


ftending|to rednefle vponthat fide that lierh to the ſunne, clea- 
lweeter taſte, which maketh the difference. *' | 


3 Frag 14 


1111 HISTORITE 'OB PLANTS." 845 


Fragaria veſca ſave ft erilts. Et | | ; 
Wilde or barten Strawberrie, & The deſcription. © 


3 This wilde Strawberrie hath leaues ſpred 
ypon the grounde, compoledof fixe os feay 
ſmall leaues,ſet vpon a middle xibbe, NlightlyMn- 
dented about the edges , and of a ruſler greene 
colour :; among which nſe vp ſlender ſtems bea- 
ring ſuch flowers as the coafmon Strawberries 
do,bur lefler,which do wither away, leaving be- 
hinde a barren orchafhe head, in ſhape like a 
Strawberric,but ofno woorth or value : the root 
is like the others. 
| *% The place. 
Strawberries do grow vpon hils and yalleies, 
likewiſe in woods and other ſuch places that bee 
ſomething ſhadowie: they Ser well gar- 
dens,the SQ cuery where, the other two more 
rare zand arcnotto be founde ſauce onely in gar- 
dens. | Fi 
| * Thetome. _ 
| Theleanes continue greene all the yeere: in 
the ſpring time they {pred further with their 
ſtringes, and flower aftetwarde, the berries are 
ripe in June and luly. ©] 
| * The names. | 
The fruite or berries arecalledin Latine by 
Virgil and Onid Frogs neither haue they anic 
other name commonly knowne : theyare called 


ay) | in high! Durch Erdbicren $.in lowe Dutch - 
Eertbcſſent in French Fraiſes: in Engliſh Strawberries, | IR 


| & The temperature. | 
The leaues androotes do coole and drie, with an aſtriction or binding qualitie: but the berries 
be colde and moiſt, | | | 
| *% The vertues.” | 


The leahes boiled & applied in maner of a pultis , raketh away the burning heate in wounds: the A 
decotion thereof ſtrengthneth the gums,faſtnerh the teeth, andis good to be helde in the mouth 
both againſt che inflammation or burning heate therof,and alſo of the almonds of'the throat :they 
ſaiethe ouermuch flowing of the bloudic flixc,and other ifſues of bloud. [ 

 Theberries quench thirſt, anddo alaiethe inflammation and hearte of the ſtqmacke, thenou- B 
ribment which they yeeldeis lirrle, thinne, and wateriſh, andifthey happen to purrific in the: ſto- 
macke,theic nouriſhment is naught. bn | | 

 Thediſtilled water drunke with white wine, is good againſtthe paſſion of the harr,reuiuing the C 
ſpirits and maketh the hart merric. | | 


' The diſtilled water is reported to ſcower the face, torake away ſpots, and ro make the face faire D 
* and{mooth;; andis likewite drunke with good ſucceſle againſt the ſtone in the kidneies. 5 

| Theleaues are good to be purinto lotions or waſhing waters for the mouth and the priute E + 
parts, | | | or, 
 |Theripe Strawberries quench thirſt, cooleth heate of the ſtomacke , and inflammauon of the F 
liver,takerh away (if it be often vicd)the rednes and heate ofthe face. | 


"JF *.. of 


x 


3;5 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
|| Of Angelica. Chapzm. | | 
TRITP Y * The kindes. 


<P Here bedivers kinds of Angelicaes; the garden Angelica ; that of the water, 


RN 
&.c? ——— 


Wy; 


6 


TI... 
| 
* *%. % 
WV 
3 
* 
* 
uy 


1 


| * The defeription. | 


I Oncerning this plant Angelica,there hath beene heeretofore ſome contention anccon- 
| 'S rrouerlie, Cordacalling it Smyraiun , ome later writers Coffgs niger: but to aupide ca- 
 uilling, the conttouerſit is ſoone:decided, fith it, and no other, doth affuredly retaine the 


name Amneelice. It hath great broad leaues,diuided againe into other leaues, which arc indented of 


ſnipr abour,muctrlike ro the vppermoſt ar 10 of Spendi/linm,but a Gyre 0a Os and ofa * 
ſtronger ſauour : among which Ieaues ſpring vp the ſtalkes, very grear, thicke and hollowe, fixe of 


ſeauen foote high, Jiointedor kneed; from which ioints proceede other armes or branches, at the 


top whereof grow tuſts of whitiſh flowers,like Fennell or Dill :the roote is inks, grearepor olle- 
ous,ourt of which ifierh(it ic be gur or brgken)an oilie liquor:the whole plant as w leaues ſtakes, 
as rootes,are of areaſonable pleaſant faupur;nor much vnlike Petroleum, = | | 

Lhereis another kinde of true Angelica founde in our Engliſh gardens (which Ihaue obſerued) 


| being like vntotheformer, ſauing that the rootes of this kinde are more fragrant,andot a more aro 
' maticke {auour , and the leaues hext the grounde of a purpliſh red colour, and the whole plant 


leiicr, 


Mo ; LY 


[* | | | | 
| | c | 2 

£ a | - 
| 


_—— @Oo— _— 


2 "HISTORIE OF PLANTS” oy. -- , 


- | *% Thedcſeription. | 2" 


2 Thewilde Angelica which ſeldome groweth ingardens, but is founde to growe plentifully ir 
water ſoken 3 ounds andcold moiſt medowes, islike to that of the yore fJavethar is leaucs arc 
notſo deepely cur oriagged, they be alto blacker andnarrower: the [talkes are wry flencerer and 
orter;and the flowers whierzthe rooce much ſmaller, and hath more threddie | ingsappendant 
thereunto,and is not {oftrong of ſauour by a great deale, | rt 7 * {0 

Mathiolus and Geſnerws have made mention of anorher kinde of Angelica, but we aft very flen- 
derly inſtcucted by their infutſhcientdeſcriprions : notwithſtanding for our berter knowledge, and 
more certaine aſſurance, I anult needs record that which my friende maltet BredwweFrelated vmnto 
me concerning his fight heercofz who founde this plant growing by the more which compaſſerth 
the houſe of maſter Muzke of rhe pariſh of Iucr, rwo miles from Colbrooke,and fince thatI hauc 
leene he ſame in lowe fennie and marſhic placcs of Eflex , about Harwich ; this plant hath leaues | 
like vnto tl 1e-garden Angelica,but tmaller, and fewer nnumber,ſct vpon one ribhe., a great ſtalke, df 
grofſ: and thicke whole ioints,| and that ſmall rib whereonrhe leafe growerh , is ofa reddiſh co- | 
[qur,having many long branches commin g forth of an huske or caſe,fuch aSis inthe comman gar- 
den parlnep : the flowers $row atrhe top of the branches,of 2 whuc colout angtytr faſhion avbich 
being paſt there ſucceede broad, long,and thicke feeds, longer and tlucker then garden Angelica: 
theroote is great,:hicke, and white,of little ſauour, with ſome ſtrings appendant thetero., | 

| | %* The place. : | | 

Thefirſt is very common in our Engliſh gardens: in other places it growerh wile withopr plan- 
ting,as in Norwaic,and in an Iiand ofthe north called [{lynd,where :t growerh very high, ir is ea- 
ten ofthe inhabitants,the barke being pilled off,as we vaderttande by ſome that have trauc!led into 
IMand,vho were fomrimes compelled ro catc hceereof for want of other food; and they report thar 
thatha good and pleaſant taſterothein thar arc hungrie : it groweth likewiſe in diuers mountaines 
of Germany,andetpecially of Bohemia, - F| | 
| | *% Thetime. Ef - 

They flower in Iuly 2nd Auguſt, whoſe rootes for the moſt part doperilh after their ſeed is ripe: 
yet have with often cutting the plant kept it from ſce ding, by which meanes the roore and planr 
hath continued fundcie yecres togither, | 
| * 7 he names. | £ 

Itis called of the larer age tAagelic:: in high Dutch Angclick, Bruſtwurts , or des heflighen 
Gepſt wirc3el,chat is, $p2ratwsſancti rad: x,or the roote of the hyhe Ghott, as witneſieth Lronhar- 
tu Fuch/zs : 1m lowe Dutch Angelijkat in French 4ngelic!: in Engliih allo Angelica, 

It lce:uerh ro be a kinde of L2ſerpitiam;for ifit be compared with thoſe rhings which Theophra- 
feat large hath wiiteen Concerning Selphtum , or Laſerpitiumn , in his {ixt booke of the hiftOrie of 
plants, it ſhall appcere to be anſwerable thereunto. But whether wilde Angelica be that which 
| Theuphr a/tues calleth Magud:ris, that is to faie,another kinde of Laſerptiees, we leaucirtobe cxa- 
minedandcoifidered of by the learn:d Plhiſicions of our London Colledge. | 

heals "  ** The temperature. | 

Angelica,cſpecially that of the gardens ior and drie in the thizde degree,therefore ir openeth, 

atenuateth,or makeththinne,digeſterh and procureth ſweate. | | 
| | ww Thevertucs. | 

| Therootes of garden Angelica isa fingular remedic againſt poiſon, and againſt the plague, and A 
al infections raken by cuill and corrupt airc, if you dobur take a peece of the roote and holde it in 
your mourh,or chew the fame beeweene your teeth , it doth moſt certainly diiue away the peſti- 
lentiall aire;yea although that corrupr aire have poſſefled che hart, yer 1t driueth it outagaine by 

Vineand lweateas Rue and Treacle doth,and fuch like Aztipharmaca. | 
Wy ngeliea is at) Chimie to poiſons: it cureth peſtilent diſeaſes if it be vein ſeaſyn:a cram waighr B - 
0; the powder hereofis giuen with thm wine, or ifthe ſeater be vchement, with the diſtilled water 
0! Carduus benelttt ies; or of Torment ll,and with a little vineger, and by itleifc alfo, or with Treacle 
0! Vipers adde4. | | p | | ? 
; P_—_ the liner artd ſpleene :drawerh downe the rearmes , driveth out or expelleththe ſe- C _ 

UNGINC, | | | 5 


® _ | | | The 


$48 THE SECOND©BOOKE OF THE 
D Thedecofion new roote made in wine, is good againft the colde ſhiuerir 
E Iris reported that the roote is auaileable againſt witchcraft and inchantme! 


. theſameabouthimAas Fuchſiz: 


F Irextenuatcth and maketh rhinne, groſſe and cough fl : the roote being viedere 
while it is full of iuice,helperch th&m rhat be 


! 
j 
7 


. 


: 


gs of 20ves, 


it's 3 if aman carrie 


£ 


faith. | 


aſthmaricke,diſſoluing andexpeRorating the ſtuffin 


« therein, by cutting off and clenfing the parts affected, reducing the bodic tohealth aga e: Ku 


when it is dry it worketh not fo 


feQually; 


G Iris amoſt ſingular medicine againſt ings andlothſomnes tor | ate: it helpeth co oRion 
inthe ſtomacke,and is right beneficiall co the hart: it cureth the bitings ofmad dogs, and all other 


venemous beaſts, | | 


H Thewildekindsare not of fuch forc 


vnto them, 


1 Imperatoria. 
Maſterwoorts,0 


s 
: 


%" 
#9, * 


z *$& [ D F j * *% *- 
Wy mY k =. 
ESI? 
ky TEAS 
d.. _— 

= 04; JJ? 


: > 
I LDN 
© 


of _Maſternoorts and berbe Gerard. Chap.372- 


Falſe Pellitory of Spaine. | : | HerbeGerard,or Aiſhwee 


L b 


©; . I. EE ol 
einworking, albeit they hauethe ſame verrtues attributed 


: 
: 


2 Herb Gerardi. 


HRT CONTI) 
WWF | KO < f 


1 FT Myperatoria or Maſterwo 


* The deſeriptin. 


rt, hath great broad leaues not much vnlike wilde Angelica , but 


ſinaller & of adeeper greeh colour, jn ſauor like Angelica, &euery kafe divided into ſundric 


other little leaues : the ten 


ſpokie tufts with white Aowers : 


er knottie ſtalkes are of a reddiſh colour, bearing ar the top : 
he ſeedeis like the ſeede of Dill : the roote is thicke, knoxtie, an 


tuberous; of a good ſauour,and hot or biting vpon the toonge, which hath mooued the mm 


' tocall irPellitorie of Spaine but ery vnfitlic and vncruely. 


OY 


'2 Herbs 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 8:9 


« |y Herba Gerard . which Penadoth alſo call Imperatorie, & Oftrutinm, the Germaines Podanra- 
 rie, that is gout woot , in Engliſh herbe Gerard , or wilde Maſterwoorr, and in fome places Ther 
| Lite Aiſhweed 31s very like the other in leaues, flowers, androotes, ſauing that they be ſmaller, 

owing vpon longer ſtems: the rootes renderer,whiter,and not ſo thicke or tuberous, The whole 

| plantis of a reaſonable g00g {auour,burtnotſo be, Maſterwoorr. 

| %* T, 

”m—_— ghd in darke woods and defarts; 3 in my TEES and __ others verie _— 


of 


* Thetime. FEE: x : 
The flower fromthe beginning of Iune to the beginning of Auguſt, * | 6 
*%* The names. | 

eratoria,or <Aftrantia,i is called in Engliſh Maſtetwoort,or falſe Pellitorie of Spaine. 

Herba Gerardi, is calledin Engliſh Herbe Gerard, Aiſhweed, and Goutwoorr , in Latine Pods- 
| graria Germanicd. £ 
| % The nature. 

Imperatoria, eſpecially the roote, is hot and aric in the thirde degree. The wilde gnperatrie, Or 
herbe Gerard i almoſt of the fame nature and qualitie,but not ſo ſtrong, 


v- The vertues. 


Imperatorivys not onely good againſt all puifon.,bur alſo fi ingular againſt all bogrupt and naugh- A' 


tieaireand infetion of the peſtilence, if it be drunken with wine. 

The rootes and leaues ſtambed,doth diflolue and cure peſtilenciall cahantlen and botches,and B 
ſuch orher apoſtemations and ſivellings beingap plicd thereto, | 

The roote drunke in wine cureth the extreme and rigorous fits of old feuers, and is good againſt C 
 thedropſie,and prouokerh {weate, 

The ſame taken in maner aforeſaid .comforteth and ftrengrhneth the omacke;helperh digeſti- D 
 on,reſtoreth appetite,and diflolueth all ventcſities or windineſie of the ſtomacke [and other parts. 
| Iegreatly helpeth ſuch as haue taken grear ſquats,bruſes, or fals from ſome high place,difioluing E 
and ſcattering abroad congealed and clotred bloud within the body : the roote with his leaucs 
| ſtamped and laid vpon the members infected, cureca the bitings ofmadde dogs , and ot all other 
venemous beaſts, 

Herbe Gerard with his rootes ſtamped,and laid vpon members thar are aublld or vexed with F 
thegout, ſwageth the paine, and taketh away the fivelling and inflammation thereof, which occa- 
| fonedthe Germainesto giue itthename Podagraris, bicauſe of his vertues in curing the gour, 
| ItcurecthaHſothe Hemorrhoids,ifthe fundament be bathed with the decaQtion of the leaues and G 
 rootes,and the ſoft and tender ſodden herbes laid thereon very hor. 
| FalſePellitorie of Spaine attenuaterh or maketh thinne, digeſterh,prouoketh feare and. vrine, H 
 concoteth grofſe and colde humours,waſteth away windines of the entrailes, ſtomacke and ma- 
 Uix: itis good againſt the colicke and ſtone. 


One dram of the the roote in _— giuen certaine daies togither, is a remedic for them that I 


| havethe dropſie ) and alſo for 


rn ole that are troubled with conuulſions FRED ,and the falling 
fic "a 


| pSgieen with wine before the fi come, it cureththe quartaine ague,and is a remedy againſt K 
peſtilent diſeaſes. 


wh ſame boiled in ſharpe or ſower i the toothach, ifrhe mouth be waſhed therwith L 
veric hot, | 


u1%, zur hewedi it draweth foorth water and flegme out of the mouth (which kinde of reme- M 
dies in Latine are called Apephlegmatiſmos ) and disburdeneth the braine of phlegmarike hu- 
ew, m_ are Ukewiſe vied with good ſucceſle in apoplexics, drowſic Oy $nd other hike in- 


Hbb 1 Mm 


N 


_—_—— Co — 


| 


350o©, THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| 


Y 


$ 
x 
# 
{| 


| 
| 


Of Hereules Woun 


? 
f 
| 


P Anax is of ſundrtie kindes,as witneſſe 
ſo that in 7 heophraſtws there are ſixc kinds 
elem, Aſclepiuwn,and Chiron;am; vwhereun 
gut by meancs of a 

yoort. | 


. 


1 Panax Heraclewn. | 
Hercules Alheale. 


ap 


: * The kindes. 


likewiſe other three, that is to ſaic Chironrum, Heraclium, 
Heregles Alheale, and AEſeu/apius Alheale 


oort, op «A lheale. Chap.373. 


Theophraftws in his 9g.booke, one growerh in Sytiaand 
| and AEſculapriwn, or Chirons Alheale 
; beſides theſe there is one Platyphylln,or broa(lleateg? 
of Panax : but Dzoſeorides defer both onelyth r$&.Herg. 


| unto we hauc added another ſort,whoſe vertues we founde 
husbandman , and for that cauſe haue namedit Pamax Colon; , or Clownes 


i 
| $ 


2 Panax Heracleum maine, | 
Hercules great Woundwoct, 


. 
D . - 
4 144", 


The deſeription. 


I Ercules Alheale or Woun dwoort, hath many broadleaves ſpred vpon t 


rough and hairic, of an oterwoxne greene colour, and dee 


IE 


like 


is that precious gum.called Opopenax :at 
yellowiſh flowers,fet rogither in ſpokie ru 
colour,tharpe and hor in raſte,and of a ple 


| 


and of awhitecolot 


ir, 


b x 
: 

1 

: 

pe |} 

f ? 


thoſe of the Cowparlnepe, andnot vnlike to the figge 
Vp avery ſtrong ſtalke,couered over with 4 rough hairineſſe,ofthe heig 
| being wounded it yeeldeth foorth a yellow 


he grounde,very 
ely cut into divers ſections, 
vr inp among which riſeth 


zht of fower or five cubites: 
e gummie juice, as doth euery part of the plant, which 
he top of which ſtalkes do ſtand great tufts or vimbles of 
dles like thoſe of Dill, which turne into ſeede of 2 ſtray 
afing ſauour: the roote is very thicke, fat, full of mice, 


HISTORIE OF; PLANTS..,,/ .. 85x 


[ % The deſcription. 4 | 
+ The great VW oundwoort , which rhe Venerians nouriſh in their gardens , hath great large 
| leaues,formewhat rough or hairie,conſiſting of diners ſmall leaues ſettogither ypon a middle ribbe, 
which make one cntire leafe toincd cogither in one, whereot each col!aterall oc fide leafe is like 
| /thecommon Docke: among which rileth vp aknottieſtalke three or fower cubirs high, diuiding 
| | afel{ejntodiuers branches ; on the tups whereof do growe.ſookie tufts.or rundles like the prece- 
dent; the ſeede is flat and plaine: the roote long, thicke, and white, which being broken or woun- 
d&d yeeldcti foorth that liquor of the former,ot an hot and warming taſte, | | 
| | BS The place. = 
Theſe, plants do growe in Syria, thefuſtof them alfo in my garden; but what Panax of Sy- 
 tiais, Theophraſts doth nor cxpreſle: P/rmy in his 12. booke 26. chapter faith, thar the leanes 
are rounde,and of a great compaſſe : but it is ſuſpeRed thatthele are drawne from the deſcription 
of Hercules Panax, | © | 
Broad leafed Panax is thought to be the great Centorie: for Play witneſleth; that Panax which 
Chiron found our, is ſurnamed Centaurium,Centoric,as we (hall more at large write heereof. | 
' Mithi-lw faith it growerh of it felfe in the tops ofthe hils Apenninign the Cape Argentario,in 
the ſea colts of Stena,and it is cheriſhed in the gardens of Italiey bur he cannot-aftirme tl1ar che 
liquor is gathered heereof in ltalie: for the liquor Opopanax which is folde in Venice, is brought 
lah he, our of Alexandria,a citic in Egypt $ in Syria,Boztia,and in Phecide, cities of Arcadia, 
| | * The time. | | 
-— They flower and flouriſh from the fi:ſt of Maie vnto the end of September. 
| * The names, 

That which is called wexs in Greeke,is likewiſe named Prmaces in Latine ;and that Panaces He- 
raclium which Dioſcorides ſetterh downe, is called in Latine Panaces Hereulanun, or Hereuleum, or 
Hercules Panax: it may be called in Engliſh Hetcules his Woundwoor,or Alheale,or Opopanax 
woott, of the Greeke name. | "2, 

| Somethinkeittooke his name of Zexaclitus that weeping Philoſopher, who continually wept 
25 Democritus altyaics laughed: for in regard of the teares or drops that iflue out of the ſtalkes and . 
rootes of this plane(which is.called Opopanax) when they are bruſed or wounded: bur whether of 
Herewlesbicauſe he vied the ſame in healing ot his ſoldiers wounds, or of thethe weeping of Hera- 
ctwitreſteth diſpurable,and yernothing pertinent to our hiſtorie, | | 


— 


|  t*% The temperature. | . | 
The barke of the roote of Hercules Woundwoortis a Symple hot anddrie, yet lefle then rhe 
iuice as Ge/em teacherh, | [ Ft: 
er] * Theverrues. | 


Theſecdebroughr inro powder and drimke in Wormwood wine,is good againſt poiſon, the bi- A 
ting of madde FIR. the ſtinging of all maner ofwilde beaſts. GY | aſs | 
The leaues or rootes ſtamped with honie , and brought to the forme of an vneuent or ſalne, cu- B 
| = a and vIcers of great difficultic , and couereth bones that are bare-or naked without 


Of ( lownes Woundyoort;or eAlbeale. Chap.374« - [ 


$'T he deſcription. 


— 


N Lounes Alheale,or the husbandmans Woundwoorthath long flender ſtalkes of the heighe 
_, of twocubirs,furrowed or charfered along the ſame,as it were with (mall gutters.andſomes 
| whatroughorhairiez whereupon are ſet by couples one oppoſite toanother , long rough 
leaes,ſomewhatnarrowe, bluntly indented about the edges likethe teeth of afawe,, of the forme 
of the leaues of Spearemint,and of an oue&tworne greene colour: at therop of the ſtalkes dogrowe 
the flowers !pike faſhion, of a purple colour mixed with ſome fewe ſpots of white, in forme hke-ro 
little hoods. The roote-confiſteth of many ſmall elireddie ſtrings , whereunto are annexed/or tied 
divers knobbie| or tiiberous lumpes , of a white colour , rending to yellcwnes:all the»whole = 
' Plantisof an vnpleafave ſauour like Srachi,or ſtinking Horehound, | PRI - 
| | Hhh 2 | Pang 


4 4 ' i 
| : ; 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Panax Colon. Ws 7 | ay 
Clouncs Alhcale, | -\ 


| 


% The pace, 7 


It groweth in moiſt medowes by thi | 
ditch; , and likewiſc ih fertill belies {ns bed 
ſomwhat moiſt almoſt eucrie where, e ecivl 
in Kent about Sourhfleere neere ro Gr4 weſentÞ 
and likewiſe mn the medows by Lambeth ncere 
London. [EIT f 
| . . 4 {rifane; TP 

tflowreth in Auguſt;and brinoeth ti; | 
to perfection in the jr of ces ole, =_ 
| | *% The names, ot? 

Ir ſhall ſuffice what hath beene faide in the - 
deſcription as touching the names , as yell in 
Latine as Engliſh, | | wot 

% The temperature. 

This plant is hotin the feconde degree, and 
dric in: the fi {t, ES 1 

$ ns % The wertues. | 

The leaves heerof ſtatnped with Axungis,or 
Hogs greaſe, and applied vnto green wounds in 

. maner of a pultis, dach heale them.in ſuch ſhort 
time &inſuch ab{olate maner, thatitis hard tor 
WF oh | any that hath not had the experience thereofto 
IR A NOEZ | | beiecue: for being in Kent about a Pacjent;ir 
| I chanced that a very; poore man in mowing of 
Peaſondid cut his leg with the Sieth, wherinhe 
made a wound to the bones, & withal verylar 
& wide, & alfo with gfecat effuſion of bloud, 
poore man crept vnto this herbe whichhe bru- 
+11 |} ſed i his hands, & tied a great quantitte'of it vn- 
tothe wound with a peece of his ſhirt, which preſently ſtanched the bleeding and ceaſed the pain, 
inſomuch that the poore man preſently went to his daies worke againe,8 fo. did from daicto daie, 
without reſting one day vntill hewwas perfe&tly hole , which was accompliſhed in a fewe daies 
by this herbe ſtamped with alictle Hogs g:eace, and ſolaid vpon in maner of a pultis , which did 
as it were glewe or ſoderthe lips of the wounde togither, and heale ir according to rhe firſt intenti- 
on (as we tearme it ) that is without drawing or bringing the wounce ro ſupp»:ration or| matter, 
which was fully performed in ſeauen daics,] that woulde haue required fortie daies with Balſam it 
ſelfe : I fawe the wounde, and offexed to heale the ſame for charitie, which he refuſed, faying,thatl 
coulde not heale it ſo well as himſtlfe ; a clowniſh anſwer I confeſle without thankes for my good 
will, whereupon I hayenamed it Clounes Woundwoort as aforeſaide, Since which time my felte 
haue cured many gretuous wounds,and ſome morrcall,with the-fanie herbe zone tor example done 
vpon agentlemi of Graies Innein Holburge,maſter Edwund Cartwright who was thruſt intorhe 
lungs, the woundentring in at the lowermoſt part of Thorex or the breſt plate,cuen through that 
cartilaginous ſubſtance,cilled Mucronare Eartrlago, infomuch thar from day to day , theffothing 
and puffing ot the lungs did ſpewe foorth of the wound ſuch excrements as it was poſleſiedal; be- 
ſides the gent'ewan was moſt datigerouſly vexed with adouble quoridian teauer, whom by Gods 
permiſſionlTperfe&ly cured in ver ſhort time, and with this Clounes experiment , and lome of 
my foreknowne helpes which wete as followerh, 1] | | 
B FuſtIframedafliyhrt vnguent hereof, thus ;Itooke fower handfuls of the herbe ſtamped,and put 
_ _themintoapan,wherunto 1 added fower ounces of Barrowes greaſe,halte a pint of oile oliue, wax 
three ounces, which I boiled vnto/the co nſumption of the juice (which is knowen when the (tuffc 
doth. notbubble at all) then did I ftra ine it, purting it to rhe fireagrine, adding therto two ounces 
of Turpentine,the which Iſfufferedto boile alictle;reſeruingthe fame formy vie, —__ 


FKN\ 


4 
: 
{ 
: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1” 

The which I warmedin a ſawcer, dipping therein fmall ſoft rents , which [ putinto the wound, 
defendingthe partes adioining with a plaiſter of Chaſerteos relented with oile of Roſes,which man- 
ver of dreſſing or preſcruing I vied euen vnrill the wound was perfectly whole : notwithſtanding 
once inaday I gaue him two ſpoonetuls of this decoRion following, 

lrooke a quart of good Claret wine, wherin I boiled an handfull of che leaues of Solidago Sara- D 
cenica,or SAIracens Cntnnd ,and fower ounces of honig,whereot I gaue hum in the morning two 
(oonefuls to drinke in a ſmall draught of wine tempered witha little Sugar, ; 

Jnlike manner I cured a Shoomakers ſeruant in Holburne, who intending to —_ himſelfe E 
for cauſes knowen vnto many now liuing, and therefore deeming it better to couerthe faulr, than 
ro put rhe ſame inprint, which might mooue ſuch a graceleflc fcllowe to arremprthe like : his 
artemptwas thus ; Firſt he gaue himſelfe a moſt morrall wound inthe rhrote, in ſuch fort, thar 
when I gaue him drinke it came forth at che wound, which likewiſe did blowe outa candle; another 
deepe and greeuous wound in the breſt with the ſaid dagger, and alſo ewo others in Abdomine, or 
thencacher belly : fo that the Zirbus or far,commonly called the Caule,iflued foorth,with theguts 
likewiſe. The which morrall wounds,by Gods permiſſion, andthe vertues of this herbe, I perfectly 
cured within twenty daics.For the which the name of God be praiſed. 


Of Mag ydare or Laſerwoort. Chap.375. 


Laſer vition. 
Latcr woort. * The deſcription. 
oP T ſcemeth that neither Dzoſcoriaes , nor yet 
Theophraitus haue euer ſcene Laſerpitiuos, Sx- : 
gaveuwwn , or any other of the | wm 1 T2 
rootes, but haue barely and nakedly fer downe 
their cenſures or iudgements vpon the ſame, ci- 
ther by heareſay, or by reading of other mens 
works. Now then ſecing the old writers be vnper. 
fe& herein , it behooucth vs in this caſe to ſearch 
with morediligence the truth hereof, and the ra- 
ther for that very few haue ſet foorth the true de- 
{criptionof that plant which is called Le/erprtcuon, 
thar is indeede the right Laſerpitivr, from the 
rootes whereof floweth that fap or liquor called 
' Lacey. Thisplant, as Pena and ZCbelimes theme 
ſelues ſay, was founde out not far fromthe lle 
= which Dzoſcoredes calleth Stzxcados (ouer againſt 
; Maſlita) among ſuncrie other rare plants, His | 
#7 ftalke is great and thicke like F-rula, or Fennell _ 
 . gyantztheleaues arc like vnto the common Smal- 
lage, and of an vnpleaſant ſauorr, The flowers 
growe at the top of the ſtalkes tufe faſhion Lke 
Ferulaor Fennell; which being paſt,there ſucceed 
broad and flat leaues Jike Angelica, of a good\a- 
_vourand of the colourof Boxe, The rootes aie 
many, comming from one head or chieferoote, 
and are couered ouer with a thicke and fat barke, 
[M1 Tot: pd: Theſe rootes and ſtalkes being fcarified or cur, 
there floweth out of them a ſtronge liquor , which being diied is very medicinable, andis called 
Lacey. = 


aq 


fe ol s The place. | 

© Therebeſundrie ſortes of Lacer lowing from os rootes and ſtalkes of Laſerpitium,the goodnes 

or ; ar whereof, varieth according to De countrie or climate wherein the plant groweth, For 

the beſt crowerh vpon the high mountaines of Cyrene,and Africa,and is of apleafanr ſmell where. 
PfCeral doth trucly write, A | 

bm HBk 3 Laſerpict 


5 

j 

! 

4 

[4 

5 

; 

[1 

i ' 
1 ! 
[1 

' 4 
n 

i 

bf 


$54 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| A Luſerpiciferis tacet Cyrenss, | 
| _ | InEngliſhchus, | 
As {and dathlic on Cyren ſhore, 
Which beareth Lacerpiſe good ſtore, | 


— 


> 


|. in Syria alſo,Media, Armenia,and Lybia ;the liquor of which plane growing in theſe PIACEs is of 


Maſlilia, was the firſt that made it knowen,or brought the plants thereof to Montpelier in Fr, 
vntothe learned Rondeletios,whoright well beholding the ſame, concluded thar of all the kindes of 


lothſome and deteſtable ſauour; L'Obeltxereporteth, that /acobies Rairnandus an Apotheca of 


|  Ferulawhichhe had cuer ſecne, there way not any ſo anſwerable vnto the truc Laſerpitium as this 


1a Media and Syriagis called Aſafetids. | 


onely plant. 


| | | | * The time. 
This plant flowreth in Montpellier about Midſommer. 


| 21] i The names, OE | 
It is called in Latine Zaferpitagen :in Engliſh Laſerwoort and Magydare: the gum or liquor that 
iſſuerh our of the ſame is called Lecer, but that which is gathered from thoſe plants that do erowe 


|\% The nature. 


} Laſerpitrumelpecially the roole, is hotand dric inthe third degree * Laſer is alſo hot anddrie in 
. *thethird degree,but it exceedeth much the heate of the leauesſtalkes;and rootes of Laſerpitium, 


JA 


G 


, 


% The vertues. 


Therootes of Ls/erpitium well pouned, or ſtamped with oile, ſcattercth clorted blood, raketh 
away blacke and blew markes that come of bruiſes or ſtripes, cureth and diſſolueth the Kings euill 
and all hard ſivellings and botches,the places being annointed or plaiſtered therewith, I * 

The ſame rootes made into a plaiſter with thc oile of Ireos and waxe, doth both allivage and 
cure the Sciatica,or goute of the/hip or huckle bone. WE. | oy 

The ſame holden in the mouth and chewed, doth aſſwage the toothachz for they are ſuch rootes 
as drawe fromthe braine a greatquantitie/of humors. br | 

Theliquor or gum of Z:1/erpitiam,clpeciallythe Zafer of Cyrene broken and diſſolued in water 
and drunken, taketh away the hgarſeneſle that commeth ſuddenly : and being ſupt vp with areare 
egge, ”=_ the cough: and taken with| ſome good broth or ſupping, is good againſt an olde ' 

leurilie, | | SER. | 
: Lacer cureth the iaundies and gropſic taken with dried figs : alſo being taken in the quantitieof 
a ſcruple,with a lictle pepper and Myrhe,is very good againſt ſhrinking of finewes , andmembers 
out of ioint. pl3 ] Ei EF: © | 

The ſametaken with honie and vineger, or the firupe of vvineger, is yery good againſt the falling 
ſicknelie. [6 . PROS Eons gd | 
It is good againſt the fluxe of the bellic;comming of the debilitie and weaknefle of the ſtomacke, 


(calledin Latine Caliacus morbag)it it be taken with raiſons of the ſunne. | 


Ic driuech away the ſhakings and ſhiuetings of agues,being drunke with wine,vepper,andwhite 
Frankincenfe. Alſo there is made an elehyarie thereof called Antidotwm ex ſucco Cyremaicowhichis = 


a ſingular medicine againſt feuer quartaines. 2 fot | 
leis excellent againſtthe bitings of al yenemous beaſts, and venemous ſhot of darts or arrowes, 
notonely taken inwardly,but UG appliedjoutward]y vpon the wounds, | | 
It bringeth to maturation, and breaketh all peſtilentiall impoſtumes, botches and carbuncles, 
being applied thereto with Rue, $alr peter and honie: after the ſame manner it taketh away cornes 
after they haue beene (carified with a knife, | | | | 
Being laid to with Copperas and Verdipreaſe,it taketh away al ſuperfluous ourgrowingsof fleſh, 
the Polypus that happerieth in che nole,and all ſcuruie mangineſle. | gs 94} ] 


M If itbe applied with vineger, pepper andwine,it cureth the navghrie ſcurfe of the head | and fal- 


ling off of the haire, 


Thegum or liquor of Le/erpitjwm which growethin Armenia, Lybia, and ſundry other places, 15 
char ſtinking. and lothſome gumicalled of the Arabian Phiſitions 4 and Aſa, as alſo with vs 
ſhaps Aſa /etid:: but the Laſerp:trmn growing in Cyrene is the beſt, and of a reaſonable pleaſant 
ſnel},andis called Lacey, to rr/$. guiſh and make difference betweene the two juices 3 br” Ale 

| 1 | fe 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. !: | $45 


Too be 000d for all purpoſes aforeſaid, yet is it not ſo good as Lacer of Cyrene #itis good alſo to 


{nl ynto; and to be applied vntorhe nauels of women vexed withthe chokingyorruing of tic 
mother. | | | | | | $:4of Fg =] 
| 65+]. , Of common Louage. Chap. 376: 
Lens ticam vulgare. © a | | 
Common Lovage. | * The deſcription.” ETD: 


Ncient writers haue addef{ vnto thisrom- 
mon kinde of Louage, a fecond fotr; yer 
knowing that the plant fg ſuppoſed is the 
true Ser montanwn, and not LeyiHicum, though 
others allo have deemed it Zaſerpirram . Thee 
two ſuppoſitions are eafily an{wered, fith they be 
fundrie kindes of plants, though verie neere in 
ſhape and faculties one vnto angther, This plant - 
being our common garden Loyage, hath large 
and broad leaues, almoſt like ro, Smallage, The 
| ftalkesare round, hollow and knortie, three cubirs 
high,h 2uing ſpokie tufres, or buſhic rundlesz and 
at the top ot the ſtalks of a yellow colour,around, 
fat and browneſeede, like the ſeede of Angelica: 
. theroote is long and thicke, and bringeth toorth 
euery ycere new ſtems, i 
es % The place. | 
The right Leu:#:icam or Lonage groweth in 
ſundry gaidens,andnot wilee(as far as Iknowe)in 


England, * Thetimme. | _ - 
Lovage flowreth molt comtponly in Iuly and 
Auigult, % The names." 


It is calledin Latin Lanifion & Lguſt icum: of 
ſome Ser mont anwn butnot trifly;inh! gh Dutch 
L ibſtocket :; in French Zzwſche: mlowe Durch 
| Lguctſe;in Engliſh Lovage, | TS 
fcpiandyy + The nature. | | 
This plant is hot and drie in the third degree. | 
| | vw Te Vertaes. | | | 
. Therootes of Louage are very good for all inward diſeales, driuing away ventoſtties or windy. A 
neſle eſpecially of the ſtomacke. , 0, | | [| | 
The ſeede thereof warmeth che ſtomacke, helpeth digeſtion, wherefore the people of Gennes, B 
in time paſt did vſe it in their meates,as we do pepper,according to the teſtimonic of Ant. Muſa. 
The diſtilled water of Louage, clcereththe fight, and purreth away all ſpots, lentiles, freckles, C 
andrednesof the face,if they be often waſhed therewith, 5” | 


Of Cowe Parfenep. | Chap.377. 


| ” Þ 
, - £ 


ff | 27 + % The deſeription. | 1s © 46 & 315H OY 
His plant Spendy/zam groweth, jn all counrigs; and isknowne by the nate of wildg Parl- 
. hep,or Sponidyhiumgwhercunto.it effetuallyan{werethy both. in [1s greevous andrafke fa- 
- bour,as alſo. mthe likeneſle of gheroote, whereupon it was,galled Spondylium, and-ot the 
Germaines. Acanthug, bur vneruly; the leaues of this plantare long and large, nut much ynlikethe 
lequesof wilde Parſ] ppe,or Panax Heraclewn, deepely notched: gf cut about; the edgeslke the 
tefth of a favecyandof an oucrworne greenecolour. The flowers grow intutts,gprundles, hk voto 
wide Parlne ;the roate is like to Honbane;, this bþerbe in cachpartehereof-hath.an evil laubur, 
and dilergth trora the right CAcanthixmnot ons!y in faculties,burcuenipallathes grings,: 
SR PAN pay AY | Hhh 4 | Spordylium 3 


? 
\ ? 
/ a 
4 


D BOOKE OF| THE 


* The place. 


This plan owerh i in ferrill ——_ medowes, 
and feeding ; = ty mn all partes 
of England,or elſe nu pI ſuch places as Ihave 
rrauciled. 
* The time, | 
Spondylizon Aowreth in lunc and July. | 
* The names. 

Iris called in GreekEmrbuiw: in Lotion 
Spondylium,, in the ſhops ws mh andlow Germany 
Branca vr /ma, who vnaduilſe ly in times paſt 7 
vicditin clyſters, in wig of Branck Vehc ine, and 
therupon haue named it ap yn tinlow Dutch 
Beerenclauwe: in E fe Foriney , med.- 
dowe Parſncp,and Ma nepe. 

% The nature. 
Cow Parſnep is of a manifeſt warme complexion 
* Thevertues. ; 
The leaues of this plant do conſume and diſ- 


ſolue colde wellings| they rs and applied | 


thereto, 
 Thepeopleof Polonia, & &Lieuania vſetomale | 
drinke with the decoQion of this herbe, ndleven 
orſome other thing made of meale, which is ved = 
| inſteedeofbeere,andother ordinarie dike ws 
| | |/'C The ſecede of CowParſhep drunken, fcoureth 
NJ out flegmarike matter through the 5zit healeth 
the iaundiſe, the falli = s,the rangling ofthe mother, and them that arc ſhore winded, 
D Alloifamanbela badadllerps, or a ſwounc , the fume of the ſeede will waken him L 


E LR a phrenetike or welandhothe mans head be annointed with oile wherin the leaues 2d roots 


have beene ſodden, it helperh him very much, and ſuch as be troubled with the headach and the le-" 
thargie ,or {icknes called the 42308 cuill, 


oy herbs Frankincenſe (hap. 78 


| I i ; | * The kindes, 
Therebe divers ſorts of herbe Frankincenſe,a be declared. | 


4\ 
| 


2 61k y | * Thedefeription. | | 
Here hath beene from|the beginning diuers plants of ſundry kindes, which menha 
termed by ors glorious name Zbanots, onely in reſpe of the excellent and fragrant 
ſmell which they haue yeelded vnto the ſenſes of man,fomwhart reſembling Frankincenle. 
The ſent andfinell Dioſeor rides doth aſcribe/to the roote of this firſt kinde, which iabgeck foortha | 
longſtalke with ioines ax may whergon groweleaues almoſt like Chernil or Hemlocks, f 
uingthar they be and thicker: at the top of the ſtalkes grow ſpokie taſle!s bearing 
whitiſh fowers, gs oo ſmelling ſcede,ſomewhar flar, qt, almoſt like the ſeede 
of Angelica.The 6# 697% i blatkes Cihonclnd white within hairic abouc,ar the parting of the root 


and ſtalke like vnto n—_—_ | at thlikevato Roſutoe Frankincenſe” ph th 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |! 857 


C 


c: * The deſeription. 


; Theſecond kinde of Libawotis hath alſo a ſtraight ſtalke,full ofknors and ioints the leaves are 
like vnto Smallage: the flowers-growe in taſlels like vnto the former ; and'bringe þ 
| long and vneuen ſeed; of a ſharperaſte: the roote is like the former, and fois thew 
kebuclefer | 


— 


1 Libanotis Theophraſti major. 2 Libanotis Theophraſti minoy.. 


Great herbe Frankincenſe. ' | Small herbe Frankincenſe. 


) v* 1-0 A 
JEI* - "44 


7 WA 


—,. 


fs 
Wy 


F=<2 1 
/J ud 

a] 

roy ! 


, 
ah. PL 
—- J hs 
| P-/ - 
| - needy n 
= & - 
” 
= 


£ 
i 4 
q wh fe 
* 
» - 


p10 


— 

1.4 

WF. 
\ 


% 
j 


* The deſcription. 


3 Thethirde kinde of Libanets differeth ſomewhat from the orhers in forme and ſhape, yet it 
agreetl-with them in ſmell, which in ſome fort is ke Frankincenſe: the leaues are whiter and 
roveher then the leaues of Lattacs aereſtis: the ſtalkes do growe tothe height of two cubits , bea- 
ting at the roppe the ſpokic tufts of Dill , ſomewhat = oi the roote 4s like the former, bur 
-wey d z and wanterdizhe hairie taſſels ar the toppe of the roote, which thegther haue, betore rc- 
ed. [ | - "© . 
4 I cannotfinde among allthe plants called Zibar thanotides, any one more agrecable tothe: true - 
andright Libanotis of Diofeorides oy this herbe which ariſerh = torheheighrol fue aud .Cu- 
bits, with the cleere ſhining ſtalks of Fera/s, dividing it{clfe from his knotye:ioints into fundrie 
ines or branches ; ſet full of leaues like Fennell , but! thicker and bigger, and fatrerghen the 
leaues of Cotula fetids, of a grayiſh greene colour, oingarehe roppe of the ſtalkes rhe.ruſts of 
Feruls, orrather of Carrots, full of yellowe flowers: which being paſt chexe ſuccederthlong flat 
leedlike theſecd of the Aſh tree, ſinelling likeRaſin,or Frankincenſe, which being chewed Hlerh 
the mouth with the raſte of Frarikincenſe, butſharperzal the reſt of the plant is ender Ap har 


wh: 
858 THE SECOND: BOOKE OF. THE 


hot, burnot e pleaſant, the plant is like vat Feraula, and aboundeth with milke as Feria th, of 
A reaſonable good 2 wan 


- 2) F575 mhupbreftnigts. Ty | Z pe ln verior.. 
Blacke herd F arg eu we _ - Roſemarie Fravkingente, 


| 
| 
| 


| 


2 
thane theewwo laf kinds groving my parden; thefirlt _ ſcrond) growpon AY ig deſerts 
and mountaines of Germanie. | 1 
| % The time, 
Theſe herbes do floweri in Iulic and Av guſt, 
* The names. | 
Theſe plants are called i in Greeke ACr\'s, bicauſe their rootes do {mell like "EF v hich iscal- 
letlin Grecke aiCzr:;} in Latine Rd/marinus; the firſt may be Engjiſhed great L 'rankincenſe Roſea- 
rie;theſtcond fmall Frankincenfe Roſemarie; waſter Ze calleth the thirde i in Engliſh blyck Hart 
roate 3 the fourth whice Hart roote: the ſcede igcalled Cachrys,o7 Canthrys. | 4d 
* The mature. | | 
'Thefeherbes whh their ſeeded and cooled "<4 hot and drie in the ſecqud je an va of 24: 
geſting;difloluing,and munditying nature. | 
| * The VErIHES.. 
A Theſleanes of Ebhe ies polned, do ſtoppethEfluxe of the Heniarthoides or piles, Bo n pl 
the frellings' and igflammations of he uridatnent ca'led Cond: domath, conc >eth the ſwelung 


ofthe throte called Sfrumas, pad SPOrYy botches that will hardly beb: oyghr to ſuppurgrion or 
ripeneſle, s ; | 


mio Fig honie,and} [Pia inro cheeks doth quicken th light, 


C © Theſeede mingled with honi cut anddenſe cotth wicers,s idbeir applicd no Lg 
'andhi#hvrcllings ,onfumeeh an them, 8 ing bn | 


17 we. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. mn 


The lcaues and rootes boiled vntill they be ſoft, and mingled with the meale of Darnell and' vi- D 
neger,afwageth the paine of the gout, if they be applied thereto, | | 

Moreouct being receiued in wine and pepper,ithelpeth Morbwn regium, and prouoketh fieatc, E 
and being put into oile and viedas anointment,it cureth ruptures alſo. 

[r purgech the diſcaſe called in Greeke a»2%5: in Larine ze:ligo,or mpetigo,that is thewhite ſpor- Þ 
cines of the skin,chaps,or ritts in thepalmes of the hands,andioles of the teere, and by your pari- 
ence.colin germane: to the {cab of Naples, tranſported ortransferred into France, and pretily well 
prinkled in our northern coaſts, | | | 

Whenthe ſeed of Lrhanvris is put into receiptes, youmuſt vnderſtand, that it is notmeantof the G 
ſede of Cachris, bicauſc itdoth with his ſharpneſle exaſperate or make rough the guller, for it 
hatha very heating qualitie, anddoth drie very vehemently, yea this ſeede being raken inwardly,or 
the herbe it lelfe,cauteth ro purge vpward and downward very vehemently. 


, Of Coriander. Chap.379. 


Coriatdrum. | | 
Corianders. | % The deſcription. 
| AC AY He firſt or common kinde of Coriander is 
9 . "7 a very ſtinking herbe, ſmelling like rhe ſtin- 
king worme calledin Latinc Ce x:ithath 
around ſtalke full of branches, rwo foore long. 


Tye.” 


DOE \4Srl N = The leayes are of a faint greene colour, very 
PAY NI ESSEN tal much cut or iagged: rhe leaues that growe loweſt 
| us REN 9 C{ "> Y 7 . ; , | 
- RNANORNY PDR Ss Cſpringfirſt, arealmoſtlike the leaues of Cher- 
W CJ I» 4 « al - b L / - - 4-. 


uill or Parſley; but thoſe which come foorth af- 
terward, and growe vpon the ſtalkes, aremore 
- tagged almoſt like the leaues of Fumitory,though = - 
a great deale ſmaller, renderer, and more iagged. 
The flowers are white, and do. growe in rounde 
taſſels like vnto Dill. The ſeede 15 round, hollow 
within, andof a pleaſant ſent and favour when it 
isdrie. The roote is harde, and of a woodie fub- 
4 ſtance, whichdieth when the fruite is ripe, and 
2A fſoweth it falſe from yeere to yeere, whereby it - 
mightily increaſeth, | 
There is a ſecond kinde of Coriander very like 
3. , vnto the former, ſauing that the fruit thereof is 
—_— gteater, and growing togither by couples, is not 


h / ſo pleaſan of ſauournor taſte,being a wilde kinde 
WW 0 thezeof,vnfiteicher for meate or medicine, | 
I Kg: I ZION SITY FO 7 he lace ſy GINEPE x 
= £7008 : | COT Irs. | | 
A CSSR=< nr OR. Coriander is ſowen in fertil fields and gardens, 


UCSEERE and the firit doth come of it felfe from time to 


a1 time;fnmy garden , though I neuer. ſowed the 


| | ſame but once. 
| Wrooo 3h3il gore 6 nntfinng , 5150 2 een” þis vo. $2 2 AP 2 
+ TheyflowerjnInune and Iuly anddeliuctrbeir ſecede in the ond of Auguſt, © | 
| "tle goto np hoot ere fro), od gar} 200 0d) tf 4 A It | 
| — Trefbſtis called in Latine Cop:gdywnir mnEngliſh Corianders. The ſecoritl Cor iandrun atberwm, 
wilde Corianders, 719189 0 Py Qt Dt, , —_— 71 2 yer tt T6154 48 


-D 419 ' r20ob en 1 010) W% Thetonperature.) i | EO TTETLT £ 

 "Diegreene and flutking leaves of-Corianders are of complexion cold and dry,and very.navghe, 
vnwholeſome and hurefall ro the bodie. | | EE TORS 2566 ho by SESDILS 
diic.and pleaſant well ſauoring ſeede is warmec,and very conuenient to ſunerie purpoſes, 


oy * The 


"- 


! 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| 


j *% The vertaes. p . | 
A Coriander ſcede prepare and couered with ſi ar, as comhits, raken aiter meare cloſer} 
mouth of the ſerdepteparey| vomiting,a d wk digeſtion, | h whe 
B Theſameparched orroſted, ordricd in an ouen, and drunke with wine, killech and bringeth 
foorth wormes,ſtoppeth the laske,and blopdie flixe and all other extraordinarie iſſues of blood, 
The manner how to prepare oriander, both for mcate and medicine, | 
C Taketheſecde well and ſufficiently dric phony powre ſome wine and vineger,andſoleae 
them to infuſe or ſteepe fower and ewenty howers,then take them foorch and drie them,and keeps | 
them for your vic. | | 
D No Apothecarie ought to fell the ſeed of Corianderto any perſon, except it be firſt prepared 
in manner abouecſaid, neither ought they to couer rhe ſame with ſugar in comfits, norto put the 
ſame in medicine : for although the ſeede well dried beof a good taſte,yer is it nor alr ither voide 
' of ſome of thar filthie and ve Dus qualitie, which remaineth in the greene herbe. hetefore it 
is not tobe vſcd in medicine without great care, for that chere hat! 1 often great danget enſued 
vpon the immoderate and vndiſcreere viethereof, | 
E Theegreeneleaues of Coriander boiled with the crums of bread or Barly meale, conſumerh all 
hor ſwellings and inflammations; and with Beane meale diſlolueth the Kings euill,wens,and _ 
. lum 
E Thea twice of the leaues mixed ind labovredi in aleadenmortar, wich Ceruſe, Litharge of filner 
er andoile of Roſes.cuterh rv fire,and taketh away all inflamwations whatſoever, 
ae) of iuice ofthe greene C Cori der leaues, takenin the quantitic of fower Gagmes, killerh and 
” COT the bodie, | 
by The ſeedes of Coriander TIRE with ſugar,prevailerth mich againſt the gowre,cakenin ſome 
. eſmallquantitic before dinner vpon a oro {tomacke, and after dinner the like, without 
he 


immediartely after the ſame, or inthree or tower howers, Aloif the ſame be taken after ſupper, 
preuaileth the more, and hath more ſupertoritie oucr the diſeaſe, | 

I Alfoifitbe taken with meate faſting, itcauſeth good di i eſtion, andſhucrerh vp the ſtomacke, 
keeping away fumes from rifing vp our of the ſame: it taketh away wor" in ho _—_— 
vp ju 09h and elerh up 1407 mga 


Of Parſtey. Chap.380. 


" The kindes. 


erebe diuers ſores of Parſley —_ their place of growing alſo in forme, _ of 
Garden Parſley,which is mote A y knownethen the reft, | | 


; F * The deſcription. 


He leaues of candls Parſley are of abcautifull _—_ . conſiſtin of many ler 

ned togither , diuided moſt commonly into 00097 rn”. ; and alſo faiprrounde aboutthe | 

edges: the take is abouc one cubire high;ſlender, omething pans. the top whet- | 

of ſtande ſpoked rundles, bringing foorth very fine little lowers, and afterwards {mall ſcedesfome- | 
what &f a fietie taſte:the roote is long and white, and good to be eaten, "Y 
2 Thereis another garden Parſley in and verrue like vnto the precedent? : the onely | 
renceis, that this plant bringeth | foorth leaues A | 
led feathers,and _ other got 30 y : | 


Td 


i. .HIST.ORIE OF PLANTS © 1 | ua 
t Apia hortenſe. 


Garden Parſley. : 
wo Wy ON » &# | Ys 


d 


% 
- 
_ 
% 
c Y 
e . 
F - © % 
mn, 
C3 
> « 
% 
* 


% The place. 


[tis ſowenin beds in gardens; it groweth-borh in hot and colde places, fo that the grounde be 
either by nature moiſt,or be oftentimes watered: for it proſpereth in moiſt places, and is del;ghted 
with water,and therefore it naturally commeth vpneere to fountaines or ſprings: Fuchſius Write th 
that itis found growing of it (elfe indiuers fennie grounds in Germanie. | | 

| | & Thetime. | | : 

It may be ſowen betime , bur ir{lowly commeth vp: it may oftentimes be cutand cropped; it 

bringeth foorth his ſtalkes the ſecond yeere : the ſeedes be ripe inIuly or Augult, 
ks * The names. | [| | 

Every one of the Parſleyes is called in Greek 49/v-r: but this is named purer nnxeTer, tharis toſay, 
Apun ho; tenſe: the Apothecaries and common Herbariſts name it Perroſelinum: in high Durch 
Prterſilgen: inlow Durch Trtnen jPeterſelic tin French du Fer/#:.in Spaniſh Perex#l [ulinert, 
and Salſa: in Italian Petroſells: in Engliſh Perſele, Parſely , common Parlely, and garden Parfley. 
Yerisit notthe true and right Petroſelimym which groweth among rocks and ſtones , wherupon 1t 
tooke his name, and the beſt is in Macedonia: therfore they are deceived who thinke thar garden 
Paiſley doth not ditfer from Stone Parſley ,and that the oflely difference is, for that garden Parſley 
0 EXE force then the wildez for wilde hctbes are more ſtronger in operation then thoſe of the 

_ FE | 
Rn | |  *& Theremperature. | 
Garden Parſley is hot and dry, hut the fy op geen hot and drie, which is hot inthe ſecond de» 


C 


greeand dry almoſt in the thirde: the roore js alſo of a moderate heate. | 
| * The wertues. | "# 

The leaues are pleaſant in ſauces, withbroth, as P{nie writeth in his 20, booke 11.chavter, A 
| | Largs 


*»> 


= Gt poiſons,and therefore they,be mixed w1 h rreacles. 


862 . THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Largh portionibus innatent, in =—_ beſifles thatthey giue a pleaſant taſte, they bealfo ſingular 
good ro take away Roppings, and toprouqke vrine: which thing the rootes likewiſe do notablie 
performe if they be bottedin broth : they b alſo delighrtull rorhe raſte!, and agreeable to the-ftg. 
macke, Ban "2 L {4 =;--| 

B Theſeedes are more profitable|for meditine,they make thinne, they'open, they proucke vrine, 
they diſtolue the ſtone, they breake and waſte away winde,theyare good tor fuch as haue the drop. 
fie rhey drawe downementes, they bring away the birth, and afterbirth : they be commended at 


againit the cough it they be mixed or boiled with medicines made for chat purpoſe : laſtly theyre- 


> 
£ 


The rootes or theſeedes of any of them{boiled in ale and drunken , caſt foorth ſtrong yenome 
or poyſon, bur the ſeede is the (trohgeſt part of the herbe.. - SER | 
They are alſo good to be put into clylter | 


againſt the ſtone or torments of the guts. | 


-1 0 water batelbs Smallage. (hap.381. 


Elioſelinurs ſiut Paluda Foy | 34 
Smallage. F | il | * The deſcription, 


| +. 
+4 : - 3 
d 
SME - =#; 
. ; GS. "4 '". 
SI L# | To 
4 | 7 
5 ©1365 BN. | 
: \ ; 


© Sw re ae 


Mallage hath greene, ſmqoth, and glittering 
lcaues,cutinto vefy many percels, yet greater 
and broader then thoſe of common Parſley: 
the ſtalkes be chamfered and divided into brane 
ches, onthe tops whereof ſtande little white flow. 
ers, after which do growe ſecdes ſome thing leſſer 
' then thoſe of common Parſley , the rooteis faſt. 
ned with many ſtrings, | E: 
% Theplace. 4 
This kinde of Parſley delighteth to growe in 
moiſt places, andis brought tromthence into gar. 
dens, Lo... EP 
* The time. | 
It ouriſheth when the garden Parſley doth, 
andthe ſtalkes likewiſe commeth vpthenextyeere 
after it is ſowen, andthen alſo it bringeth foorth - 
ſcedes which are ripe in Iuly and Auguſt, 
* Thenanes. | , 
Iris calledin'Greeke i>10-9\97, of Gaza palnde | 
pium finſhops dpinnn, abſolutely withpur anie 
addition: in Latine Palaſtre Apivm, and pun 
ruſticam : in l.igh Dutch Epf fich ; inlowe Dutch 
Eppe, &of divers Jouffrouwmerck: in Spaniſh | 
and lralian Apo: in French de Cache: in Engliſh 
March Mariſh Parſley, and Ap;um aquatife, or wa- 
ter Parſley; but 17y4; ofelinum , or Sium main, 15 
- thetruewaterParſley, | 
| i | - w\Thetemperature. [| | 
"This Parſley is like in temperature and| yertues to that of the garden , bur it is both hotter and 
drier, andof a more force in moſtthingy : this is not woonted to beearen , neither 15 1t counted 


good for fauce,bur itis not vnprofirable fgr medicine. | | 


The iuice thereof is good for 


any things,it clenſerh,openeth,attenuaterh or maketh thinzitte- | 
moneth obſtruſtions, and prougketh vrite , &therfore thoſe ſyrups, which hach his mixed with | 
them,as thatwhich is called Syrypus Biz4ntimwe,open the toppings of the lier and ſpleqnegznes | 


| -8TSTORITE of PLANTS, i: | 86; 
;remedie for long laſting agues, whether they beterrians or quartains, and all gther which pro- 
ceedeboth ofa colde cauſe and alſo of obſtru&tions or toppings , and are very good againſt the 

"wlowe iaundiſe : the ſame iuice doth perfectly cure the malitious and venemot1s vicers of the 
mourh,and of the almonds of the throte with the decoCtion of Barley and Atel Xoſarwm, or honic 
of Roſes added, ifche parts be waſhed therewith : it likewiſe helpethall oyrwarde vicers and foule 
wounds: with honie it 1s profitable alſo for cankers exu)cerated, for although ir cannot cure them, 
yer it doth keepe them from purritaction, and preſerueth them from ſtinking : the ſecede is good for 
thoſe things for which thatof the garden Parfley is : yet is not the vie thereof ſo ſafe, forir hurteth 
thoſe that are troubled with the falling {icknes,as by cuident proofes itis very well knowne. 

' Smallage as P/any writeth,hath a peculiar vertue againſt the biting of venemous ſpiders, B 

The iuice of Smallage mixed with honie and beane flower , doth make an excellent mndifica- C 
rine for 01d vicers and malignant fores, and ſtaieth alſo the weeping of the cur gr hurt finewes in 
ſimplemembers,which 3re not very fartic or fleſhie,and bringerh the ſame to perfect digeſtion. 
The leaues bojled in hogs greaſe and madeinto the forme of a pultis , taketh away the paine of D 
felons and whitlowes in the fingers,and ripeneth and healeth them. | ; 


Off Mountaine Parſley. Chap.382. 


Wy 


Oreoſelinis. | | 
+ Mountaine Parſley. | % The deſeription. | 


. 
-——£T" Veftalke of monaraine Parlley, as Dioſceri- 
f des writeth, is a ſpan high, growing tiom a 
{lender roote; vpon which are branches and 
« little heads,like thoſe of Hemlocke, yet much len. 
dderer : on which ſtalks do grow the ſeedegwhich is 
lone, ofa ſharpe or biting taſte,flender, and of a 
ſtrong ſmell, like vnto Cumin : but we can nor 
finde that this kinde of mountaine Partley is 
knowne in our age : theleaues of this are like thoſe 
of common Parſley, but greater and broader, con- 
ſiting of many {lender footeſtalkes faſtned vnto 
them ; the ſtalke is ſhort,the lowers on the ſpoked 
tufts be white ; the feede ſmall :the roote is white, 
and of ameane lengthand bignes , in taſte ſome- 
what biting and bitreriſh Jos! of a ſweete {:ncll, 
% Theplace. | | 
Dioſeorides writeth that mountaine Parlley gro- 
weth vponrockes and mountaines which diuide 
Silefia from Morauia, called in times paſt the 6oii- 
trey of the Marcomans: and al{9 on other moun- 
taines and hils in thenorth parrs/of Englande, 
| % The names. | 
The Grzcians doe name it of the mountaines 
 , 9prordburer, which the Latines alſofor that cauſe do 
call © Apizon Montanum , and Mentapiun , in En- 
gliſh mountaine Parſley: in Latine Apmmn : bur 
l; | Dioſcorides maketh Petroſelinin or ſtone Parlley 
todiffer from mountaine Parſley for faith he,ve muſt not be deceiued, raking mountaine Parſley 
tobethat which growerh on rockes : for rocke Parſley is another plant, of ſomeir is called Cifrei- 
. Nuffatin Larine Multibons (in Engliſh Much good:) for it is fo named bicauſe it is good & proft- 
[ table for many things,and this is not altogither vnproperly termed Oreoſelinum,or mountaine Par. 
&;torir groweth as we haue ſaide on mountaines, and is not valike toſtone Parfley : the ſeede is. 
.| | | - nor } . 


|: 
| i 
i 


- $864 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
not on — you ſ- Now 0, who woulde denic it AW Wh $-Dmg , or Dj-ſeorides 


F 


| | » The temperature and Vertues. zi: 5 [643 
A Oreoſchnum,or mountaine Parſley is as Galenfaith, like in faculty vnto Smallage,bur more effec. 
euall ; Dioſcorides writeth thar the ſeede and roote being drunke in wine prouoketh vring , bringerh 
—_ the menſes,and tharit is mixed with counterpoiſons, piſſing medicines, and medicines that 
arcnort, et | | | [ | | | | 
B Therooteof Yetlentts, or Much By: , isalſo hot and drie, and that in the latter ende of the 
P 


ſeconddegree,itmaketh thin, it cutteth, ppeneth, prouoketh, breaketh the ſtone, and expellethit, 
MN openeth the ſtoppings of the liuer and ſpleene, andcureth the yellowe iaundiſe, being chewed it 
\, helpeththecoothach,and bringeth muchwater our of the mouth. + | 


Of flone Parſley of «Macedonie. Chap.38z. 
I Petroſelinum Macedonicun Fuchs. | | 2 Petroſelinum Macedonicum virus, | 
Baſtard ſtone Patſley. || {1 | The true Par{ley of Macedonia, 


WOTyY” 
\ 7 | 
NY 390 VERS 
; WW - '\ re 4 
ol. NW 
V ; 4 
« ; "a n 


% Thedeſeription. 


Ftone Parſley very little is written by the olde writers ; Diofforideronely faithchar this 
hath ſecede like to that of Amees | but of a more pleaſant ſmell , ſharpe, aromaticall, *; 
ſpiced :touching the forme of the leaues , the colour of the flowers, and faſhion 0 


| roote he writeth nothing at all :and Plnte ismore breeſe; as for Theophraſtus he doth nok {0 muc | 


as name i:,making menuon onely of Parſley, Alexanders,Smallage and mountaine Parlley. , For 


hy, 


; 
[ 
| 


ens ate 14 1 a be VOY EN AAA IN TIT poet CFE VOOR; 


bh 
| 
F 
, 


+" 


.. . HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 855 


t For fone Parſley Cronhartin Fuch/is hath fer downe a plant, hauing leaues not ſpred and cur 
after the mancr of garden Parfley,butlong,and [nipped roundabout, made vp and faſtned to a rib 
or ſtem in che mid{t,fomrhing like, but yer nor alrogitherto the firſt leanes of theleſler Saxifrage; 
the ſtalke is lender, and a cubite highzthe flowers on the ſpoked rufts arewhire: the ſeed ſomthing 
blacke,liketo that of Ameos, and garden Parfley, very lweere of finell, ſomthing ſharpe or bicing: 
the roote is {lender and tull of ſtrings. | . 

2 Lobclimsallo in ſteede ofthe right ſtone Parſley deſcriberh another, which the Venetians cal! 
ſtone Parſley of Macedonia,this hath leaues like thoſe of garden Parſley,ot of Saxifrage rather:the 
QMatke is a cubire high z the ſpoked tufts ſomething white : the ſeede (mall , quickly vading ( as he 
faith)inferior tq that of Farden Parſley in tetnperature and vyectues: but whether this be the true 
andright ſtone Parſley,he adderh,he is ignorant. | +: 

| | * The place, 3 e.g 
Itgroweth on craggie rocks,and among [tones: but the beſt in Macedonia whereupon itbcareth 
the lurname Macedonrewn,ot Macedonia, | 
| | * The time. I 
k flowreth in the ſommer moneths, 


= % The names. | | | 
| Iriscalledin Greeke mwroowmer, of the ſtonie places where ir groweth t in Latine Petrapium, & 
Petroſelimum Macedonicum : in Engliſhſtone Parſley: the Apothecaries know itnot: they are farre 
 ' deceived that would haue the herhe which Fechſizs pictureth\to be ,Lmamum :; for Amonuon dit- 
fereth from this, as it is very plaine by the deſcription thereof in D zoſcor:des: but! we holde this for 
| thetrnieſtone Parſley,rill ſuch time as we may learne ſome other more like in leafe to the Parfleies 
andin ſeede, ſuch as that of ſtone cone br to be : and the very ſtede ir ſelfe may caule vs to 
holde this opinion,being ſoagreeing to the deſcriptionas no herbe more for itisſharpe & biting, 
_ andofaſweeterſmel thenistharof Ameos , andof a mate ſpicie ſent yer do not the leaues gain- 
' Kieitwhich'though they haue nor the perfe& forme of other Parlleyes , yer notwithſtanding are 
notaltogither ynlike, | | | 

iN A *% The temperature. | LE 
| Theſcede of ſtone Parſley which is moſt commonly vſed, is hot and drie, hayingwithall a cut- 
ting qualitie, | Be 
| © (\ *% The vertues. | | 
Itpronoketh wineandhringer downe the flowers,itis profitable againſt winde in the ſtomack, A 
andcolick gut,and gripingy in the belly: foritis , as Gelep ſaith , devny, that is to lay, 2 walter or 
conſurner of winde : itis a reinedie againſt paine in the ſides, kidneies, and bladder, it is alſo mixed 
in counterpojſons: Dioſcorides. 7A n / | w- 


| 


Of eAlexanders. Chap.38 4. 


/ 


[ 


* The deſeriptions 


Heleaues of Alexander are cut into many parcels like thoſe of Smallage, but they be much 

greater andbroader, ſmooth alſo, and of a deepe greene colour : the ſtalke is chicke, often- 

treKCubire high : the flowers be white,and growe vpon ſpoked tu(ts : the ſeede1s thicke, 
long, blacke, ſomething bitter, and of an aromaticall or ſpicie {mell: the roote is thicke /blacke 
without white within,like to a litle Radiſh,& isgood to be eaten,out of which being broken or cut, 
there iſſuer forth 4 iuice that uickly waxerh thicke, hauing in it a ſharpe bitterneſle, hike in 
\ faftento Myrthe:which thing alſo Theophraſias hath noted, there iſſucth out of it, faith he , a 
\nuce like Myrrhe. FTE1 | | 


iy, 2 / 


L 4 / | Tii 1 | Migpeſelinum. 


866 


{arg it 


46 F 


E 


, %» 4 : 
a - k = 
Ld - , * + x 
4 4 . " 
FE 20 
# 1 
\ * % 
: % _ 
\\ \) 
ty LY 
Y > 


Q 


LL == 
WALKS 


) 


LAM 


[22 


Px 
- 
»- £35 
a7 # 
T7, *%. 
14" T 
- AY - 
' 
Y 


1) 


$14 89475 


BOQKE OF THE 


* The place. 


Alexanders or orcat Parſley, grow ; | 

places of England. RE <ſinmoſ 

OTE” » Eben) | | 

c cede waxeti ripe the ſecondyeere, i | 

month of Auguſt. ! 1 "aw | 
2h 0: 


& The Nats. 


Itis called in Greeke ofthe greatnes, wherein | 
i excellcth the other Parſleyes immoiw, orgrear | 
Parſley ; of Gaz4 Equapimm : it is alſo named Ol 
atrwn, ot blacke Patherbe, and of divers Sylaefre 
aptwn , of wilde Parſley 3 of Galen and certaine 
others Twpriey, by reaſon of the wice that ifluerth | 
foorth thereof, that is, as we hae aide, like vn- 
ro Myrrhe,which is called in Greeke 9p: there 
is alſo another Smyrnium of mount Aman, of 
which we doe write inthe Chap. 387. the Apo. 
thecaries cal it P:rroſelinum Macedonicum: others 
Petroſclinum <CAltxandrimun : the Germaines 
G2ol3 Epflich : the lowe Countric men Peter» - 
ſeiie van Pacedonion : in Spaniſh Perexil Me- 
cedonico: the French and Engliſh men Alexan- - 
dre, Alexander. | | 
* The temperature.. 


WLAN IB 


The ſecede and roote of Alexanders, is noleſſe 
hot and driethen are thoſe of the garden Parſley, 
they clenſe and make thinne , being hot and drie 
| inthe thirde Cegree. Cel | 

1 RE | | *+ The vertues. b-1=4 bao 

A Dioſeoridesfaith , that the leaues arid ſtalkes are boiled andeaten , and dreſſed alone byrhem- 
ſelues, or with fiſhes : tharthey are preſerned rawe in pickle: that the roote caten both rawe and 
ſodde, is good for the ſtomacke : the roote heereof isalſo in our age/ſerued to the table rawefora. 
ſallade herbe. a On | E-+3 ED Y 

| B Theſecdes bring downe the flowers , expell the ſecondine, breake and conſume — 
vrine,and are good againſt the ſtrangurie: rhe decoction alfo of the roote doth the ſame, | pecially 

it itbe made with wine. |; | | | 


{ 


| 
: 


| 


Of wildeParſley. 


Chap.3$s. 


*% The dcſeription. 
| 


His is like to the kindes of Parſleyes in the ſundrie cuttes of the Jeaues,, andalſo in thebig; 

neſle ; for they be broad, and cut i1 iro divers parcels : theſtalkes are round, chamfered, [ct 

> with certaine tvints, hollow within], acubite high or higher, two or three comming foorth 
togitherout of one roote, and inthe neather part many times of a darke reddiſh colour. The flow- 

. ers be white, and growe vpon ſpoked tuftes : the ſeede is round, flar, like that of Dill: the rote? 
white within, and dividediinto many branches and ſtrings. This plant in what part ſocuer it be 
or broken,yceldeth foortha milkie iuice, | Te2s TP: 


| 
| | MERE 
: Api 
| | | 
k £ 

' t 


þ 
; 
. 


| -"HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 367 
CAp109 ſrlueſtr e ſme Thyſelium. | || 
Wide Parſley. | *% Theplace. | 
| It is found by pondes ſides in moiſt and dankiſh 
places, in ditches alſo hauing in them ſtanding wa- 
rers, and oftentimes by olde ſtocks of Aldertrees. 


$i *% The rime. | 
:It lowreth and bringeth foorth ſcede in Ine 
and Iuly, * The names. | 


The ſhops of the Low countries haue miſcalled 
tin times paſt by the name of Mewn 8& vicd itfor 
the right Mew or Spiknell woort,, The Germanes 
name it D{lenich : Yalerius Cords Olſenichium : 
diuers in the Low cotltrics cal irmitlang Eppe, thar 
ist0 ſay in Latine Apium /ylueſtre, or wilde Parlley, 
and ſome water Eppe, that is, Hydroſelinen,or A- 
piwn aquatile, water Parlley, and oftentimesits 
named, as we haue alreadie written, E/eofetin 


MF 27S 
SIS 
4 


Y 
=> \ 


EA VS FRI 


5046; bicauſe jt extendethlit ſelfe,in Greeke 7, thorow #©41%5,07 marriſh places. 
| | % The temperature. | 
The roote hereof is hot and driein the third degree. | | , 
uy | | *% The vertwes. | (UT 7, 

The roote being chewed. bringeth by the mouth flegme our of the head, andis a remedie for the A 
toothache, and there is no doubt but that it alſo maketh chin, cutrerh, and: openeth; prouokerh 
vrine,and bringeth downe the owers 8&dothlikewiſenoleſle bur more eftectually performe thoſe 
things thatthexeſt of the Parſleyes do, © *! 1911241? ON ERIE SHES TEN SONG | Fe 


Of bailard Parſley: .Chap-386-. ..1,.. 


z Wb % The kindes. | 3950 | 
i! Here þe diuers ſorts'of baſtard Parſleies,youſhall receiue the figure of one, with the deſcrip-_ + | 


$4 | Jonny * The deſeription, |, ,  , THS< HD ens 
He firſt kinde of baſtard Parſley is a rough baitic herbe, not much vnlike to Carrots: the 
| þ leaucsarelike to thoſe of Corianders,but partedinto many ſmall iagges/: at the top! of the 
/ branches do grow ſhadowic vmbles,or ſpokic rundles, conliſting of many {mall white flo- 
wers: the ſeede is long and rough, liketheſcede.gf Carrots, butgreater: the. rqote is ſtraight and 
growing deepe intothe grounde,ofa white colour,and in taſte like the Parlnep. yo 
2 | / | | 183 $* *: - Cauc 


868 THE, SECOND BOOKE OF: THE 


Camucalis albis foribas, ; | h | 
| Baſtard ys with dywhirg fomers. Y T he FO /on, 


There is another ſort like vIity the farmer, fa. 
ving that the leaues heereof arcbroader and f 
flowers are of a reddiſh colour: there hath rear 
controuerſie riſen about the rrue deere. of 
.Cancalts,bicauſe the Latine i incerpreration of Dioſ: 

 cortdes is greatly ſuſpected, conteining in it ſelfe 
"much ſuperfluous matter , not pertinent to the 

 hiſtorie : but we deeme that this plant is the 6 
Caucals, the notes; ſer downe declare it ook. 
the flowers, ſaith he, are reddiſh: rhe ſeedes core. 
red with a rough huske er about with, prickles, 
which cleaue vnto garments thar it roucherh, m1 
do Burs, which rou T7 being pilled off, the ſeed 
appeererh like vnto hulled Ores,nor npleaſantin 
taſte,all which do ſhewirto be the ſame, 

| There is likewiſe another ſort that hatha long 
ſingle rooce,thrummed about the vpperende with 
many thrummie threds, ofabrownecolour: from 
which riſerh vp divers ſtalks full of iointg orknees, 
coucred with a ſheath or $kinnie filme, like wnto 
that of Means: theleaues arc finely ciitor ia 
reſembling the leaves, of our Engliſh Saxifrage: 
the flowers growe at the trop of theftalkes in ſpot- 
tie rundles h eFennell: the ſecede is ck He that 
of Parſley. 


) 


BY "5 The plate og 
6:huech | Theſe plants do growe narurally-ypon rocker 
and (tonie provides, we thue the firſt and thelaſtinour paſtures: ps Pages of bngien: tha 
: withred flowers is aſtranger in England. 
There is likewiſe'Qne ot theſe founde in Spaine. z called Canealis Hiſuwiee, like the {2 li i 
| itisanannuallplantavhichperiſherh ar the firſt approch of winter, nn which haue {omen i in my 
garden,bur ir periſhed before th ſeede was perfeRed, 
*% The time. 
They flower and. flouriſh from Maie toithe end of Augult, 
| %* Thememes, + 
Baſtard Parſley is ;calledin Greeke _ in Latine alſo Carats, of ſome Davems fries or 
wilde Carror,but vnproperly: among the baſtard names of Democrat, Bei: in Larine PesValb- | 


in Rage baſtard Parlley glnd Jetines fopte...11 (: 3 
| 3 The temperature and wertues. | | 
Ep , Dieferide faith, hat baſtard Parſley isa poneve which is eaten eicherr: rave enact and: | ptQ- 
uoketh vrine | 
B Phnydothreckonit vp alſo F(T the portribes: Glen Jithie th, that itis preſerucd pil for | 
FE ee in winter, | | | HUIOATA UD) 7 
C e{cede of Baſitd Parſley is enidentlyhor and drie, and that velit] the ſecond depree: it pto- 
uoketh vrine,and bringeth bowie the defjr red ſicknes :it diſſolueth the (tone and driveth iefoorth. | 
D. Ittaketh away the toppings of the liver \ Hiethe;andkidneies: ircurreth and concoReth rawe | 
and flegmarike humours-: ito | orterh : colde Ry diffolueh winds jt | 
E "et tolng itn hisC Fotfinhlint es vpor Di the feconde es; att 
execlſent vertues,to proucke ng ol nantreenor * the Lord # op 


macews, Pes Pullz: the Eg gyatianshame i it Seſelis: : the countrey men opt Heteuria vr 49 pon | 


1 : 
4 » i 
þ s Þ J 
? q " 
Z ; Z \ d 
& | Is Fi Ki] * | 
0 k f { 1 
- [1 - . G 
I : | '! 11 
* [2 M ; j 
LJ ' 4 
| [ [4 
- 4 o : 
[4 % : 
Þ 
, 
[4 
; 


y 


| redParlley. | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. — 865 
| » Of Candie eAlexanders. (hap.3$7. 
ad | 


Sirnicwn Creticum. | | 


Ioſeorides and Plimje have reckoned $ 

wn among the kindes of P , whoſe 

iudgements whule this plant is yoong and 
not growen vppe toa ſtalke, may ſtande with 
very good reaſon, for that the yoong leaues nexr 
the grounde arelike vnto Parſley , but ſomewhat 
thicker and larger:among which riſeth vp a ſtalke 
a cubite high,and ſomwhat more, garniſhed with 
round leaues, farre different from theſe nextthe 
grounde, incloſing the ftalke about like Thoxow 
waxc ,or Perfoliata; which leaues ate ofa yellow 
colour, anddoratherreſemble the leaues of Fole- 
foore then Parſley : atthe top of the ſtalkes doe 
growe round ſpokie tufts of a yellowe colour , af- 
ter which-commeth rounde and blacke ſeede like 
Colewoorts , of a ſharpe and bitter taſte like 
Myrrhe:theroote is white and thicke,contrary to 


N \ | I tc (6 | the opinion of Dodonews, who faith, it is blacke. * 
FAN( i £ '* without, butIſpeake that which haue ſeene and 
<a PA prooued, 
LNG Smyrniun groweth naturally vpon the hils and 


mountaines of Candie, and in/my garden alſo in 


WPF | HS greatplentic: alſo ypon the mountaine Amanus 
BY 4 ; / "WF, : on», of | 
, TC 4 WF. rs A in Cilicia, | 
———_——— k.} * The time. 
1 Smyrpium flowreth in Tune, and the ſcede is 
ripe in Auguſt. | | 
v The names. 


This plantis called in Latine Swyraium : in Greeke or :in Cilicia Petroſefinon, and as Galers 


7 


reſtiierh,ſome haue called ir Hippoſelinum agreſte: in Engliſh Candie Alcxander s, or Thorowbo- 


| *% The nature. | Hd | 
Smyrniwn is hot and drie in the thirde degree. | : 
| t The vertues. | j 
Theleaues of Smyrnizn do difſolue wens, and hard ſwellings, drieth vp vicers, and excoriati- A 
ons,and glewerh wounds togither, | 
The ſeeds are good againſt the ſtoppings of the ſpleene,kidneices,and bladder. 
Candie Alexanders hath force to act! 


B. 
and waſte away hard {iwellings,in other o_ itis like C 
tO garden Parſley,and ſtone Parſley, and therefore we vie the ſeede thereof to prouokethe defired 
nes, vrine,and to helpethoſe thatare ſtuffed in the lungs as Galex writerh., i wry 
Therooteis hor,ſois-rhe herbe and ſeede,which is good ro be drurike againſt the bitings of fer- 
pents: it is a remedy for the cough, and profitable for thoſe thar cannot rakerheir breath, vnieſſe 
ey doſit or ſtande vpright: it helpeth thoſe that can hardly maketheir warer ; the ſecede is'go00d 
2ganſt the infirmitie of the ſpleene or milt, the kidneies and bladder: it is likewiſe a good medicine , 
for thoſe that haue the droplic as Disſecorideswriteth. | EDN , 


* 


ih 
+} 


Fit 3 Pow IE 


; 


809 THE 'SECOND:BOOKE OF THE 
O) eps. Chap.388. | of 


| th The kindes. þ 


There be two ſorts of Parſneps,the tame andche wilde. 


I Paſtinacalatifolia ſ@ina, | 2 Paſtinaca hatifolia Plueftr, pn 
_ GardenParſneps, | us , WildePatrlneps, 


: Wo ” | 5 
, 4 
; wt 9% - : 


J [4 

LS. | 1 

2 k 

TK pe : 

"© if : 
Pug = » « 

Fr | 


i} ] 


of 


Heleaues of the tame or garden Parſneps arc broade, conſiſtir g of many ſmall leaues faſt 
ned toone middlerib like thoſe ofthe Aſh tree: the ſtalke is vpright , of the heighr of a 
man: the flowers ltande; ypon ſpgkietufts,of colour yellowezafter commeth the ſecde flat 
and rounde, greater then thoſe of Dill: the roote is whice,long,ſfweete, ahd good to be caten. 
2 Thewilde Parſnep is liketothar ofthe/garden,in leaues,ſtalke, ruſt ;yelloweflowers,'flat and 
round {eede,but alrogither leſſer: the roote is ſmall, hard woodie,ard not fic to br caten. | 
I SINES nd | The place. ian bd | | 
The garden Parſnep requitetha far andllooſe carth,and har, that is digged deepe./ ' 


The wilde Parlnep groweth in}vntoiled; laces , elpeci ally in the falr marſhes 8 won the bankes 

and borders of the fame: the ſeed whereof þ ing gathered and broughtintothe garden;ard ſowed 

In tercill ground,do prooue better tootes, fveerer, and greater, then they that are ſowen of ſeeces 

gathered from thoſeof the garden, Lt 4 SAY P's Th OGnrea Th 

/; They flower jn ble and Auguſt,and ſeede the ſecond yeere after theybeſowen,: oo» 

A TheHerbariſtes of our time do call heldnkby Parſneps =994ir95, and Paſtinacs , and-therefore 

we haue furnamed it £4'i//4, oribroad leated,, that it may differ from the other garden ParſneP 

. with narrow leaves, which is trudly and pioperly called Staphylinm , that is the garden om 
[| I WAKY | Te. ane 


?-| 
, 1 
s | 


.* 
C 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. . Sx 
Same phyficions doubring andnor knowing to what herbe it ſhoulce be referred, have fained the 

| wildekind heerof to bc Panacts ſpecies, or a kind of Alheale, as ſhall be declaredinhis proper place: 

| diners have named it Bazcra,others hauecalledit Branca Lronma, which it you diligently marke and 
confer with E/-phoboſcum Dyo/coridrs,youthal hardly tiad any difterenceat all : burthe plantcalled 

' ar Monroclier Pabulum Cerumnumyin Englith Harts fodder,fuppoled there toberhe rue Elaphotoſ- 

- wn, differech nmuch-fromthe true notes of wilde Parſneps: Bur Bazcia, as Jacobus Manlizue revor- 

| rech in Luwmmari mazore,is Drofcorrdes and the old writers Paſt;naca;that is to lay;Tenu:folie. or Car- 

| rot: the old writers, andeſpecially Dz9{corzdes hanecalled this wilde Parlnep by the name alſo of 
| Elphoboſewn : thatof the garden we do call Parlneps and Mypes: 1olT4 9 

aan pdt Fig. %* 7he temperature, | ' a5Þ 

\ * TheParſnep roote is moderately hot, and moredriethen moiſt, | | 
nad bog ear 141 * The vertues. of ras 
©. The Parſneps nouriſh more then dothe- Turneps or the Carrots, and thenouriſhment is fome- A 
- wharthicker,but not taultic nor badzaorwichſtanding rhey be fomwhar windie:they paſſe thorough * 
 thebotyricicher flow!y norfpecdily.they neither binde norlooſe the bellie; they prouoke vrine, 
andluſt ofthe body : they be good forthe !tomacke kidneies,bladder and lungs. | 
 - Therersa'goodandpleaſant toode orbread made ot the rootesof Parlneps ag my friend maſter B 
 xlathathi ſertagrth in lus booke of experimencs, which I haue made no triall of,nor meane todo, 

; Theleedis hotter and drier etten vntothe ſecond degree;itmooneth vrine, andconfutneth wind. C 

Itis reporced, ſaith Dz2ſcorrdes, that Deere are preferued from bitings of Serpents, by eating of D 

theherbe E/aphoboſewn,or wilde Partnep, wherupon rhe {eedis ginen with winc,againlt the bitings 
and tingings of ſerpents, | FE :-* 


: Sifaram, Skirrets. ; | * The deſeription. 
; dtd Eng SI ORRnG, Heleaues of the Skirret do likewiſe conſiſt 
TOI. Rf. \ Wa of inany ſmall leanes faſtened to one rib,cue- 


ry particular one whereof is ſomething nic- 
kedin the edges, butthey are lefler, greener, and 
ſmoothet than thoſe of the Parſnep. The ſtalkes be 
ſhort,and ſeldome a cubire high; the flowers inthe | 
{poked tufts are white, the roores be many innit. * 
ber.growing out of one head,an/hand bredth long, 
molt commonly not a fingerthicke,they are fiveer, 
white,good to be eaten, and moſt pleaſant in taſte, 

wn | *% The plactiand time. 

This Sl irretis planred ingardens,and eſpecially 
by the ropte, for the greater andthicker ones being 
taken away,the lefler are put into the earth againe, 
whichthir.g is beſt tobe done in March or Aprill, 
before. the ſtalkes-come vp, and art this timethe 
100tes Eh be gathered atceatenrawe, 

$5 by * The nones. 

This herbe is called in Latine $:/arwm, and alſo 
in Grecke c/2zer: the Latines doe likewiſe call ir 
S:ſer:and diuers of the later Herbariſts Serur{wm or 
Cherurllam,oc geruilla : the Germans name it S1tr- 

Un. Tr-g« 3am garten Rapunkelen: in the lowe 
countries S\Wcker woztelen, that 1s ro ſay, Sugar 
rootcs, andofrentimes ©crilictt: in Spaniſh Che- 
r:nia : in|Iralian Sifayo: in French Cheruy: in Eng- 

TH | _ » liſh Skirtetand Skirwoorr, And tins is that Srfer,or 

Skirrer, which 73beria the Emperour commanded to be\conueied vnto him from Geldubaa caſtell 

about the rjuers of Rhene, as Pline reporreth in his 19.booke 5.chapter. The Skirrert is a medicina- 


bleheibe, and is the taine thatthe foreſaide Emperordid ſo much commende , in fo much that he 
| | | Jii 4 | deſired 


xy 


" KR 


$24. THE SECOND BOOKE OF-THE 


6 ceſired the ſame to be brovght vnto him cyery yeere our of Germanie. Iris not,as divers ſ{ ole, 
1s Sera#ro his Sevacul, of which he haxh written in his 89.chapter: for Secata/is deferibed by y An 
of Zulberthat is tolay,of the Peaſe, as Matbiolms Syluaticeus expoundeth it: and it bringerh foorth 1 
a blackeftrmrofthe bigneſſe ofa Gick pcale, tullof moiſture, and of a fweete raſte,which i ts called | 
* Gramms Culcul, Butthe Skirret bath nor thekafe of the peaſe, neither doth it bring toorth fruiclike 
« rathe Cicheprale, whereuponit|is manifeſt, that the Skirret doth P much —— fr 
Ius Secacwl: fo farisit from being the ſac, 
'* The nature and wertues. "FAR 
A The racmniiili Kirrer be mogderately/hot and moiſt; they be eafil y concoRed; they: koi 
meanly and yeeida reaſonable good uice: (Hue they arc ſomething windie, by reaſon whereof they 
alſo prouoke Juſt, 4 
B They be eaten boiled, wich! vineger, falt hind alittle oile;a frer the manner of afallad ,and often« 
times t ey be fried in vile and butter,and alf dreficd after other aſhions, accordingto the skil of 
the cooke and thetaſte of the eater. 
._ C The womeninSweuia, faith Hllehomomas Herold prepare the roots hereof for their hunbands 
and knowe full well wherefore andwhy,8&c. | 
| D Theiuice ot the rootes drunke with goates milke ſtoppeth the laske The fame drunke nine 
putterh away windine (Te out of the ſtomacke, and gripings of the belly and helperh the mis 
yeoxing. To ltir vp Spperiagnd m—_— vrine, 


Wl Carrots. Chap.390. 


fog: 


|! /Thekindes. | 
f Here hs wo ſorres of Þ.a binatawich iagged leaues, calledin Engl Carrors : ; ade thoſe 
with tagged c gr narrow leauesghere is one wilde, | | 


' | 
| 3 | 


Paitinia Poems tenuifel la | | | | 
Yellow Careor,| 'þ | [| . * The deferiprns 


He "yn of the parden Carrots ate of a 
deepe greene colour , compoſed of many 
fine Fennell-like leaues, very notablycutor 
tes |. agged; among which riſeth vp a ſtalke ſtraight 
$2222 ' and round, fower cubires high, ſomewhat hatric » 
and hollow, having at the top round ſpokedtufrs, \ 

| Jn which Fn growe little white flowers: in their | | 
|| |. places commeth the ſcede rough and hairie, of 
ſvvcete ſmell when itis rubbed, Therooteislong, 
thicke and fingle, of a faire yellow colour, plealant 
to be eaten, and very ſweete in taſte, | 

here is another kinde hereof like tothe for- 
mer in all partes, and differeth from it onely the 
colour of the roote, whichin this is _—_— 
but of a blackiſh red colour. 


* The e place. 
Theſe Carrots are fowen in the fieldes and; in 
gardens, where other potherbes are : they! 1 
a loole —d well manured ſoile, | 


— 


| % The time. 
They are to bee. ſowen in Aprill ; hel bring, 
foorth their flowers and ſeede the yeere after th cy 
be ſowen, | 


* Th 


en > As 1b by ard 


| HISTORTE OF PLANTS. ' | 8947 
EY þ ni | * The names. | nd or: : 
[The Carrot is properly calledin Greeke»eraives, for that which we have rermed in Latine by the : 
name of Paſtinaca Letierns foly,or the garden Parſnep, is deſcribed of theolce writers by artther 
name: this Carrot 1s called in Latine likewiſe ,' Paſt:maca ſatina, but with this additjon tenuifolta, 
char it may ditfer from the garden Parſnep with broad leaues and white roote, Theeph: aſtus in the 
; -booke of his hiſtory ofplants nameth this Sraphylnus, or Carrot, aur, and writeth that it gro- 
weth in Arcadia, and faith that the beſt is founde in gpartenſi Achara, but doubdefſe hementthar 
Davew which we call Cretenſis,that may be nuwbredamongthe Carrots; G:/exinhis booke of the 
faculties of Simple medicines doth alſo make ito be Daucms, but yet nor {implie Daves, but with 
acompound name Dauew paſtionecs : in high Ducchitis called Geetruben: inlowe Durch Gee] 
zen, Heel Pootein,and Seel UUorteien': in French Caratte, and Kacine 1autue : in lralian Paſti- | 
nece: in Spanith Canahoris. in Engliſh yellow Carrots: the other is called red Carror;and blacke 
Carrot. | % The temperature and Vereues. C11 
Theroote of the yellow Carrot is moſt commonly boiled with fat fleſh and caren: itis rempe- A 
racly hotandſonjerhing moiſt. The nouriſhment which commeth therof isnot much,andnorverie 
ood: itis ſomething windie , butnor ſo much as be the Turneps : and doth not foſoone as they 
palle throvgh the bodie. | M8 | 
: Thered Carrot is of like facultie with the yellow. Theſſecde of them borh is hor and dric, i B 
breaketh and confumeth windinefle,prouoketh vrine,as coth thatof the wilde Carrot, 


Of wilde Carrot. Chap.391. 


” Paftinac «/fflueftris tenuiſolia, 


+. Wilde Carrot. | w*% The deſcription. 
ont ke He leaves of the wild Carrot are cut into di. 
Sep En (, = uers {leader narrowe parcels, very like vnto 


thoſe; of the garden Catrors, but they be 
: ſomewhac whiter, and more hairie:the ſtalkes be 
likewiſe hairie and fomewhatrough: the flowers 
-are little,and ſtande vpon broad ſpoked tufts, of a , 
' white colour,of which tuft of flowers the middle 
' molt part isof adecepe purple, the whole tuft is 
drawne togither when the ſeedeis ripe,reſembling 
a birdes neſt 3 whereuponir hath beenenamed of 
; ſome Birds neſt: the roote flenger,and of ameane 
length, Av 
| | + The place. - D 
It groweth of it ſelfe in vntoiledplaces, in fields _ 
andin the borders thereof, almoſt every where. 
L __*% Thetme. 7”. 
; | They flottegand flourith in InneandIuly, the 
| ſeedeisripein Augult, | 
| | #$Thenanes, _ 
| The wilde Carrot is called in Greeke paves 
«es: in Latine Paſtimacs [plueſtris terurfolta : in 
| ſhops Devcw: Ser vied RE vEs of the Jon Dau- | 
54, and not amill:, nor mprofitablic : for Ga/emn | 
a'ſo in his gime doth teſtifie thatirt was taken for 
| Dau: 8, or baſtard Parſley, and is without doube / 
' Danci ſylueſtris genus, or a wilde linde of baſtarde / 
| bs : Partlev, ſocalled of T heophraſtms ; in high Dutch = | 
* | þ- | itis named UM Paltenen,clonol neits in lowe | 
Dinch Qogelsnct, and Wilde C aroten,Crookens crupt: in French 7 :/{eza2e ſcunagetinEn- | 
pllh wilde Carror,and after the Dutch Birds nelt-, "mT | ' | 


Os 


CAthen emu 


tf 
> 
x 
> 


$4 THE SECOND. BOOKE OF ThE 


i MAtbenemw citing Diphilas for the authorGaith, that the Carrotis called +9: \bicauſe ; © it ſerver! 
for love matters, and Orphets, as Pliny writeth, faide, that the vie heereot winneth love which 
things be written of wilde Carrot, the rqote wh cof i 1s more effcCtuall then that of ace 
andconteineth init;as Ge/exfaith,a cerraihe{fotce toprocure luſt, , |, | 

| * The tempirature and vVertues. | | 

The ſeede of this wilde Carrop,gnd likeyile the roote is hot and driei i*1 the feconde tege, and 
doth withall open, | | 

. The roote boiled and eaten ,or boiled with wine,and the decoction Scaled. vrine 
pelleth the ſtone,bringeth foorth the birthz it alſo procurerh bodily luſt, 

The feede drunke bringeth downe the deſired ficknes , it is good for themthar can hardly make 
water,it breaketh and diſloluerh winde;i remedieth the droplie,jr cureth the colicke ancbfitue, he. 
ing drunke in wine. | 

Itis alſo goodfor the paſſibhs bf the mother,and helperh conception : :itis 200d noni the by- 
tings of all maner of venemous beaſts : ir is fares ſaith SET that 1uch as haue be nA 
of it arenor hurt by them. MELEE BLSTLLS | 


4 
1 
[1 
oy 


Of Candie Carrots. Chap.” Ne 


AL-. 


Danewus Creten/s verm. 


CandicCartbes. | FEES 09G + Thed-feprin 


ker both in name &nature with tie wy 
called Cawce/t4, that is termed in Greeke 
Noxrarer, which name is taken from the reſen:- 
blance of the ſeed intheruft, which revreſenterh 
(as irwere) the ſcales of branne : this Daxw 
Cretenſis, being the tne Daucus of Dipſeorides, 
-dothnor grow an Candie only, but is found won 
the mountaines of Germanie, and vpen'the hils 
and rocks of Iura about Geneua,from whenceir 
hath beene ſent & con ucied by one friendly Hets 
bariſt vato another, into fundricregions; it bea- 
reth Icaues which are ſmall and very fincly iag- 
ged, reſembling either Fennel! or wilde/Carror: 
among which riſeth vp a Nate of a cubire high, 
having atthetop white ſpokie tufts, andthe flo- 
wers of Dill, whichbeing paſt there come great 
plentie of long ſecede, well fi nelling : nor vnlike 
the ſeede of Cumin, ſauerhatit is whitiſh, with 
a certaine moſſines, and a ſharpetaſte, and is in 
greater yſe, then any part oftheplant. Theroote 
alſo is right good in medicine , being leſſer then 
the roote of a Parſnep,bur hotterin caſte, and of 
a fragrant ſmell, Pex hath ſer foorth/ another 
Daucws creticus , vnder this title Danes cretenſis 
Fuchsy, offering wrong vnto our Mewn , wh 
groweth olentifullyin the arch arts of Boland, where they callit Baldmonie,which i 
what reſemble Dauczs, yet he = hauc thought vpon this rule, Nullum you eſt ide. 
| + Thetime, 
They flower in Iunc and yh lcede is ripe in Auguſt, 
'% The names. 


Thereis ſufficiens ſ pokeal Tv te þdckrign as touching the names. 


"Tis kinde of Dawcts famah whe) art2- 


a 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 7 

[| % The nature. | | 

Theſe plants are temperate in heate and drineſle, eſpecially the ſeede of Davens Cretiers, which 

: hot and dric inthe thirde degree : but the {cede of the wilde Carrot,is hot and dry inthe feconde 
degtere | ; + Thewertnes, | ; 

The ſecede of Dauews drunken is good againſt the ſtrangurie,and painful! making of water, itpre- A 

vaileth againſt rhe gr auell and ſtone,and prouokerh vrine. 

| Iraſlwageththetorments and gripings of the bellie,diſfoluerh windines,cureth the colicke,and B 

ripeneth an old cough, _ | Pe] Pl 

The ſame taken/in wine,is very good againſt the bitings of beaſts,and expelleth poiſon, .- C 

The [cede of Dawews Creriews is of great ctheacic and vertue, being putinto Treacle ,Mithridate, D 


or any antidotes;againſt poiſon or pcitilence, | Y 
The roote thereof drunke in wine ſtoppeth the laske, and is alſo a ſoucraigne remedie againſt E 
venome and poilon, | 


Of ſtinking and deadly Carrots. Chap.393. 


I Thapfia latifolia C lus. | : | 2 T hayſia oulgary. 
Stinking Carrots. | Deadly Carrots, 


i. if 
3 nn 
WH 
1u/ 

WOT - 
4 

'N 


AN] 
4 


Jn * Thedeſeription. 


_. I*F He great ſtinking Carrothath very great lcaues,ſpredabroad like wings efemblingrhoſe 
of Fennel gyant (wherof ſom haue rakE it to be a kind, but vaproperly)ota bright gieen.co- 

: lour,ſorwhat hairie 3 among which riſerh yp a ſtalk of the height of twq cubires,& 5f the 

ignes ofa mans finger, hollow, and full of a poongious pithz whereypen ate {er at certaing ivintes, 
Kaucs like thoſe next the ground, bur ſmaller. The flowers are yellow, ſtanding at therop "x = 

: alxes9 


| 
| 


8355 © THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
ſtalkesin ſpokie rundles,like thoſe of Dill ;aftexwhich commeth the ſeetle flat and broad like 
ofthe Parſhep, but mych greater and broader. The roote is thicke, gatniſhed at the top 
taine capillaments or hairie rhreds,blacke yichour, white within,full of milkic iuice, of 


ke thoſe 
P Withcer- 


Y yi 2 | > : 
rer,ſharpe, and lothſome taſte and ſmel!, i ſomuch that if a man doſtande where the br) or 


blowe from the plant, the aire doth exulcerate and bliſter the facp, and euery other bare gx naked 
placethat may be ſubiect ro his venemous blaſts,and poiſonous qualitie, | | 
2 Thecommondeadly Carror is like vnto the precedent, ſauing that he doth more neerelyre. 
ſemble the ſtalkes and leaues of the garden/Carror, and is not garniſhed with the like buſh of haire 
abour the top of the ſtalkes: otherwiſe in ſeede,roote,andeuill imell,taſte and qualitie like, | 


3 Thapſuctenuifolia. "2B (of [|| Pb 
Small or thin leafed ſtinking|Carror, [7 | * The deſcription. 


| 


[|+ | This ſmall kindeof {tinking or deadlyCarror 
|| | is like nto the laſtdeſcribedin each reſpe, fa 
{| | ing thar the leaves atethinner& more finely min. 
|| | cedoriagged,wherin conliſterh the difference, 
li] | *% The place, 1} 
| | _ Theſe pernicious plants delight in onie hils 
| andmountaines:they are ſtrangers in England, 
[5 * The time, [ 
They flowerin Auguſt or ſomewhat after. 
*% The names. [ 
| | | TheFrench Phiſitions haue acceptedtherootg 
| | of Thapſia fora kinde of Turbith, calling it Twype- 
| | | Fm Cineritium, notwithſtanding vpon better con- 
I | | fideration they haue left the vie thereof, eſpecially 
|  inpurging. Forit mightily hurteth the principal 
<7 | | partes, anddoth oftencaufe cruel! | (65. hope 
|| | gursand bellie, with conuulfions and crampes, ne- 
| | uertheleſle the venemous qualitie may be taken 
| | | awaywith thoſe correQiues, which are viedinmi- 
; tigating the extreme heate and virulent qualitie of 
| Sarcocolla, Hammoniacum, and Twrpetwm, but where 
| | therebe ſo many wholeſome fimples, andlikewiſe 
' | compounds,they are not tobe vicd. | 
|; Offomeitiscalled Twperwn Griſeum,it iscalled 
Fa | | Thapſie,as ſome thinke of theiland, Thapſus,where 
| itwas firſt found, or as we-deeme, ofthe likeneſſeit 
| i | . ||| hathwith Carrots. | | - | 
| Ofthe people of Sicilia and Apuliait is called Fera/acoli, where it doth growe in greatabur- 
dance. ; | BY | Ha: | 
= Þ TL erature and vertues. © | © %1 6 
The temperature and faculties in working hauc beene touched in the deſcription,and likewiſe in 
the names. | . | | | | 


Of Femell. Chap394- 


| i 1 *% The deſeription. FEET | 
I Hefirſt kinde of Fennell called in Latine Fenicalwm, in Greeke wdexty , is fo well known 
+ amoneſt vs, that it were but pur to deſcribe the ſame. | 
2 Theſecond kinde of Fennell js likewiſe well knowne by the name of ſweere Fenne!}, 
ſo called bicauſethe ſeedes thereofare in taſte ſiveere like vnto Annie ſeeds, reſembling the _ 
mon Fennell,ſauing tha the leaue tr and fatter , or more oilegus: the ſeede greatet ©" 
whiter,and the whole plant in eac| | | "i 
Ns 408 ns Fancuns 


HIST ORTE OF PLANTS. 


I dh vulgare. | | | 2 Feniculumdulee. 
Common Fennell, . *  SweeteFennell, | 


of yy 


, 
. 
<4 & %" 
\ Id . 
- . 
. 
A : : — +® 


% The place. 


Thek herbes ate e ſet and ſowen in Ron : bur theſecondedothnor raider wellinthis coun- 
rey, for being ſowen of good and pertedt ſeede;yer inthe ſecond yeere after his lowing! itwill —_ | 
nerate from the right kinde,and become common Fennell, 
*% The time. 
They Gower in Tineand luly,and theſcede is ripe in theend of Auguſt, | 
% The names. 

Fennell is calledi in Greecke 2-9-9 : in Lon Maratbrum, and Fenicala; :in high Durch Fenc- 
kellinlowe Dutch Uenckell: inTralian F mocehio: i in Spaniſh Zirejo: in French Feroil: inEngliſh 
remand Fenckell.. 

an T he nature. Net . 

The ſeede of Feninell is hot and dric'in rhe thirde degree. ©” 

*% T he,vertues. 
"Thipowdet of the ſeede of Be cnet, drunke for certaine daies $rogither faſting, rckirwoch ne FR 
cicfightgwhereof waswritren this diftithon following, 
 Famiculus, Reſa, verbena, Chelidonia, Rut a, 
| Ex his fit aqua que luntina reddit acuta. : | 
' Of Fennel Roſe s.Vetueine,Rue and Celiridine, | OE a 
'Is made a water od ro cer the Ggh of eyne. 
© The'preene leaues of Ferinell eaten, ot the ſcede 
brelts with milke, 

The decoQtion of Fennell drunke, eaſerh the paines of the kidncies , cauſeth one to auoide the C 
ſtone,and prouokerh vrine. 

Therootes are as effetuall,andnot onely good for thei intents aforcſaid,but againſt the dropfic D 
alo,bein 2 boiledin wine and drunken. 


n made into a Ptifane,, fillerh womens B 


Fennel] 


| | BY | | 
9-8 THE SECOND-BOOKE OF THE 
' E Fennellſcededrunke,afſwagethithe paineof the ſtomacke, and wambling of | 
: to vomite,and becakethewinds, : ht | RA oy ts; A cefire 


I 
is 
bo 
in 


F Thehetbeſcede,and rooteof Fennell,are very good for the lungs the liver nd thekidng; 
it openeth the obſtruftions or ſt ingsof the ſame,and ET iavand nova kidneies,for 
G Theſccdeand herbe of vcere Fennell, is equall in vertues with Anniſe ſeede, 


o 
(| 
i 


. [1 


Of Dill, ( hap.395- 


* The deſcription. 
Ill hath alittle ſtalkof acubite hig} 
and iointed; whereupon do growe 


yery finelie cutte , like to thoſe of Fi 
bur much ſmaller: the flowers be little ar 


| 
It is ſowen in and is alſo ſonjerimes 
found wilde. | 


_ % Thetime. | 
Itbringeth foorth flowers and ſeede in Avguſ. 
* The names. | 
| Dill is called in Greeke av : in Latine likewiſe 
nethum, and Anton : in high Dutch Dyllen; 
 inlowe Dutch Dille $ in Italian _Anerho : in Spa- 
;- niſh Ezelds: in French Axet: in Engliſh Dilland 
; . Aner. phos | FR ae | 
*% The temperature. | 
Dill, as Ga/enfaith, is hot in the endeofth 
_ conde degree , and dry in. the beginning of the 
ſame,orin the endof the firſt degree, 
| ...-_ The decoGtion of therops of Dill dried, and 
| | likewiſe of the ſeedebeing drunke , ingendere! 
| | ? | milke inthebreſtsof nurſes, alaieth gripingsand 
Rn vrine,increaſcth ſecde, ſtaigth the yeox,, hicker, or hicquer , as Dioſcorme: 
teacheth, || Ee 


B Theſeedelikewiſe jfit be ſinelled vnto, aierh the hicker, 2 Limes bein boi edfa wing;/but 


'- chiefelyifit be boiled in Wormewood wine or wine and a fewe 
Roſe leaues,and the ſtqmacke bathed therewith. MG Foe | 

C Gatenfaith,that being burnt and laid vpan moiſt ylcers, jt.cuteth them, eſpecially thoſe in the 
ſecret parts : and likewiſe thoſe /#b Preputis, though they be oldand of long continuance, _ 

D Commonoile,in which Dill is boiled or ſunned, as wedo oile of Roſes , doth digeſt , mitigate 

paine,procure{leepe,and bringeth rawe and ynconcotedhumours toperfeR digeſtion , abdpro- 
noketh camall bf OT OT OO MEETS FR [ij "FH1E7 

 E Dillis of great fqree and efficacie againſt the ſuffocation or ſtrangling of the mother , ifthewo- 


ranchcsof Wormwood,andred 


-* mandoreceiue the fume theteof being boiled in wine , andput vnder a cloſe ſtools or Hollone 
q ſcar fir for hepurpple, | | OI £61! 


of 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, 


Of Caruwaies, Chap.396. 


aut Car ewn. 
Coon n7 % The deſcription. 
SY W: | Aruwaies hath an hollowe ſtalke fower 
2 ſquare, of two cubirs high , full of knots 
= OT or ioints ; from which proccede ſundrie 
- other {mall:-braunches , ſer fall of leaues veric 
finely cut or iagged, like vnto thoſe of Carrotsor 
Dill: atthe top of the ſtalkes grow ſpokie white 
' | tufts like thoſe of Dill; after which commeth rhe 
ſeede,ſharpe in eating,yet of a pleaſant taſte: the 
roote is like that of Parſley, often white, ſeldome 
 yellowe,and in taſte like vnto the Carrot, + 
b | © * Theplace, 
It one almoſt every where in Germanie & 
in Bohemia, in fat and fruitfull heldes,and in me- 
| dowes that are now and then overrunne with wa- 
ter: it groweth allo in Caria,as D/oſcorides (hews- 
eth,from wltence it tooke his name. 
| 5 The tne. _s 
It lowreth and ſeedeth from Maie cuen vnto 
- Auguſt, | 


aw b*, 


L, 


BELT 

"ASA 
«  A*®\YYF 
> . y / % A f 
e 4 '_ , + f "s; Y " — hf 


 *% The names. 
Itis called in Grecke #5: in Latin Carwmand 
Carewn : in ſhops Caruz, Smmeon Zethy calleth it _ 
Carnabadion: in high Dutch Kym, & Kymmel : 
in low Dutch C aruy ſaet 2 in French a Cars 
in Italian Caro :in Spaniſh Carazes, & an article 
| | | being ioined vnto it, Alkaraves: in Englith Caru- 
maic,andthe ſeede is called Caruwaie ſcede, | | 
| * Thetemperature. 
The feede of Caruwaies(as Galenfaith)is horand drie in the thirde degree,and hath a moderate 
bitiog qualitie, 43 
| 2 _ wThewvwertaes. 
Tt conſumeth winde,it is delighfull to the ſtomacke and raſte, it helpeth concofion, vrouoketh A 
_ ,and is mixed with counterpoiſons: the roore may beſodden and eatenas the Parinep or 
tot 1s, | WO ; 
| Theſeedes confeftedor made with ſugar into Comhts , are very good for the ſtomacke , they B 
helpe dizeſtion,pfouocke vrine,afſwage and diſſolue all windines :to conclude in a worde , they arc | 
anſwerable to Anife ſeede in operation and vettues. 


Of eAmſe. Chap.397. 


* T he deſeription.. . 


ST £T He ſta!ke of Aniſe is rounde and hollowe,dinided into diuers ſmall branches, ſet with leaues 
T next the ground ſomwhar broad and rounde; thoſe that growe higher are morce1agged, like 

thoſe of yoong Parſley,but whiter;on the top of the ſtalkes do ſtande {pokte rundles or tufts 
otwhite lowers, and afterward ſcede,which hath a pleaſant taſte as all do knowe., 
| | . Aniſum. 


'E SECOND||BOOKE OF THE 


+ Theplace. | 
Ir growerh plentifully in Candie, Syria, Egypr, 


\and other countries of the eaſt:I haue often ſowen 
 jtin mygarden, where it hath brought foorth/his 
| ripe ſeede, when the yeere hath fallen Out to be 
' temperate. | s | 
| % The time. | 
|| Ir is to be fowen inthele colde regions in the 
| moneth of Maie,the feede is ripe in Auguſt, 
| &% The names. | | 
| Iriscalled in Larine ©An;jſwm: in Greeke &1ny: 
in high Dutch Aniſ3; in lowe Dutch Amifſact ;in 
Jralian —— in Spaniſh CMaraha/ns : in French 
| 4s :in Engliſh Aniſe, and Anniſc ſeede. 

1} | *% Thetemperature, . 
| + Galen writeth, that the ſeede of Aniſc is hor 
| anddry in the third degpehaſter othersitis hot in 
| the ſecond degree, and much lefle then driein the 
| ſecond degree z for it ingendreth milke, which ir 
. | coulde not do if it were very drie, as Galen in his 
| Chapter of Fenell doth whether hee will or no 
| declare and reſtifie ; in that it doth ingender milk, 
his opinion is, thatir is not hot aboue the firſt de- 
| | greewhich thing alſo maybein Aniſe ſeede, both 
| by this reaſon and alfo bicauſe itis ſweete: there- 
| fore to conclude , Anife ſeede is dric in the firſt 
| degree, and hotin the ſecond, | 
[1 | * Therertnes. 
| ; Theſcedewaſteth and conſumeth winde, and 
| | : | | is good againſt belchings and vpbraidings of the 
' ſtomacke, alaieth gripings of the belly, prouoketh vrine gently , maketh abundance of milke, 
and ſtirreth yp bodily luſt : jt ſRaicth the A ,andAalſo the whire fluxe in women. ol 
B Being chewed ir maketh the breath ſivecte, and is good for them that are ſhort winded, and 
quencherh thirſt,and therefore ir is fit for ſuch as haue the dropſic:ithelperh the yeoxing or hicker, 
both when it is drunken or caten dric : the ſmell thereof doth alſo preuaile very much. ? 
C . Theſame being cricd by the fire and taken with honie, clenſerh the breſt from flegmatike ſuper- 
Auirics,and if irbe caten with bitter almonds,it doth helpe the old _—_ {4 ; | 
Itis tobe giuenvnto yoong children and infantsto cate which are like to have the falling fick- 
nes,or ſuch as haue it by parrimonie,or ſucceſſiqn, Po{44 = 
Itraketh away ch& pacic. quincie(that is,a fivellingin the throte) being gargled with ho- 


nic, vineger,and a little Hyoflpe gently boiled rogither. 


GI GET Se Es cr 207 


 - Of Biſhops neede,herbe William,or eA meos. (hap. 95. 


" * Thekindes. 


"T* Helater age hath obſerned two kindes of Ames: , onegreater with the broate leaſe , which is 
& the common Amegs and the other the le{ſr with the fmaller leaues,and allo another fort be- 
ing a dwarfe or lowe plant of the ſame kinde, | / 6 28 


1 Anim 


HISTORIE Of PLANTS. 


1 Anmivulgert. 7 Thi 2 AmmiCreticwn. | 
Common Biſhops weede. |  _ CandieBiſhops weede. 
=_— | i 6'# | FS a £ Wk WY rb. 

EN lg is Ea NE. \ 1 __ 

\ SV; I AD a 'Y Pm i 
Sn <= = | "<8 wMe 

rl L 3 Le If I 

Xs dk 4 wie ' 


»d, w S _ 
L , , % * - Ko 
#\.: ANIFLPREY w # ? 
4 44> \——_— % 4 <3 
IRES 1 WW 
1 . 
WR 


- 
> ff 
4 1 o 
SS A 
4 —_— 
_— 


"7 > 
m 


\ 
z 


C5 
v 
» 


SAY 
VO \ ] __— 
X 


LY 
£4 
4 
*% - - 
4 (RIS 
" 
B 4 k S. AE " x 
l , 's £31 A z 
ol 4 £ 1 * # = 
4 6 | > Si. \ 4s" 4 
Q 4 1 4A A ” \ 
s,* "— — \ _ - 
\ E * . A 4 . q 


Ml! <A 
/ 


£224 
\ 
« 


ET 
© 
NS & 
AF 


4 


—— 
IDO! 
% I SR 


=> \ 
- VL i 


"A > 
PANVAR> 
EA 


& The deſeription. 


I He common Ameos, eſpecially with vs heere in England, hath round greene ſtalks, with 
divers boughes and branches, and large and long leaues, diuided into divers other nar- 
_ **. rowe, long, and ſmall leaues, dented or ſnipt abour the edges, andat therop of the ſtalke 
white flowers,in.great ſpokie tufts, which bring foorth a lirtle ſharpe and birter ſeede :the roote is 
white and threddie. CE NY - 
2 This excellent andaromaticall Ameos of Candie, hath tufts and leaues like Daucus Creticus, 
and aroote like vnto the garden Carot, of a yellow colour, and hot feede like Or:ganmn, of an ex- 
ceceding ſpicie ſauour and ſmell, growing in tufts or ſpokie rundles like Carws : it hath been broughe 
from Candy and Syria vnto Venice,and from Venice into Fraunce,Flaunders, and England,where 
we haue often ſowen itz but withour doubt we haue beene beguiled therein, by the deceirfull drug- 
maſters,whohaue firſt boiled it, or vied ſome other falſe and deceitfull deuiſe,to bring greater - 
miration vnto the Venice Treacle,for the confeftion whereof this ſeedeis a chiefe and moſt princi- 
pall ingredient. / | | | | 
There is another kinde of Ameos , whichis an herbe very ſmall and tender , hauing ſtalkes a 
foote and a halfe high, very ſmall and tender,beſet withleaues like vnto Dil finely iagged and ſom- 
wharlender,and atthe rop of the talks little ruftes or {ſpokie whire rundles, which atterwards da 
turne into ſmall gray ſeede,hot ar.d ſharpen taſte :the roote is ſmall andlender. * , 
| * Thep/ace. - 
Theſe plants doall grow in my garden,except yn Creticwn,; whereof hath beene ſufficiently 
ſpoken in the deſcription. 
| LN *%T he time. 
* They flower in Iune and Iuly,and yeelde their ſeede in the end of Augult, 
| | | Kkk x | *% The 


— 


382 ' THE SECOND BOOKE/OF THE 


| w The nies, | > 
The Grecians call it 4:w, the Latines alſo pos 61 1 call it Cuminum AEthjopicum others cy. 
 mninm Reviam, or Comin Royall:in ſhops Ammrivs,or Ameos inthe Genitive caſe: the Getmaines 
Airey:inEn gliſh Ameos,or Ammi,of ſome herhe VWiltam,Bulwoort,and Bithops weede. 
| : |, $ Thetemperature. * | | | 
| Theſecde of Ameos.is hot and dric inthe latter end of the thirde degree, | 
4 1 *% The verrnes. h | | 
A lr auaileth againſt gripings of the bellic in making of vrine, the bitings of ſerpents taken in 
wine,and alfo it bringeth downe the flowers: [being applied with honie it aketh away blacke 
and bleweſpors which come of/{ripes : the ſeefle of Seſondoth allo the like : for it is hot and 
drie and that in the thirde degree 3likewiſe of thin parts, prouoking viine, and bringing downethe 
defiredficknes. PPS of l by Po. 
B Thelſeede of Ameos is good tobe drunken in jvine, againſt the biting of all maner of venemoys 
beaſts.and hath power againſt al maner of poiſon/and peſtilent feauers, or plagye,and is vicd in the 
correcting of Cantharides,whereby thoſe flics ate made medicinable tobe received into the body 
withour danger. "Hifi bl TA 1/4 
C Ameos baied and mingled withhony ſcatterqth congealed bloud,and putterh away blacke and 
blewe markes which come by ſtripes or tals,it ir be applied thereto in maner ofa plaiſter. 


Of Cheruill. Chap.399. 


1 Cerefolium vulgare, 2 Tin | 2 Cerefolcum magmon. 
Common Cheruull. 4 bi | ___  GreatChemulhorMyrthe. 
0 3" TR. , Wy | F 
IF 43-4 S441. 0 aa VT ; | WAL WL 1G, 
<N\\ | MIT - \ YA 7 WK WP 


\ #/; = 
T EDN2: YB 
' >» # GN 


#4 | im —_ — 
wx 
. Ye ' 1 x 
. 2 Ly A 


* 
o JP 


HISTORIE | OF PLANTS. © 88; 


| + The deſcription, 7 A P, 
Heleaues of Cheruill are ſlender, and diverſly cut, ſomething hairie, ofa whitiſh greene : 
T: the ſtalkes be ſhort,flender, round and hollow within, which at the firſt rogither with the 
leauesare of a whitith greene, but tending to a red when the ſeedes beripe : the flowers 
be white,and growe vpon ſcattered ruftes. The leede is long,narrow lender, ſharpe pointed: the 


roote 15 full ot {trings. w 
> Grear Cheruill hath large leaues,decpely cut or iagged,in ſhew very like vnto Hemlocks, of a 
very 200d and pleafant ſmell and raſte like vnro Cherml], and fomething haine, which hath cauſed 
v« to call irſweete Cheruill. Among theſe leaues riſeth vp aſtalke ſomewhat creſted or furgowed, 
ofthe height of two cubites ; at the top whereof growe ſpokie tuttes or rundles with white flowers, 
which doturneintolong,browne and ſhining ſecede, one ſeede being as big as fower Fennell feeds, 
which being greene, doraſte like Annis ſcede, The roote is great, thicke and long, as big as Enula 
Campana,cxcceding {weerte inſmell,and taſting like vnto Annis feedes, 
| | :  _ * Theplace. 

The common Cheruill growerh in gardens with ocher pot herbes: it proſpererh in a ground that 
' jsdungedand ſomething moiſt, The great ſweete Cheruill growerh in my garden,and in the gar- 
dens of other men,vho haue beene diligent in theſe matters. | 

| , | | % The time. | 

Theſe herbes do flower in May,aud their fegd is ripe in Iuly, 
| | nl : & The names. | 

Cheruillis commonly called in Latine Cerefe/:u2,, and as diuers affirme Ceyofolium, with o inthe 
ſecondſyllable. Columelix namerh it Cherephyliwmr , anditis thought tobe fo called bicauſe it de- 
lighteth tro growe with many leaues; or rather in that it cauſerh joy and gladneflc : in high Dutch 
Korffelbraut :in Lowe Dutch Rertiell ; in Italian Cerefeg/ro: in French Du Cerfuci/: in Engliſh 
Cheruell,and Cheruill., | | 
* Myryhisis alſo called Myrrha, taken from his pleaſant ſauour of Myrrhe : of ſome Corzlz,as itis 
found noted among the baſtard names. | 

 Ofthis P/inie maketh mention in his 24.booke 16.chaprer , where he reporteth that it is called 

Smyrrh;z4 :in Engliſh great Cheruill,and Sweete Cheruill, | 


| | % The temperatureand Vertues. 

Cheruill is held to be one of the por herbes ; it is pleafantro the ſtomacke and taſte ; itis of a a 
temperate heate,and moderate drynefle,but nothing ſo much as the Parlleies, 

[t prouoketh vrine, eſpecially being boiled in wine, and applied hot tothe ſhare or nethermoſt B 
part of the belly,and che wine drunke in which was boiled. 

It hath init a certaine windinefle, by meanes whereofit procureth luſt. S 

Itis vied very much among the Durchpeople in akinde of loblollic or hotch potch, which they D 
docare, called Warmus. | 

Theleaues of ſweere Cheruill are exceeding good, holſome, and pleaſant among orher ſallade E 
herbes, giuing the taſte of Aniſe ſeede vnto the reſt. 

: The roote,as Ga/enx writeth,is hot inthe ſccond degree,and hath joined with it athinneſle of ſub- F 
ance, 

Deſcoridesreacheth,that the roote being drunke in wine, is a remedy 2gainſt the bitings of che G 
venemous ſpiders called in Latine Phe/aneza, and that it bringeth down the menſes & ſecondines : 
and being boiled anddrunke,jt is goodfor ſuch as haue the priſicke or conſumprion of theJungs. — 

The ſecdes eaten as afallade whileſt they are yet greene,with oile, vineger, and pepper, cxcceede H 
al other ſallads by many degrees,both in pleaſantnes of taſte,fweetenefle of fmell,and holfomneſle 
tor the cold and feeble ſtomacke. | 

 Therootes ate likewiſe moſt excellent ina fallade,ifthey be boiled,and after dreſſed; as the cun- I 
ning Cooke knowerh how better then my ſeltez norwithſtanding I do vic to cate them with oile 
and vineger,being firſt boiled, which is very good for old people that are dull and without courage, 
reloicerh and comforteth the hart,and increaſerh their luſt and ſtrength, 


Kkk-y' |. Wc 0; Of 


— 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


884 
Of Shepheards Needle, or Wilde Cheruill. Chap. 4.00. 
Petfen Veneriafue Standex., || | vY 


Shepheards Needle,or Venus combe. 


z 


d; i 


F7% 
AR RA ROLES 
S Minh; EST Pa, 
SS. 149, => % 


—_— 


— 


. Fs 
AN "2s 


AE if Bad 
_' = 


k he a ky 
I : P 6 gh. . 
Y% { bs 


—* A Y 


o 
- 
= A - dS, YL 
"42 5 $2. - 
—W — — ” v* 
k 


dlezvilde Cheruill, Mock-Chernill, and Ladic 


with corne, 


faith Pliny in his 22. booke 22.chapter,thar het 


w%The deſeription. 


Candzx,or Pecten Vereris doth notmuch gif. ; 
ferinthe quantinee of the ſtalkes, leaues ang 
flowers from Cheruill, but Scandrxhath no 


ſuch pleaſantimell as Cheruill hath: the leaves 
be greater,more finely cur,and of a browne green, 
; colour :the flowers growatthe top of the {falkes 
in ſmall white tufts, after which come vppe long 
Teedes, very like vnto packneedles , orderlie (er 
one by another like the greattecth of acombe, 
; whereotit tooke the name Pedten Penerts, Venus 
| Combe, or Venus Needle: the roote is white , a 
fingerlong. | | 


| % Theplace. | 
It groweth in moſt corne fieldes of England, 


eſpecially among wheate and bar ly. | 


It lowreth in Maie, the ſcedcis ripe in Auguſt 
 *The names . 1 | 

| The Latines call it Scandrx, having borowed 
thatname of the Grecians, whocallir =49#: we 
finde among the baſtard words that the Romains 
did name it Scararia, and iAcuia , of the iceede 
that is hike vnto a needle : Knelzns defcribeth it 


| vnder the name Peter Yeners, of others dew 
| Veneru, and CAcus Paſtors, or Shepheards Nee- 
$ Combe: in high Dutch Naclde Rarnel: this is 
be which Ar:ftephanes obic@ed in ſport to the Poet 


Euripides, that his mother was woont to ſell not any right potheghe but $eangex, or Shepheardes 
needle: meaning as I rake it Y7/nage wherewith the Spaniards & picke their teeth when they hauc 
caten no meat at all, except a few Orenges or ſuch alike trifle,called alſo Scanaix. - | 


*% T hetemperature, | 


 Shepheards Needle, as Gale ſaith,is a potherbe ſomewhat binding,and bitter in taſte, inſo- 
much that itis hot and drie,cither in the larter chde of the teconddegree, or in the beginning of 


the thirde. 


A :: Dioſeoridesfaith thatitis eaten both 


% The tvertues. | 41+] | 
aw and þoiled,and that it is an holſomepotherb among the 


Greckes, butin thele daies it is of fmall eſtimation or value , and taken burtor a wilde woort, as 


appeereth by _Aritophanes taunting of Exreprdts, as aforeſaid,” 


o 


The decoction thereof 1s good for the bladder , kidneies and liver ;burasI deeme, he ment 


Cherull,when he ſer the ſame downe to be vicd in Phiſicke, 


Of Toutbpicke (beruill Chap. 4. or. 


* The 


growe ſpokie tuftes, beter tound abo 


| | {Þ _ eription. 
I He firſt of theſe Toothpicke Cheruily bearerh leaue 
frowedgiontred, black ith and bairie, 


| ; 
$like wilde Turneps, around ſtalke 
iwided into many branches; on the tops whereof 


with many ſmall leaues. The flowers thereof are 


[3 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | $85 
whitiſh z after commeth the ſcede, which being once ripe do cluſter and are drawen togithet, in a 
round thicke tuft like a ſmall birdes neſt, as be thoſe of the wilde Carrot, which ſeedes who fo rou- 
 cheth, they will cleauc and ſticke to his fingers, byreaſfon of the glutinous or flimie matter they 
are pollefled with. The roote is fmall and whitiſh, bitter in taſte, as is all the reſt of rheplanr, 

2 The Spaniſh Tootbpicke hath leaues, flowers, and knobbie ſtakes like vnto wilde Carrots, 
fauing thatthe leaues are ſomewhat finer,cutor :agged thicker, and tenderer; but not roughor hai- 
ric atall,as is the former :of abirterraſte,and a reaſonable good ſmell : amongwhich riſe vp buſhie 
roundles or ſpokic rufres, like thoſe of the wilde Carrot or Birdes neſt, cloſelvdrawen rogither 
when the ſeed is ripe zat what time alſo the ſharpe needles, which are the feed veliels,are hardened, 
fit to make Toothpicks,and ſuch like ,for which purpole they do very fitly ſerue, | 


1 Gingidium latifolium. 
'Broade Toorhpicke Cheruill, 


Le 


xy 4 


F t 
id] Fi 


| % The place. | | 
Both ofthemido growe in Syria,and moſt commonly in Cilicia: the later is tobe found likewiſe 
in Spaine almoſt euery where ; and I have it likewiſe in my garden in great plenty. | 
| - *Thetime, | 
They flower in my garden about Auguſtzand deliuer theirſeede in October. 
»þ ou The names. Y 
Thar which the Grecians call -yſi/2,the Latines do likewiſe name Gingidium: and it is called in 
| Syria Leprdium; yetis there anorher Lepid/wn, of which we will intreate hereafter. Ir is icporred 
among the baſtard names to be called by the Romanes Brſacutum, of which name ſome thew re- 
maierh amongthe hyrians, who commonly call rhe later Gingidinon Viſnaze ; this is namedin 


Engliſh Toothpicke Cheruill. | 

JF. | | *% The tempera ture and vertues. | | 
There is, fairh Ga/ey, great increaſe of Giag/drwn in Syria, and itis eaten nootherwiſe than is 
hepheards needie of Troy with vs,making a difference between Cerefoltmm which is called of fore 
dhepheards needle,and Gmgid/am which is called Toothpicke CONE Ir is;laichhe,very whe 
E1-; | Kkk3 | | ome 


A 


THE SECOND HOOKE OF THE 

ſome forthe ſtomacke, whether itbe caten rawe or boiled ; notwithſtandingir is euident that jr , 

a medicine rather than a nouriſhment. Asit is|bitrer and binding, ſo is it likewiſe of a temperate 
heate anddryneſſe. The heate is not very apparanr, buritis found tobe dric in the latterend of the 

{econddegrec, as alſo the ſaid author alledgerhin his diſcourſe of rhe faculties of ſimple medicines 

B Dieſeorides doth afo write the fame: This ns rbe,ſaich he,is caten rawe,ſodden,and preſerued 

with great goodto the ſtomacke,it proucketh vrine : and the decoction therof made with wine anq 

drunke, is profitable to ſcowre the bladcier, prouoketh vrine, and is good againſt che grauell and 

ſtone, | : ”a | 
C Thehardquils whereon the ſeedes diqgrows, are good to clenſetheteeth and gums, and doe 
. eafilyrake away all filth and baggage ſticking injthem, withour any hure vneo the gums, as follow. 


eth after many other Toothpicks,and leaucth a gopd ſent or ſauour in the mouth, 


Of Medeſweete,or Queene / * the medowes. Chap. 4.02. | 


Regina pratz. | | = | 
Queene of the medowe. F111 *% The deſcription, 

| His herbe hath leattes like thoſe of Aeri- 
IE monie,confſiſting of divers leaues ſer ypon 
| a middle rib, like thoſe of the Aſhe tree 
| eueric {wall leate lightly ſnipt about the edges, 
| white onthe inner fide, and on the vpper {ide 
| crumpled or wrinkled like thoſe of the Elme 
| tree, whereof it tooke the name Yimarra, of the 
| fimflicude or likeneſle that the leaues have with 
| the Elme leaues. Theſtalke js three or fowec 
| foote high, rough and very fragile, or caſic to 
| breake, of a reddiſh purple colour ; on the top 
| whereof are very many little flowers, cluſtering 
| and growingapynber, of a'whire colour tending 
| to yellownelle, and of a pleafanc ſweet ſwell, as 
a:e the leaues likewiſe : after which come the 
ſeedes,fmall, crookedly turning or winding one 
| with another, made into a fine little head. The 
| roote hath a ſweete ſmell, ſpreading far abroad, 
blacke withour, & of a darkiſh red colour within. 
| _ * The place, 
| | Irgroweth inthe brinkes of waterie dirches 
and riuers (ides, and alſo in medowes : it liketh 
watcrie and moiſt places, and groweth almoſt 
Eucric where. | | 


| *% The time. 

| It flowreth and flouriſheth in Tune, Tuly, and 

Auguſt, | Þ 1-1 

| | | *% Thenanes. | 
Itis called of ghe later age Regina prati,and Barba Capriof fome YVimaria,a foliorum V mi ſantirts- 

drne taken from thelikenefle it hath with the Elnzetrec leafe: in high Dutch Sciſzbart. Iris cal- 

led Barba Hirci,yhich name belongeth to the plant which the Grecians do call T ragopogon,of An- 

enillara, Potentillamatora. Ithath ſome likeneſle with xhodora Pliny, but yerwe cannot athrmeirro 


be theſame. Iris called in lowe Dutch Retjnett 
Engliſh Maideſweere, Medow {weere, and Qu 
ſaith itis called of the Germanes his countrim 


*in French Barbe de Cheure, Reine des prats : m 
ne of the medowes. Camerarize of Noremberg 
, Wurme kraut, bicauſe the rootes, ſaith he, 


ſeeme to be eaten with wormes. I rather ſuppoſe they callitfo, bicauſerhe ancienthackney men, 
and horſe leiches, doe give the decodtion thereof to their horſes andaſſes, againſt the bots and 
wormes,for the which it is greatly commended. » . ſ- 

| "TYM  * The 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 287 
% T be temperature. 
Medeſiecte is cold and drie,with an cuicenc bindingqualitie adioined, | - 
* The vertues.. * 
The roote boiled,or made into powder and drunke, helpeth the bloodic fize, ſtaieth the lacke, A 
and all other fluxes of blood in man or woman. 
[cis reported, that the flowers boiled in wine and erunke , do rake away the fits ofa quartaine B 
ue,and maketh the hart merrie, 
The lcaues and flowers far excell all other ſtrowing herbes, for to decke yp houſes, toſtrowe in C 
chambers,hals, and bankerting houſes inthe ſommer time for the ſmell thereof maketh the hart 
merric, delighteththe ſenſes : neither doth'ir caute headach, or lothlomneſleto meare, as ſome 
other fweete ſmelling herbes do, 


The diſtilled water of the flowers droppedinto the eies, rakerh away the burning and itching D 
- thereof,andclecreth the fight, | | 


LEY 


Of Burnet Sax1 rage: Chap 404. 


1 Pimpinelly Saxifraze. 2 Bipinella, ſue Saxifraga minor. 
Burner Saxifrage. _ Small Burner EY: 


i Tee 


467 


WY I NY AF | a 
$Wws 3:46; $32 3h 
od: dnbigols cn | ; 2612 00 <q 0 ove? Igricg ONSITE UH ag. <2. 
| *% The deley Nc «Honig þrik hrumlbdo Wa a= £3 


\ His great ir kinde of Pimpinel, or rather Vaxifeage, hath great andlong rootes , * faſhioned 

like a Parfnep,of an hot and biting taſte like Gin gerifrom which riſerh vp an hollow ſtalke 

with toihts and knees, two cuþi obies feb: beſet Tithe leaties, which do more neerely re- 

Preſent Smallage then Pimpernell, or ——_ the garcen Parinep. This lant conſiftethof many 

lmall leaues growing vpon one ſtemme J{nipe or abour the edges lite a ſave : the flowers do 

gr atthe top of theſtalks in white romnd tufesy! e ſeede is like the comthor Parſley, fa faving that 
« is boxcer and biting v vpon the toong.”! L 09 

2 Spence iskewiica kinde of Barnet or Pimpin ,ypon which Pen hath beſtowed Ithit addiri> 

'K kk 4 on 


883 THE SECOND/BOOKE' OF THE - 

on Sexifragamimer,vnder which name Saxifragiaarecomprehendeddiuers herbes of divers Ljng« 
and rhe one very vnlike vnto the other : for ſome of thoſe herbes called Saxifrage ,,dono more 
agree with the Saxifrages of Dioſcorides, then iniſhewe like vnto the diurericall herbes called Ruff 
£14 Polygonatum,and Aſparagus: but that kinde of Saxifrage whichis called H:rejma,which is row h 
ot hairie Saxifrage,of others Bipjnellais beſt knowne,and the beſt of all the reſt, like vntothe ſm;11 
Burnet,or common Parlley, fauing that it is voide of haires,as may appeergby the old Latin verſe - 

| Pimpmells habet pelos, Saxifragy non habet wilos, «© 
| _ Pimpinell hath haires ſome : bug Saxifrage hathnone. 51} 

Norwithſtanding,l haue founde a kinde heereofigrowing in our paſtures adioiring to Lon don, the 
leaues whereof it yourake and tenderly breake with your hands,yec may dtaw foorth ſmall threds 

like the webbe of aſpider,ſuch as yee may draw from the leaues of Scabious, Ihe ſtalke is hollow 
diuiding it ſelfe from thg joints orknees, into ſungrie other ſmall branches; ar the rop whereof & 
. grow ſmall cufts or ſpokie rundles,of a white colpur,atter which commeth the ſeed like vnto Carg; 
or Caruwaies,of a ſharpe taſte : the roote is alſo ſharpe and hot in taſte. ; 
| * T he place. | ; 
24 fully, 


»> Fs 


They flower from Iune to the end of 


 Thatwhich Fuch/awcalleth P ;mpinells maror, Dodonews termeth Saxrfragiamaior , which kinde 
of Saxifrage doth more abſolutely anfiver the true P/ell1ndriion of Plinie), then any other planr 
whatſocuer : wherein the Phifitions of Paris hate becne deceived , calling or ſuppoſing the me- 
dow Rue to be the right Phellndriwn, whereunto itis not like either in ſhapeor tacultic: foriris 
nothing ſocffeCtual in breaking the ſtone,or prouoking of vrine, as either of theſe plants;eſpecially 
Hircangs which is notfo called bicauſe it hath any ramimiſh ſmell of a goate;but bicauſe pradticio- 
nershaue vſed to feed goates with it,wholc ficſh & bloud is ſingylar good againſt rhe {tone;bur we 
rather rake itto be named Hircina,of Hircinia /ylua, where it doth grow in great abundance; the (a- 
uout of the herbe nor being vopleaſant,fomwhatreſembling the ſmell & rafte of Daxcrs Lrguſtrun, 
& Pgftineea:{o toconclude both theſe are called Sexifrag:4:the fwalleris called of ſome Perrefiy- 
duls Biprnella,8 Bipenula; of Baptifia Sarfus,and pil 0 of Leonardus Fachſ1u,Pimpinella mater; wher- 
fore diuers cal it Pimpinells Saxifraga: for there is allo another Pimp:neja, called P;mpinellaSangui- 
ſor ba, ot Burner, notwithſtandung rhe verſe betore rehearſed, ſhewerh a difference berweene Fim- 
pinclla, and Saxsfrage: in high Dutch, iris called /Bib.rnel tin lowe Dutch Secucnaert ; w En- 
gliſh the greater may be called great Saxifmge, and the other mall Saxifrage.. © 
4 Bipinell is called Saxifragia minor, in'En ghſh «mall Saxifrage.as &rmpineikris called great Saxi- 
t 4 _- £0 NON. WR Le mare EET th AHN 
"Sandrageofborh kindes,with their ſeede,|caues,androotes are hot anddric in the third degree, 
and of thin and ſubtilepartes.. 7 { A's LR: 


1 


eek. ITY, * The wertues, - 42 a AI | 
A Thelſeedeand rooteof Saxifrage drmken with wine, orthe decoftion thercofmade withwine, 
cauſerh.to piſſe well, breaketh che ſtone in the kjdneies and bladder, and is ſingular againſt the 
ſtranguxie.and the ſtoppings of the kidneies and bladder; whereof irrooke the name Saxi#agis,o! 
breake ſtone, | | Eh+ j: we. 6 | 
B Theiviceoftheleaves of Saxifrage doth clenſe and take away all ſpots andfrecklesof theface, 
andTeaueth agoodcolour. Ul j | 


| Chap. 4.03. 


l 


£ 


#. 1 
, 
. 
of 
. 
& 
4 


# 4.4 


Vrnet doth differ from P ampinelle, which is alip called Saxiffege, ofwhichwe will inrreart. One 
of the Burners is leſſer, for the moſt part growing in gardens, notwithſtanding-}it groweth in 
barren hieldes where it is much ſmaller: the othepgreater;isaltogither wilde, + + > 
| | "" | 2H | 1 Pimpi 


Wd -þ 


_ HISTORIE OF PLANTS. $89 
1 Pimpinells Hortenſs. | | 2 Pimpinell ſylueſtris. 


Garden Burner. | Wilde Burner, 


4 
4D 
L 
£*. 
we _— 
\ , 

kX : 

j Mi 

L Y 

\ 

* 

\ 4 

k 


£145 pooled 204 6 Vibe dojenche dues” bins 176 Wh oigerefl 16 eoukþlotT 
I Arden Burnet hath long leaues made vp togither of a great many vpon one ſtem, enerie _ 
(; one whereof isſomething rounde}nicked onthe edges, ſomewhat hairie : among r theſe ri-< © 
ſeth a ſtalke that.is not altogither withourleaues,, ſomething chamfered: vpon therops 
whereof growe little round heads or knaps , which bring foorth ſmall lqwers of a browne purple 
colour,and after them cornered ſeedes, which are thruſt vp togither, The roote is long: the whole 
plant doth ſmel! ſomething like a Melon,or Cucumber. 


2 Wilde Burnetis greater in all parts,\ithath wider and bigger leaves then thoſe of the former : 


the ſtallte is longer, ſometimes two cubirs high? the knaps are greater, of a darke purple colour: 
_ theſcedeis likewiſe cornered and greater:/the roote longer,but this Burner hath noplcaſant ſmell 
atall, | | BY 
| ] %* Theplace. | He nha'S Bar 
The ſmall Pimpinell is commonly planted in gardens,notwithſtanding it doth grow wilde vpon 
many barrenheathes andpaſtures, ooo, bags pop ef oe - nor ol 
The great wilde Buttiet growerh (a5 maſter Lzze ſaith) in dry niedbwes aBoritViſtirde, arid my 
ſelfe haue fotmde it growing vpon' the fide of a cawſey which: croffeth the one Hifeof a ficlde, 
whereof the ant pai "Ada grounde,' and theotherparrmedowe, lying berweene Paddingron 
; SHOULLE 2 3 og The time,” - Vi CI&g3 | "Ee > 4 $)QOL 
They flower from Tune;vnto the end of Auguſt," - |. hens 2: oh amr; r—$4 cd iN 
* &! FP Ion Þ 4 C11 "oe The names. | , TL I f45> LO [4 {Daw 2 
The later Herbariſts do call Burnet Pimpinelle Sanzifor ba, thatit may differ from the other;and 
ct itis calledby ſeucrallnames, Sanguiſorbe, and nur; rel Fe frer hat rather it ſhoulde be cab 
d Peponclie of the fmell of Melons or Pompions,rowhich jtisUke'as we haue aide; of others it is 
named Prmpincle,or Biperaule,ot moſt men Sobaſtrela: inhigh Dutch Kolbleskraut, her Gots 
Bartlin,Blutkraut, megelkrautziaFreach Pmmpennele,Sanguc/orbe: in Engliſh Burner,It _ 
. | | | @ FM 


859 _ / THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
eth cwn alters Dioſcoridis Sideritide , that is to ſay , with Dioſcorides ſecond Iron woot: the 
leafe(andeſpecially thatof the lefler fort) which we haue written to conſilt of many nickes in the 
edoes of the leaues,and this may be the very ſamewhich Pliny inhis 24. booke chapter 7, repor- 
" to benamed in Perſia S1ſitepteris,bicauſc igmade them merry; healſocalleth the ſame +,,,,. 
media,and Caſiznete,and likewile Dronyſonymphas, forthat it doth marueilouſly agree with wine; to 
which alſo this > ,-mpinel/s (a5 we haue ſaide) dqth giue apleaſant ſenc: neither isthar repugnant 
which Pl:zy in Mite place hath written , De Jzder:tibas, of the Iron woorts z for it often tallech. 
out that he intreatethof one and the ſelteſame plant in divers places , vnder divers names : which 
thing then hapnech ſooner when the writers therpſelues donor well know the plant, as thar p/;y;7 
did not well know Siderzti or Ironwoorr, it is euen thereby manifeſt, bicauſe he ſetreth nor downe 


his owne opinion heereof,bur other mens. | 
| | | | w% Thetemperature. | 
Burnert,beſides the drying and binding facultie that it hath, doth likewiſe meanly coole: and the 
leſſer Burnet hath likewiſe wichall a certaine ſuperficiall, ſlighr,and remperare ſent, which when ic 
is put into the wine it doth leaue behinde it: this js not in the dry herbe, in the iuice , nor in the de- 
coCtion. Te) -_— | | 


*+ Thewertues. 


| 


A Burnetis afingular ggod herbe for wounds (which thing Dioſcoridesdoth attribute ro his ſecond 


Ir6nwoort)and commended|of a number: it ſtancherhblecding, and therefore it was named $a- 
a as well inwardly taken as outwardly applicd. K- | 
B 


icher the iuiceisgiuen , or the decoQion of the powder of thedrie leaues of the herbe, being 
bruſed,ic is outwarely applied,or clſc put amongſ} other externall medicines. | | 
C HItftaieththelaske and bloudy flixe: it is alſo moſt effeRuall ro ſtop the monthly courſe, 
'D Theleſſer Burnetis pleaſant robe eaten in ſallads,in which itis thoughterto make the hart 
and glad,as alſo being put into wine,towhich ir yeeldeth a certaine grace in the drinking, 
E ; Thedecoftion of Punpinell drunken,cureth the bloudie flixe, the ſpitting ofbloud,and al other 
flexe ofbloudin manor woman. [ | | 
F "Theherbe and feede made into powder,and d 
quenched doth the like, | | [| 
G Theleauesof Pimpinell arc veric good to hcale'woundes, and are received in drinkes that are 
made for inward wounds, | ; >44 | | 
H Thelcaues of Burner ſtceped in wine and drunken,doth comfort the hart,and maketh it menic, 
aidis good againſtche crembling and ſhaking thercof. 3x 


unke with wine, or water wherein iron hath been 


Of Engliſh Saxifrage. (hap. 405. 


% The deſeription. | | F 


Y His kinde of Saxifrage ou Engliſh women Phiſitions haue in great vic, andis familiarly 
knowne:yato them , vouchſafing-rhat naine vnto it of his vertues againſt the ſtone: it 
"7  haththelcauesof Fennell bur thicker and broader,very like vnto Seſe/ipratenſe, Monſpe 


$ 


lienſarr,(which addition Pea hathbeſtowed vpon this our Engliſh Saxitrage) among which ritcth 
vp ” ſtalke,ofacubire high ormore, bearing axthe top ſpokie rundles beſetwith white flowers: the 
roote is thicke,blacke without,and white withinandof a good fauour —— i 

| Thetce is anothet Saxifrage, let foorth by Mathiolas , which he calleth, Saxifrage,mmior , that = 
groweth naturally on the ſlope cliffes and r sof the mountaine Baidu in Italy, neere vnto the 
Citic Verona:couliſting of a greatnumber of ſmall twigs , fomcwhar rough and woodic z whereon 
do growe little leaues like thoſe of winter Sauorie, growing for the moſt part by couples, ler one 
againſt another: the flowers grow at the top of the wigs. ofa white colour, faſhioned like uttle 
cups, after which 236 hk d Bil ſecede: her thruſterh it ſelfe {o deepe intothe clits and 


. 


. Eranncics of the rockes,that itis very hard to pluck them out, 


£ 
b 
'! 


I $S4x1/74g4 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 991 

Sexifraq « Anglicans, ſeu Seſels praten ſe. | NR | age 

{he Gn Faxifenge wt aſe 1 Theneſeription. ; 

| A | There 1s anorher apory alrogither lefler 

then the foriner, wherof the drie coaſts, chalkie 
hils, ſtonte andbarren growundes, which brin 
foorth Ser pillun or wilde Time inEnglarid, Jok 
yeelde alſo grearplentie: thisſinallerSaxifrage 

. (whichof 7 Obetrmn is called Sxxifrazs antiquo- 
rwn,or the ancient Saxifrage,) hachmany thicke 
branches ſpreading vpon the grounde, like Sey- 
pillum or wilde Time, fer with the like leaues of 
wilde Time , but ſomewhat leffer; among which 
come foorth ſmall flowers of ah herbie colour, 
afrer commeth a little red ſeed: rhe roote is ſlen- 
der and groweth-deepe intothe ground : of the 
firſt oftheſe two laſt deſcribed, the Iraliansdo 
make greataccount , calling ic Lithontriua, quaſi 
terens laidem: in Engliſh wemay callic Rocke 
Breakeſtone. | | 

v% The 


Saxifrage groweth in moſt fields &medowes, 
cucry where throughout this our countrey of 
England, | 

* Thetime, | 

It flowreth fromthe beginning of Maie to the 
end of Augult, 

% Thenames. 

Saxifrage Anglrcana, is called in ovr mother 
ro0ng Stone breake;or Engliſh Saxifrage : Pemg 

| | and LC O0beil call þ by this name Saxifraga Ap — 
glicans, for thatit groweth more plentifully in England then in any other countey, J 
| 5 Thenature. | I 

Stone breake is hotand drie in the thirde degree. 

ORE 4: The vertues, | 

AdecoQion made with the ſeedes and rootes of Saxifrage , breaketh the ſtone in the bladder A 
andkidneics,helpeth the ſtrangurie,and cauſeth one to piſle treely. | 

The roote 6 Stonebreake boiled in wine,and the decoftion drunken, bringerh downe womens B 
ſicknes,expelleth rhe ſecondine and deadchilde, : | 

Iheroore dried and made into powder, and taken with ſugar,comforteth and warmeth the ſto- C 
' mackeghelperh digeſtion,curerh the gnawings and griping paines of the belly, 

Ichelperh the colicke,and driucth away ventoſitics or windines, 


D 
Oiir Engliſh women vie to put itin their running or renner for TT exſpecially in Cheſhire E 


(where I was borne)where the beſt cheeſe of this lande is made. = 

This great Saxitrage of A7athiolus deſcription is eſteemed moſt ſingular for curing of the ſtone, F 
and voiding of praueli, being boiled in wine , and the decoCtion drunke : it alſo cureththeague, 
eaſeth the ſtrangurie,helperh the diſcaſe Singultus,or yeoxing; finally,whatſocuer may be expected 
_ ofanyhetbe for the breaking of the ſtone, the ſame may be looked for inthis plane. 


Of Siler mountaine,or baſtarde Louage. (hap.4.o & 


*% The arſeription. | 
| He naturallplanrs of w_ , being now berter knowne then in times paſt, eſpecially among 
our Apothecaries,is called by them Siler montanzm , and Seſe/eos : this plant they haue rerai- 
ned to very good purpoſe and conſideration; but the errour of the naine hath canſed mm 
0 


82 THE | SECOND BOOKE OF.THE 

of our latewriters toerre,andto ſuppoſe that Siley montanum,called in ſhops Seſeleos,vasno other 
than Seſelt Maſilienſnu of Digſcorides . But this planr containeth in his ſubſtance much more cri. 
monie,ſharpneſſe,and efficacie in working,than any of the plants called Seſelzes, It hath ſtalkes lite 
Ferula, two cubites high, The roote ſmelleth like! Zj2u#icwm : the leaues are very much cut or dini- 
ded,like the leaues of Fennell or Seſe/; Maſilienſe, and broder than the leaues of Pencedenum. Ar 
thetop of the ſtalkes growe ſpokie tufts like Angelica, which bring foorth a long and leafic ſeede 
like Cumine, of a pale colour; in taſte ſeeming as though it were condited with ſugar, but withall 
ſomewhart ſharpe,and ſharper than Seſel; pratenſe, | ; 


| | % The deſcription, 

| | Thereis a ſecond Linde of Siler, which Peng 
| and ZQbel ſer foorth vnder the title of Seſeli 
| grate 7 Atwpicndien which Dodonexs in his 
laſt edition callerh Siler praterſe alteram, that is 
[in ſhew very like the former. the ſtalks thereof 
| gr2weto the height of twocubitrs, but his leaues 
-| are ſomewhat broader and blacker : there arc not 
if way leaues growing vpon the ſtalk, and they 


| areleſſe dinided than the fortmer,and are of little 
{Auour. The ſeedeis ſmaller than the former,and 
\ſauoring very little or nothing. The roote is 
| blacke without,and white within,diuiding it ſelfe 
| into ſundrie diviſions, | | 
SO ES >, - 
| | Irgrowethof it ſelfe in Liguria, not farfrom 
; Genua in the craggy mountaines,and in the gar- 
i deas of diligent herbariſts, | 
| % The time. $4 
| | Theſeplants do flower from Iune tothe ende 


[of Augult. 
8 þ *% The names. 


| | Ir is called commonly Siler montanwn : in 
[French and Dutch by a corrupt name Ser-MHon- 
| #477: in divers ſhops Seſe/eos, but vntruly: for it is 
{not Seſe/z, nor akinde thereof : in Engliſh Siler 
[/mounraine after the Latine name, and baſtarde 
| Louage. | 
||| | _\*+Thenetwe. 

This plant with his ſeedcis|hot and dry in the third degree. 
| {| '__ *Thevertues. ul 

The ſecdes of Siler drunke with Wormewoodwine,or wine wherein Wormwood hath beene 
ſodden, mooueth womens diſeaſes in great abupdance : cureth the ſuffocation and ſtrangling of 
the matrix,and cauſeth itto rechyne vntorhe naturall place againe, 

The roote ſtamped with F | 


Y 


hony, and applied or put into old fores,doth cure them and coucr bare 

and naked bones with fleſhy, | FH: | i: 

C Being drunke it prouoketh/vrine,caſerh the paites of the guts or entrailes proceeding of cruditic 
ot rawneſſe,it helpeth concoftion,conſumeth winde,and (welling of the ſtomacke. ; 

D Theroote hath the ſame vertue of operation,but not ſo effectuall,as nor being ſo hot and dric, 


Of Harts woort,or Seſeli. (hap.407.' 

| i ' _ #* Thekyndes. j | ; 
Tſeoridesmaketh three ſortes of Seſe/;, Sife/r of Marſiles, of Peloponneſus,and that of Ac thioe . 

p1a being a ſhrubbie or hedge plaar,wherof weiwill intreare 11 the laſt part of this our hiſtorie, 


The later writers haue found moic As ſhail be ſhewed in this preſcntchaprer, Sefel 
LD ; | L "TE | ger 


, 
fl 


HISTORIE"OF| PLANTS. ' © 895 
Se ſels Peloponne ſiacum. | | 5 x] 
Harts woort of Peloponneſus. % The deſcription. | 
| off Eſeliof Peloponneſus orof Greeee, hath a 
chicke great roote, white within and blacke 
without,of the bignes of a Parinep,growing 
ſtraight downe,and deepe in the ground like that 
of Ferula,ofa good {mell and ſharpe in raſte;trom 
which riſeth vp an vpright ſtalke rwo cubitrs 
high ;zwhereupon doth grow heere and there art 
certaine ſpaces one _ leafe ateuery ioint,con- 
ſiſting of many ſmall iagged leaues ſet vpon a 
rough and hairie middle nib, very much curled, 
hairy,& ful of wrinckles,greater then thoſe leaucs 
of anlechs at the top of the ſtalke do ſtande 
great tufts or ſpokie rundles of yellowe flowers 
like thoſe of Dill, after which followecrh the ſeed 
ſomewhat flat and broade, ofa darke yellowe co- 
lour and pleaſant ſmell, in ſhape like thoſe of Fe- 
rula,or the Parlnep ſeede}./ 
k 1 * Theplace. 1 
It groweth in rough and warteriſh mquntaines , 
indiuers places of Greece ,Morea,and the mounc 
Ida :it is a ſtranger in Englande, F 32- 


7 TE 

n 5 s Ty MIS 
TAI 
41 + b 


o 


* The time. 
It flowreth and flouriſheth in the ſommer 
months. 6 
| + The names. = 


Itiscalled Seſeit Peleponneſas, taken from the 
| natiue ſoile , divers alſo call it Sphagnon, and of 
ſome Feniculum tortuofum,or writhed Fennell, in ſhops Seſeleos : in Engliſh Hartwoort of Pelopon- 
neſus,or of Greece, Pl. 7; a | | 
% The temperature. | | 
Both roote,leaues and ſecdes are hot and drie in the ſecond degree,and of thinne parts, 
= 26 | * Thevertues. _ ad | 
| . Itprovoketh vrinezand he'perh the ſtrangurie , bringeth downe the ficknes and Cead birth : it A 
oy the cough and ſhortnes of breath, the ſuffocation of the mother, and helpeth the falling 
ckneſle, | ix | | | 
The ſeede drunke with wine conco@eth rawe humours,taketh away the griping and torments of B 
. the belly and helperh the ague as Droſcorides faith. dg GR DOT Ra 
The wiceof the leaues is giuen to goates and orher cattleto drinke : thatthey may the ſooner be C, 
. Celivered of their yoong ones : as thelame author reporteth. i of 20 


Of Seſelios,or Harte woorts of Candie. Chap 4.08. 


| o | * The deſeription. [4 tes 

His plant being the Se/e/; of Candie, and in times paſt notelſewhere tobe found tooke his 

ſurname of that place where it was firſt found, but now adajes it 15 tobe ſeene in thecorne 

hcldes abour Narbon in Fraunce, from whence I hadſeedes, which proſper wellin wy gar- 
den. This is but an annual /plant,and increaſeth from yeere toyecreby his owne ſowing. The ek | 
grove at the firſt euen with the ground, ſomewhat hairie, of an overworne greene colour, inſhape 
much Jike vnto Gheruill, but thicker; among which riſerth vp an hairie rough ſtalke, of the height 
ot a cubite, bearing at the rop ſpokie tuftes with white flowers; which being vaded.there followerh 
ronnd and flat ſeede, compaſled and cunningly wreached about the edges like a ring, The feede is 
flatlike the other, ioyned two togither in one, as you way ſec in the ſeede of Ferula or Angelica, in 
ſhape like a round targer,in taſte like 3f \yrrhis. Mathiolis Gid greatly miſtake this plane, © 

£4 | Seſell 


2 
A 


894 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| n it \ 
Sefeli Creticum. ® 


Seleteos of Candie, | | S * Thedeſeripticn, 

ths | { There is akinde of Seſe/rCreticum,called alſy Ty. 
1a +, $18 dyhen , and is very hike vnto the former, ſauing that 
his.lcaucs are more like vnto common Parſneps than 
Cheruill, and theſfeede hath no ſuch wreathed rins 
about the edges as the former. | 1 

There is likewiſe akinde of Seſel; thathath a rov 
as big as awanis arme,cſpecially if the plant be olde; 

but the new and ypong plants beare rootes an inch 
thicke , with ſome knobs and tuberous ſprowres,, 

abqut the lower part ;therootejs thicke, rough, and 

coyered ouer with a thicke barke , the ſubſtance 

whereof is firſt gummie, afterward ſhatpe, and as it 

weiefull of ſpartle; from the vpperpart of the roote 

praceede many knobs or thicke ſwelling rootes, our 

of 'which there iſlueth great and large wings or 

branches of leaues, ſome whereof are notched and 

dentedround about, growing vntoone fide or rib of 

the leafe, ſtanding allo one oppoſite vnrto another, 

of a darke anddelaiedgreene colour, and ſomewhat 

ſhining aboue, bur dernearbiof a grayiſh or Aſhe 

color:from amongſt theſe leaues there ariſcth a ſtra- 

ked or guttered Nalke,a cubire and a halfe high,ſom- 

times an inch thicke, having many iointes or knees, 

and many branches growing about them,and vpon 

each joint leſſer branches of Jeaues. Atthe top of 

theſtalkes, and vpper endes of the branches growe 

licthe cups or bottles of pale flowetsz which being 

| vaded,there commeth in place a ſcede,which is very 

| | f like. Ser montanun. » 

There is alſo a kinde of Seſe/z, which Pexa ſcrterh foorth for the firſt kinde of Daucws, whereof I 
rake it to be a kinde, growing euery where inthe paſtures about London, that hath large leaues, 
growing for a time cuen with the earth,and ſpred thereupon, and diuided into many parts,in maner 
almoſt like rothe former for the moſt part in all things, in the round ſpokie tuftes or vmbles , bea- 
ring ſtiffe and faire white flowers in ſhape like them of Cinkfoile, in ſmell like SexbucmorEider, 
When the flower is vaded, there commeth in place a yellow guttered ſeede, of a fpicie and very 
hot taſte. The roote is thicke and blacke without,which rotteth and peritheth in the ground (as we 
may ſee in many gummie or Ferulous plants ) after it hath ſeeded, neither will it Bower betore the 
ſecond or third yeere after it is ſowen, 6 | 


There is likewiſe a kinde of Se/e/zcalled Seed; Afaſitienſe, which hath leaues very much clouen 
or cut and finely iagged,very much like vnto the leaues of fweete Fennell,greater and rhicker than 
the common Fennell. The ſtalke grewerh to the! height of three cubites, having knorcrie 1ointes, 
as it were knees; bearing ar the top thereof tuftes like vnto Dill,and ſeede ſomewhar long andcor- 
nered, of a ſharpe and buting taſte, The roote is long and thicke like vntothe great Saxitrage, Of 2 
pleafant ſmell and ſbarpe1n raſte. | [1 

There is another Sejelrof Maſfilia, which hathllarge and great leaves like vnto Ferula, andnot 
much vnlike Siler montanwm : among which riſe vp {iilkes tower cubites high, bearing at the rop 
{pokie ruftes like vnto the laſt before rehearſed, of a good {auour, The roote is like vnto the tormer 
inſhape,jubſtance,and ſauour,bur rhat it is greater. 
| -1| | "*bThephed.  «-. | 


- 


Theſe plants are ſtrangers in England notwithſtanding L haue them in wy garden. 
 _t% Theta. | 
They flower and flouriſh in September, o 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


| | '% The nones. 
Their names haute beene toughed in their ſeuerall deſcriptions, 
| The —_— and vertues, 
Their temperature and faculties in working ate referred to the other Seſe/eos; 


Of Spignell, Spicknel, or AM ewe. (4p. 409. 


Mewn, 5 ll 
Spignell. | | %* 7 he deſcription. — + 


7. 
FE 
- 


Pignell hath ſtalkes riſing vp to the height 
of a cubite and an halte , beſet with leaues 
reſembling Fennel or Dill bur thicker,more 
buſhie,and more finely iagges; and at rhe top of 
the ſtalkes do growe ſpokietutts like vnto-Djll. 
The roores are thicke and full of an oleous ſub+ 
ſtance,fmelling well,and chafing or heating the 
toong of a reaſonable good ſauour., | 
There is a baſtarde kinde of Spignelllike vn- 
ro the former, ſauing that the leaues are not fo - 
finely cut or jagged: the flowers are tufred'more 
thicker then the former: the rootes are manic, 
' thicke,and full of fappe. _ | . 
| * The place. ON 
Mewe,or Meon,groweth in VWeſtmerland,at 
a place called Round-thwait berwixt Aplebie 
| and Kendall,inthe pariſh of Orton, i 
; Baſtarde Mewe , or Meam, groweth in the 
waſte mountaines of Italy,and the Alpes,and(as 
it hath becene tolde me) vpon Saint Vincents 
rocke by Briſtowe , where I ſpent two daies to 
ſecke it, butir was not my hap tofinde it, there- 
fore I make ſome doubr of the truth thereof. 
% The time. | 
. Theſe herbes do flower in Iune and Iuly,and 
yeelde their ſeede in Augult, 
| | % The names. | . 

Itis called ofthe Grzcians »©e, or wier, likewiſe of the Latines Mewn : oftheIralians eo: in 
Apulia,as Mathiolus declareth,it is called !mperatrix : in diuers places of Spaine Siftra, in others 
mel: in high Dutch Bierewurt3t in French Sffre : Ruclu faith that it is nained in France 
CAner hun toytuoſwr, and ſylueſtre,or writhed Dill,and wilde Dill : alſo ir is called in Englith Spig- 
nellr Spicknell,of ſome Mewe,or Baldmony,and Bearewoort. 

The (ſecond may be called baſtard Baldmony,or baſtard Spicknell. | 

; | * The temperature. 


| Theſe herbes eſpecially the rootes of right Meon,is hotin the thirde degree, and drie inthe {c- 
cond. = | 


F 


$ 


|= 94 S% The vertues. | EI 
The rootes of Meon,or Baldmony boiled in water and drunke , _— openerh the ſtoppings A 
of the kidneies and bladder,proucke vrinc and bodily luſt,caſe.nd helpe the ſtrangurie, and con- 
fumeth all windines and belchings of the ſtomacke, | | 
The ſame taken with honie doth appeaſe the griefe of the belly, and is excellent againſt all Ca- B 
tarrhes,rhennes, and aches of ioints,as alſo any phlegme falling vpon the lungs. 
lf the ſame be laide plaiſterwiſe vpon the bellies of children,it maketh them to piſſe well, . C 
| ; They . 


3% THE SECOND: BOOKE, OF THE 

ÞD Theyclenſe theentrailes,anddeliuereth them of obſtrufions or ſtoppings: they pr of 
driue foorth the ſtone, and bring downe the flowers: bur if they be 04s _ Oe 5 296 
they cauſe the headach; for ſeeing they haue in them more heate then drines, hy FH, 


| | they carrie to th 
- headraw moiſture and windy hcate,as Galen ſaith. | | | _ 


Of Horeſlrange,or Sulpburwoort. Chap. 410. 


i Pencedannm. . | *g / 2 Pearedenwm mains. 
 Sulphurwoorr. | [j |. Great Sulphurwoorr, |. 
RD AE TD, "ny 1 1 DVD. WY GL. we Gn. 
SV NW {78 [| "SR? j EN i Y/ Py = 
SES ex). © [|  J624 | | WY [EA PE 


= 


SUBS; I 

# ll Ni, WW k ' 

wt, WAY 

KORS \ 

: | \ N | (} 
WAN 


Ny | Q \\l \ j\ 
y hk oY 
JENA 


by} 
NN ' 
WAY 


\ \ 
A. 


- 
: 
t 


v2 


—— F 


4 4 


i P; TY / Ul! T4 x L | \ il Will / 
VAL \ 10 | > WIYK 4 | 
44/48 d) Rt V\ ; 


_ * — ——— ——— 
—— 


| | \  %The deſcription. | 
I Vlphurwoort or Hogs Fennel! hath a ſtiffe and hard ſtalke full of knees or knots,beſet with 
0 leaues like vnto Fennell, bur greater,comming neerer ynto Ferula, or rather like the leaues 
of wilde Pine trec;z and atthe cop of the ſtalkes round ſpokie tuftes full of little yellow flow- 
ers,which do turne into broad browne ſecede. The roote is thicke and long; I haue digged vp rootes 
thereof as big as a mans thigh, blacke without, and white withinz ofaſtrong and greeuous fmell, 
and full of yellow ſap or li uor, which quickly waxeth hard or drie, ſmellingnot much vnlike Buim- 
None,called Su{phar, which hath induced fome to call it Sulphurwoort ; having alſo atthe top to- 
ward the vpper face of the earth, a certaine buſh of haire, of a browne colour, among which the 


leaues and ſtalkes do ſpring foorth. = | | 
2 Theſecondkindeof Percedamon or Hogs Fennell, is very like vnto the former, ſauing that the 
leaues be like Ferula :rhe rootes are nothing fo great as the former, but all the reſt of the plant doth 
far exceedethe other in greatneſſe,' BY BREA art nem Ty 
There is another kinde of Pexc-4lanuy,or Hogs Fennell, which Pens found vpon Saint Vincents 
rocke by Briſtow, whoſe piEture he hath ſer foorth in his Adver(ar;e, which that famous Engliſh 
Phiſitionoflare memorie D.Tarner found there alſo, ſupp ofing irto be the right and true Prauceds- 
mnyn whereof nodonbritisakinde : it growethinot aboue a foore high, and 1s in ſhape and leaues 
like the right Peacedanon but theybeſhorter and lefler,growing ſomewhar lik the wiithed Fennell 


OL. 


5 


- HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 897 


of Maſlilia,but the branches are more largely wrichzd,and thelleaues are of the colour of the bran- 
ches,which arc of a pzle greene colour. Arthe top of the branches groweſmallwhite ruftes,hauing 
ſvede like Dill,but ſhorter and lenderer, of a' good raſte, ſomewhat ſharpe. The toore is thicker 
than the ſmalneſle of the herbe will well beare; Among the people abour Briſtowe, and therocke 
aforeſaid,rhis hath beene thought to be good to cate, | | | 
| % The place, b, | S -| 
The firſt kinde of Peacedanwn, or Hogs Fennell, growerh very plentifully on the ſouth fide of a 
wood belonging to Waltham.at the Naſe in Eſſex by the high way (ide, alſo at VWhitſtable in Kent 
in amedow neere to the ſea ſide , ſometime belonging to Sir Henrie Crifþe, and adioiningrto his 
houſe there. | 
Irgrowerh alſo [in great plentic at Feuerſham in Kent, neere vnto the haven vpon the bankes 


thercof,and the medowes adioining. $i | | 
The ſecond kinde growettr vpon the ſea coaſts of Monrpelker in Fraunce, andin the coaſtes of 


Italic, | 
% The time. 
Theſe plants do flower in Iune,July and Auguſt, 
| - *% T he names. 


The Grecians call it 74xidr%;: the Latines in like manner Pexcedenos, and alſo P inaFelkm : moſt 
ofthe ſhops ; andllikewife'the common people name it Feniculon Poreinun : of divers Statarre : 
of the Prophets <a% Suiwwr, thatistolay, agood Angellor ghoſt : in high Dutch DHarſtrang, 
Schweffclwurkel, Sewfenckel 2 in l[calian and French Pexcedavo: in Spaniſh Herbatum : in En- 
gliſh Horeltrange, and Horeſtrong, Sow Fennell, or Hogs Fennell, Sulpharwoott, or Brimſtone 
woort.Itis called Peucedanum,and Pineftethon,ofthe Greek and Latine words -w/xa,and Pinus. 

| | * The temperature. | 2 

Theſe hetbes, eſpecially the yellow fap of the roote, is hotin the ſecond, and drie in the begin. 
ning of the third degree; - | | 

| TE ES | & The wvertnes, | | 

The yellow fap'of the roote of Hogs Fennell,or(as they call irin fome places of England) Hore- 4 
ſtrange,caken by it ſelfe, or with bitter Almonds and Rue,is good againſt the ſhortneſle of breth,ir 
afſwageth the gripingpaines of the belly, diffolueth arid driueth away ventofiric or windinefle of 

 theſtomacke,it waſteth the ſwelling of the miltor ſpleene, looſeth the belly gently, and purgeth by - 
fiegehothflegme and choler. Ws 

The fame taken in'manner aforeſaid, prouoketh vrine,caſeth the paine of thekidneies and blad- B 
der,cauſeth eafte deliverance of childe, and expelleth the ſecondine or afterbirth,and dead ehilde. 

The fap or juice of the root mixed withoile of Roſes and vineger, and appliedgcurerhthepallic, C 
crampes,contra tion or drawing togither of ſinews,8 all old cold diſeaſes, eſpecially the Sciatica. 

Itis viedwith good ſucceſle againſt the rupture or burſtings in yoong children, and is very good D 
tobe applicd vnto the nauels of children that ſtand out ouermuch. | (= 

thedecoQionof the roote drunke is of like vertue vnto the inice,but not altogither fo cffefuall E 
againſt the foreſaijd diſeaſes. | PE fs | 

Theroote' dried aid made'into powder , doth mundific and clenſe olde ſtinking and corrupt F. 
ſores and vIcers,and healeth them iralſo draweth forth the corrupt and rotten bones (that hinder 
the ſame from healing)and drawerh foorth ſplinters,and other chings fixed in the eſh, © , ©, *-- 

The faid powder or iuice of the roote mixed with oile of Roſes ,cauferh one to ſweare if thebo- G 
dy be annointed/ therewith ; and therefore good to beput intothe ynftion, or ointmene forthe 
French diſeaſe, | © *- Rog 8 5 CR ng 

The congealedliquor tempered with oile ofRoſes & applied to the head,after the manner ofan H 
ointment,is good tor them that hane the lethargic; that are frantike; that haye diffinesin the head, 
that are troubled with the falling ficknes,that Haue the palſie, that are vexed with conuulfions and 
cramps,and generallyiris a remedy.for all infirmities of the {inewes, with vineger and oile as Dyofe 
corides teacheth, HE 4 : h 

Theſame being ſinelt vnto,reuiueth and calleth them againe that be ſtrangled with the mother, I 
andthat lie in a dead fleepe. [0 94627 OY POET ft Ml <2 2-5 BY 

—_ areare egge;ithelpeth the cough and difficultfe of breathing, gripings, andwin- K ' 
dines,which,as Galexadderh ,Proceedeth from the —_— is clammines ofhumours, ' © . 
| a. F237 . It 


— 


338 THE SECOND|BOOKE OF THE 
LM ently,ir diminiſheththe ſpleene,bycurting, digeſting, and making thinne hunzc,; 

P hes iris conſicti cage trauaile,and openerh the marrix., F{| S I | 
M . _ peece ofthe roote holdeninthe mouth, is apreſent remedic againſt the ſuffocation of 


x 


Of herbe Ferula,or Fennell Giant. (jhap.qn. 
EST + The hide | $828 


Ioſeorides maketh mention ofa Feral, out of which is gathered the Gum Segapene, & alſo he 

declareth thatthe Gums Ga/benwr.and Ammonizcwmn arc liquors of this herb Feral/a-butwhar 
difference there is in the liquors , according to the climate or countrey whete it groweth,, he doth 
not ſet downe ; for it may be that out of one kinde of Feral ſundry iuices may be gathered , that is 
to ſay, accordingto the diuerſitic of countries where they grow,as we haue ſaide: foras Laſer, the 
juice of Laſerwoortthat groweth in Cyrene,doth differ from that liquor which growerh in Media, 
and Syria: ſoitis likely that the herb Fera4a doth bring forth in Media Sagapenwm, in Cyrene 4m. 
moniacum,and in Syria Galbanuwm, Theophraſtus ſaith,that the herbe Fers/a1s diuided into mo kinds . 


F , 


and he calleth one great, by che name of Ferals,and another lirt]e,by the name Ferulago, 


| \ % Thedtſcription. 
| [JD Eruls or _ Gare, hath very great 
| |, F* &largeleauesofa green colour, cut 
| 1} andi like thoſepf Fennell, fpreading 
' themaſelues abroad like wings : among which r1- 
| | ſerthvpa greathollow ſtalke, ſomwhat reddiſh 
_ | ontharſidenext the ſunne, divided intocertain 
| ſpaces, with joints orknees like thoſe of Hem- 
| lockes or Kexes, of the bignes of a mans arme 
| | inthe wreſt, of the heightof fowerorfive cu- 
\ | bites where ir groweth naturally, asinlralic, 
: Greece,and other hot countries: notwithſtan- 
| | dingithatharrained tothe height of 14. or 15. 
| | foote inmy garden; and likewiſe groweth fairer 
| , and greater then from whence it came, as 
\ ; Jt fareth with other plants that come hither 
| | from hot regions; as for example , our great 
| ' Artichock,which firſ was brought out of Italic 
| | IntoEngland,jis become (by reaſon ofthe great 
| { moiſture which our countrey is ſubicct vnto) 
| greazer,, and berter then thoſe of Italy, inſo- 
| | much that diuers Italians haue ſent for ſome 
| | plants of our Artichockes, deeming them 
+ | to beof another kinde z neuertheleſſein Iralic 
* | theyare ſmall anddry,as they were before; cuen 
| | foithapneth vnto this Feral, as wehaue ſaid. _ 
| | This foreſaid ſtalke dividerh ir ſelfe towarde the 
; . top intodiuers other ſmaller branches, wheron 
| | are ſer the like leaues that growe next the 
; nouns , bur much leſſer: on the top of the 
| | branchesatthefirit budding of the flowers, ap- 


peere certaine bundles incloſedin | inne skins,like the yolke of an egge, which divers call Corcalum 
.. Ferwe,or the little Hart of Feralawhich being brought to maruritic, openeth it ſelfe into an open 
cuftor ymblc like that of Dill, of a yellowiſh colour: after w hich come che ſeede , in colour and 


faſhion 


'. | 


| 1 HISTORITE OF. PLANTS. 899 
ſhion like thoſe of the Parſnep but longerand greater, alwaies growing two togither fo cloſel 
wg hat it canhot be diſcerned wh re then one ſcede vnril they bedinjded: the roote js wn; 
rie thicke and great”, full afa cercai trnnie niice, rharfloweth foorth the roote being bruſed, 
broken or cut, which being dried orhardned js that Gum which is called S2gzpramm, andin ſhops 
Ser wy .: 


10M... | | 
; There is likewiſe anothex.ſmaller Fers/z,likevnro theformer in cagh reſpeR fajing it is altogi- 
ther kcſſer : the roote likewiſe bein wounded,yeelderh foorth a {ap or juice, which whenit is har. 
ned is called Ga/banwm : ofthe Aſlyrians Metoprum. | + 
 Thaue likewiſe anothes fort ſeneme from Paris, with this title, Ferula n/gre , which profpereth 


exceeding wellin my garden,bur difference I cannor finde any fromthe former, ſauing the leaues 
are of a more blacke or {wart colour, = FT 


F FC *% The fat | | 
Theſe planes are not growing wilde in England ;1 hauethem all in my garden. | 
[ir * The time; A. 4 ry. MF Ig 
They flowerin Iune and Tuly,they perfect their teedein September, not long after the ſtalk with 
his leauesperiſh; rhe roereremaineth freſh and greeneall winter, R 
; | w% The names. BY EL ESE, nd 
The firſt is called in Greeke N-435: in Latine Feru/s : in ltalian Ferola : in Spaniſh Cananbeia :in 
Engliſh herbe Ferula, and Fennell Giant. | | 
| 4 * The temperature. | 
Theſe plants with their Gums arc hot in the chirde degree,and dric inthe ſecond. 
2s AT | | * 7 hewertness > ] [out 
Thepith or marrowe called Corcutum Fernle, 25 Gz/enteacheth,, is of an aſtringent or binding A 
quality,and therefore good forthemthar ſpet blond, and that are troubled withrrhe flixe, * +. 
Droſeor 31es aith,rhat being pur into the noſthrils ir ſtajeth bleeding,andis giuen in wine tgxhoſc B 
that are bitten with vipers. | | oc; I ICs 
|  lrisreportedro be eaten in Apuliaroſted in the embers, firſt wrapped in leaues or in old cloves, C 
whh pepper and ſalg, which as they fay, is a,plcaſant fweete foode, that ſtirreth vp luſt as they * 


report. | BF | "NS 
The ſecede doth heare and attenuate or wake thinne ; it is a remedie againſt coldefirs of an ague, D 


by procuring {weare,being mixed with oile,and the body aunoinred qe WO 24 
Adramot the juice of Ferale,which beareth Sagapenws, purgeth eps rough and ſlimic hu- E 
mours,and all. gtofſe legmeand choler: avd is alſo good againſt allbld and colde diſcaſes , which 
are hard to be cured; itpurgeth the braine , and is very good againſt all diſeaſes of the head,againſt 
the Apoplexie and Epileplie. $: | EB 
| Being raken in chef 
linewes. | | 
Itis good againſt the ſhortnes of breath, the colde and long cough, the paine in the fide and G 
breſt, for igmundificth and clenſeth the breſt from all cold flegmegand cheumatike humors. 
Sagepenipminfulcd,or ſteeped in vineger allnight,and pred vpon leather orcloth,ſcattereth,diſ- H 
ſoluerh,and driucth away all hard and colde fwellings,tumors, botches,and harde lumpes growing 
about the ioinrs or elſe where, andis excellent good to be put into or mingled withall omunents 
oremplaiſters,which are made to mollifie and ſofren, k 
The iuice of 'Ferala Gator, called Ga/banwmw, drunke in wine with a lictle Myrrhe, is good I 
againſt all venome or poiſon that hath beene taken inwardly, or ſhot into the bodie with venemous 
darts,quarrels,or arrowes. | : EE 
xa womens painfull.crauell, if they do take thereof ina cup of wine the quantitic of a 


ame maner itis good againſt cramps, pallies, ſhrinkings, and paines of the F 


The perfume of Ga/bamwn, helpeth women thar are grieued with the riſing of the mother,andis L 
good for thofethar haue the falling ſicknes. THEY bs 

Galbamen ſoftneth,mollifieth,and draweth foorth thornes, ſplinters,or broken bones, and con- M 
ſumerh colde and flegmatike humours,ſeruingin ſundrie ointments and implaiſters,for the vic of 
Chicurgerie,and hath the ſame Phiſicall verwues,thatare attributed ynto S:gapenwm. 


rg Te 0 


— 


THE SECOND |BOOKE!OF: THE 


Of Dropmoort, or Fylipendula,,” Chap.412.' * 
' | + The hindes. | Ih | 2g} lifts 
T Here be diuers forts of Dropwoorts, ſome of the champion orferiill aftu 


i 


| & moiſt anddankiſh grounds and ſome of the water, * '** * Jil. 


þ - 


* The deſeription 


I He firſt kinde of Filipendula hath leaues growing and ſpred abroadlike feathers, ech leafe | 
conliſting of ſundry {mall leaues, dentetd gr fnipr rotinde about the edges, growing to the 
; Rtalkebya fmallandflender ſtemme; theſe leaues refemble'wilde Tanſic or Burnet, bur 
thattheybe longer and thicker,ſet like feathers 4s is aforeſaid : among theſetiſe vp ſtalks a cubite & 
an halte high,at the crop wherof grow many faire white flowers.cach ſmall flower conſiſting of fixe 
ſlender leaues,like a little ſtarre,buſhing togither in a tuft like the lowers 6f Meadfiveerte, of a foft 
ſweer ſmell: the ſeed is ſmal and groweth togither like a button : the roots are ſmal and blacke,wher- 
upon depend many little kngps or blacke pellets,much like the rootes of the female Peonie, ſaving 
thar they be a great deale fyialler. £5810 WUkd 14 


n * : 


2 Thelſecondkinde of Filipendula, calledof Pexein his Obſeruations Oenenthe ſuc P hilipendwla 
alter amontana, is neither at this day very well kyowne,neither did the old writers heeretofore once 
write or ſpeake of it: but Pea that ain Hetþariſt founde it growing naturally in Narbone n_ 
Fraunce neere vnto. Veganjum,on'the top ofthe high hils called Paradiſas Der,and neere vnto the 
mounraine Calcaris :this rare plant hath many knobbic long rootes,in ſhape like to Aſphodeims lu- 
#ex4,07 rather like the rootes of Corradl, that is, wilde Aſparagus: from whichriſeth vp a _ a 

| [4 | Si L | , | o0te 


' {HISTORIE OF PLANTS. gor- 


foote high and more, which1is thicke,round,and channeled, beſet full of leaues like thoſe of com- 
mon Filipend u!a,bur they be not {o thicke ſer,or winged,bur more like vnto the leaues of a Thiſtle, 
conſiſting of ſundry {mal leaues in faſhion like to Coroneo «s Ruelly, that is, Rucllizes his Bucks horne: 
roundeabour the top ofthe ſtalke there grower avery faire rufrof white flowers , refembling fine 
ſmall hoods, growing cloſe and thicke togither , likerhe flowers of P culayss, that is, red Rartell, 
called of Caro'ms Cluſines _Alectorolophos whereof he maketh thi plant a kinde, butin my iudgement 
and opinion rather like Cynoſorchis,a kinde of Satyrion, | | 


Fulipendul | | eancuſtifolias 4 FilipendulaCicut4 facte, 
? Narrowleated Dropwoort, | | Homlocke Dropwoort. 


* 
LM F. 
f 4 | 
Do : ” 
* 2 p 
y | 4 I P 
** bs 4 
LS P 4 * 
G F , V+ * 
WAN 7? 
W 
: 


- 
C%\ Mo 


+ The dferigtion. Y 


, 


Va eas bd wn wen” Non fel git al 20] ak CVA DUES IEOGKIoS Iwo; 
3 Thareis anotherkindof Filipendula ſet forth vndet.thename.of Oenanthe, that hath niany tu- 


» 


x anda er one of, thoſe knobs hath a certaine ſtrigg or 
4 


berous & thiKke rootes like the malePelonie, one « © KNODS 12K A EETTAINC RTLAG OT 
fibre antiexed tHerets; from wheneeanieth a creſttdſtalke two foore high, diuiding it ſelfe toward 
the top into ſundry armes or branches z, fram the. 0 lowe. place 0 boſome of. euc - Tot _ 
. ofwhith do grolv thafe Branchesthie keauesdo als proceed, very much cutor rd one's 
every ſinall leate for rhe moſt parr RO the forkes of the herbe called HarrShorne, or licks 
horne: at the top of thoſe branches, come ootth ip , le rundles of-whire lowers, faſhioned bike 


aloe? ©1557 TS 


. : gp | «XR 7) |= een 140 et {1 6 
4 Thefourthkihdeof Biliperduls is 3tfifange a plant3sthe former , eſpecially with vs heere in 
S t Lt or 

groweth , whetelntoih Teaures its hot vnlike , bur more Feels apr ' 2] th: many plumed 
» that is Hon | 

two cures lwgh z comming from 2 roote WK KCCCc {3 | (C4,C LLLEC | 

Aſlthodelis abu. Theſe nals are periianent and Tafting,ten r,and in taſte ſharpe and vnpleafant, 

The ſpokie rufts or nindlcs growing at the top are like Cicuta,yea it much referablech Homlocke in 


England;exceptin the watery p agg aps riltes in ; where, Paludepizzu, or watcr Smalizge 
branche\\a'navghrie faiidtr, atidincolour and ſhape like Czru lomlocke. The ſtalkes are 
rom 2 roote, which exccedin yupalep ieth it {cle ;nto bulbes, like 

L1l 3 propertic 


902. Tur: SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


propertie and cuill qualitics, ſodo they affirme that haue prooued and lecne the experience of 
.. For being raken in ſharpe ſawces;it doth well gh poiſon, and thoſe which eare of it haue been. 
made giddic in their heads, waxingſFery pale jſtaggenvg and reeling | like drunken men. Beware ang 
take good keede of this and tuch like fimples3|torthere is no Plufirion that will giue it: bic auſe 
there be many other excellent if ——; which God hath hyped Ry vs.for the preuer, ing 
and curing of diſeaſes, | | | | 


5 F ilipenduls apqebite, | [| ; | 
vw arcr dropwoort. i % The deſeript /0n, 
5 '5 The faft and laſt kinde of Filepeaduts, which 
' 3s the fourth according'to Mathio/ns his ac- 
| count, hath leaves like 1 water Smallage, which 
' Plimee callech Sylans, the leaues very Sh reſem- 
| blingthoſe of Lazer Cratew4z among which riſerh 
' vp a great an age deepely furrowedor - 
creſted, bearing at the top therot ſpokicor buſhic 
' rundles of white flowers. The rootes are compat 
of very many filaments or threds zamong which 
| cometoorthafew tuberous or knobby roots like ' 
| vato the ſecond kinde. | 
| * Theplace. 
| | Thefirſt growerh plentifully vpon ſtonie rocks 
. or mountaines, and rough places, and in fertill 
| paſtures. I found great plenty thercof growing in 
 'a fielde adioining to Sion houfe, ſomtime a Nun - 
 riencere London, on the ſide of a medow called 
| Sion Medow. 
| | Theſecond hathbeeoeſuſſiciaty Goda ofin 
the deſc:iprion. | 
': * Therhird growerh neere vnto brookes and ri- 
| uersſfides.The fourth groweth berween theplow- 
 edlands in the moiſt and wer furrowes of a fielde 
| belonging to Batterſey by London. Thefift grow- 
| (ethneere the ſides of rivers and water ſtreames, 
eſpecially neere the riuer of Thames or Tems, 
| abourthe Biſhop of Londons houſe at Fulham, 
| | ' and ſuch like places. | 
+ Thetime. | 
| Theſe plants do fonerf om WR tothe end of Lulie, 
| | the "*% be wones, © bipendale 
are common yeate ed F erdule. The fuſt is called of a—des; Mirep ws Pbuljpe 
of Wing Saxifra el and Adf:llc ola fylueſtre: of Plinie of in Tralian nor Spaniſh Fub- 


:in Engliſh Filipendula and Dropwoort, Water Philipendulais called Philigendulaagpatic, 


Oen ate autrcran Selaws Pliny. 414.3 | 
Arc li cks,is called of of code Wigs in ahh Hom- 
locke Filipendula. | uy | 
*T narure. 


Theſe kindes ofPhilipendils hi ind uk inthe third FP YD opening UE clenſing, andyet 
with a lire aſtriQtion or binding. All the kindes of Qenantheshave the lame facultie. 
idk '* Thevvertues, 6-0 + | 
The roote of common Philipenduta bailedin wine and drunken, is good, againſt all paines ofthe 
bladder, cauſerh one to make water, and breaketh the ſtone. wy lke Deefeorides hath written of 
Ocnanthe ;the roore, faith he,is good for chem that piſſe by 61.þ 0 
B Thepowder Wy rootes zof Phi BPng offen viedin meaze, Lak i a arſrom the fal- 
ling licknefic, | ! $1 [3 41/; . of 


| HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS. teat 903 | 
. Of Homlecks, or herbe B ennet. Chap.q1z. 


1 Cicuta. IP 2 Cicntalatifolia fatidiſima. _ 
Hemlocks, Broad a ſtinking Homlocks, 


\; RE "r 1/1 
\ | \ / ' | 


4 \ 


— 


bE- &* The deſcription. 
I y 2 He firſt kinde of Hemlocke hath a long ſtalke, five or ſixe foote nigh, 48 and hollow,full 
wit 


of toints like the ſtalkes of Fennell,of an herbic colour; powdere {mallred ſpots, al- 1 

moſt like the ſtems of Dragons, The leaues are great,thicke, and {mall cut or jagged like o 
the leaues of Cheruill,but much greater, and of a very ſtrong and vnpleafant ſauour, The flowets 
are white, growing by tuftes or ſpokie tops, which do change and turne into a white flat feede: the 
roote is ſhort,and ſomewhat hollow within. | | | E 
2 TheApothecaries in times paſt notknowing the right Sel; Peleponnenſe, have erroniouſly ta- 
ken this Crcuta latifalia for the me. The leaues whereof are broad, thicke,atid like vnto Crentaria, 
yet not the ſame they called it Seſel; Peloparnen ſe cum folio Cicute, the faculties whereof denic and 
refure that aſſertion and opinion,yea a 


| he plantirſelte, which being touched, yceldeth or brea- 
theth our a moſt virulent or lothſome ſmell: theſe things ſufficiently argue, that 1t is nota kinde of p , 
7% Seſelt,belides the reaſons following, Seſels hath' a reaſonable good ſauour inthe wholeplant, the | 
roote is bare and ſingle, without fibres like a Carrot: but Cicurahath nor onely alothſome mel], 
his rootes are great, thicke, andknobbie, like the rootes of Ayrrhis : the whole plant doth in a 
manner reſemble the leaues, ſtalkes and flowersof MHyrrhi odorata, whoſe ſmall white lowers do 
turnetrto long and crooked ſeedes,growingatthe top ofthe branches three cubites high, 7 
7 REN, * The place. | ; | | 
Common Hemlocks growerh plentifully rug. rowne wals and villages in ſhadowy places,and 
fat ſoiles neere ditches, = a34+3 9x8 | 
Rs | LM 4 | | Ihe - 


" 


9044 THE SECOND BOOKE OF. THE 
- The ſeconde groweth ypon mountaines and defargplaces, andis a ſtranper in Englande. 
haueplants re ou my garden, (ffs ct | | | 8 in ng = yet] 


They flouriſh and ſeedein September. | | 
| | * Thepones. 


Homlockes is called in Grecke :/verev :inLar ne Citata : in high Dutch Schirling: in low Dutch 


LA'F; 


Schirrlinck 2 in Spaniſh Cegutay Canahera: in French Crewe + in Engliſh Hemlocke, Homlocke 
Kexc,and herbe Bennet. | 7 1*41 | FOSF =. , 
The ſecondis called Ceuta latifolia,and Creutaria latifolia,and Seſeli Peloponnenſe quorundam «i 
Engliſh great Hemlocks,and ſtinking Homlock.! . Fe if f ” | 4 5 = 
PE, * Thetemperature. 


Galen ſaith , that Homlocke is extreme colde'm operation , cuen in the fourth degree of cold- 
neſle. | | | 1-3 | i” 0 
af | *%* The wertues. | 


A leisthereforea very raſh partto laie the leaues of Homlockes to the ſtones of yoong boies or 


virgins breſts,and by rhat meanes to keepe thoſe parts from growing great: for it doth not one! 
caſcly cauſe rhoſe members to pine away, buralſo hurterh the hart andliver being outwardly ap- 
plied; then muſt ir of neceſfitichutt more bein qojady raken ; forit is one of the deadly poiſons 
which killeth by his coldequalitie, as Droſcorides writeth,ſaying, Homlocke is a very euill,dan Ne- 
rous , hurtfull, and poiſonous herbe, infomuch chat whoſoeuer takerh of itinto his bodydicthre- 
medileſſe,except the partie drinke ſome wine thatis naturally hot , before the venome haue taken 
the hart , as Plinie ſaith :bur being drunke with wine the poiſon is with greater ſpeedecarried to 
the hart, by reaſon whereof it killeth preſently ; therefore not to be applied outwardly much eſſe 
taken into the body. | | Keg el | | 


B Thegreat Hemlocke doubtleſſeis not poſleſſed with any one good facultie, as appeereth by his 


lothſomeſmell,and other apparant ſignes, and therefore nor to be yſedin Phiſicke. 


$ >; 


Of wilde and water Homtocks. Chap.q14- 


% The kindes. Eo 


+ 


' Here be diuers ſorts of wilde Homlocks, two figures ſhall be ſet foorth vnts you, one of the 
. 4 Jand,another of the water, with the deſcription of moe. IP, p14 | 


% The deſcription. [if 

I His wilde kinde of Hemlocke hath a, thicke roughg#ote, from which riſe vp diuers 

ſiffe ſtalkes,hollowe,ſomewhar reddiſh roward the ſumne, iointed or kneed at certaine di- 

ſtances, from which ioints ſpring foorth long leaues very greene, andfinely minced oriag- 

edlike the common Cheruill: the flowers ſtande atthe tops Fit ſtalkes in ſrall okie vm- 
les: the ſeede fulloweth like thoſe of Parſley,but lefler: the whole plant is of anaughtie fmell. | 

2 Water Homlocks, which ZObelzus calleth Cirutaria paluſtris; Clu/aw and Dodenem Phellan- 


 drixw, tiſeth vp with a thicke, fat , and emprie hollowe ſtalke , full of knees andioints , creſted 


chamfered, or furrowed,ofa yellowiſh greenecþlour : the leaues ſhoote foorrh of the igints an 
branches like vnto wilde Homlocks, bur much thicker,fatrer,and oileous,very finely cut or iagged, 
almoſt like thoſe of the ſmalleſt 77/nagaor Spaniſh Toothpickes : the flowers ſtande on the top 
ofthe ſtalkes in ſmall whitiſh tuſts: the ſeede followerh blackiſh,of the bignes of Anile ſecede, and 
of a ſweete {auour : the rogte is thicke, and long within the water , very ſoft and render, with very 
many ſtcivgs faſtned thereto, [7 i wh FH 


x Cientaria 


S 


| | ' HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1 Cicataria tenuifolia. 2 Cicutaria paluſtris, 
Thinlenty) wilde Hemlocks. Wikle water 4 


| * The place, | 
The firſt eg Wy among ones rubbiſh, by the wals of cities and townes almoſt cuery where, 
The other groweth in the midſt of water ditches,andſtanding pooles,and ponds,in moſt places 
of England : it groweth very plentifullyinthe ditches by a cauſey as you go from Redreffe ro Det- 
forde neere London,and many other places. 


% The time. 
They flower ad flouriſh i in Tuly and Auguſt, '. - 
\. $$ The names, 
Thar i is not more ke laide of thenames,then is expreſſed in their ie $6 deſeipion. 
if t Thetemperature and vertues. 


Their temperature andfaculticsare anfwerabie to _ common Homlocke, which haneno oe 
in Phiſicke as we haue ſaid. 


ot Earip $60 Earth Coins, or Kipper A 


; 2 4 F | $ » - , 
* Thedeſeription, þ 5 fin oth! : YWYZ32351H "PE > 


Arth Nur, or Kipper Nut, called after L Obelinn, Naeuloteireftrihath ſmall even creſted 
ſtalkes,a fooreand ſamewhgrt more den nextthe'grounde!eaues hke 
.. thoſe of Parſley, and thoſe; thar: do higher lke thoſe of Dill : che whire flowers do 
ſtande onthe Wy of the ſtalks in{pokio t womens au tops 6f Dill, which turne mto limall ſeede, 
of a very good el.nor-wlikero:hols of Fennell;bue ſnaller+.the roote.ierounde, knobbed with 
certaine eminehces or bunchings outs browne without , white within, of a firme and ſolide ſub- 
AE of a taſte like the Cheſſenur ,or Cheſtnurghercof it rooke hivr name. | 


» 2 There 


: 
iy : 
- x : " g , 


- 


ts RE 9 2% 0 Ces 


WE 3». 29 ORG = EDT arte 


_ 
- it | 


906 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| EE NE =. L: 1 
2 Thereis alſo another Earth Nut, that hath ſtalks a foote high,wheron do grow iapped 
like thoſe of Engliſh Saxifrage,ofa bright grecne colour :the ya Rk Ke Ky Ow 
chesin ſmall ſpokie rufts,conſiſting oflittle whitiſh flowers,laide ouer with a waſh of light carnari- 
on: the roote1s like the other,bulbus faſhion with ſome fewe ſtrings hanging atthe botrome , of a 
goodapdpleaſant taſte, | | | of 125 WIT 


1 Bolbocaſt anon. | [if 2 Bolbocaſtanon altera Lon, 
Earth Nur. | || Great Nur. 


04's, br 
p 


Theſe herbes do growe in paſtures and Enki almoſt euery where: there is a field adioin- 
ing to Highgate,on the right {ide of themiddle of the village , couered ouer with rhe fame : and 
likewiſe inthenext fielde vnto the conduit heads by Maribone, neer the way that leadeth to Pad- 


dington by London,andin diuers otherplaces, | | 


| | *% Thetime. | | 
They flower in Tune andTuly: the ſeede commeth to perfeRtion afterwards, 
M ih Woh % The names. Ry OR 


_Mexander Trallianm bath made mention of Beaforgzrer in his 7. booke, reckoning it vp among 
thoſe kinds of meats or ſuſtenances,vhich be gopdfor ſuch as haue rotten lungs,of ſome it is called 
Agriocaſtanon. [2 08 T3} ek oy 

Gurwterius thought the worde wascotruptedjand that Balamocaſtanon ſhould be read, but this is 
as ſtrange a worde as Bolboceſtanon, which was derived of the forme of abulbe , and the raſtc of a 
Cheſlenurt : of fome Nuenla Terreſtris,orthe little Earth Nut: it is thought to be Puniam Droſcort- 
da of ſome,bur we thicke not ſo;of Door Twrzer Capios, yerthiete is another Hpres,being a kind 
of Tithymale : of Methiolus Oenantbe, making it a kinde of Flipendula :inhigh Durch Eerdnul3: 
in lowe Dutch Eertnotent the people of Sauoycall it Faxera#res : in Engliſh Earth Nuts , Kipper 


nuts,and Earth Cheſtnuts. 
Fg | 


if 


x | OW " . | | __—_—_— | | , 
HISTORIE OF | BLANTS. boy 
+ The temperatare. 


The roote ofBarch Nuts are moderately hot and WT mn binding : bur the ſeed is both hgt- 
' reranddricr, E) 
% The verrues. 

The ſeede openerh and provoketh viine,and ſo doth the roore likewiſe, 

The roote is good for thoſe thar ſpet and pile bloud, if the rootebe eaten rawe , of coſted! inthe a 
entbers. -- 

The Dutch people do vic tocate them boiled and buttered , aswe do Parſneps andCarrots, g 
which fo caten comfort the ſtomacke , and yeelde elckirifiticnt that is good tor the bladder and 
kidnetcs. 

There is a plaiſter made o the ſeedes Wn beddurycn towrite inthis placegwere 7 agg to C 
our hiſtoric. -- /: 


of Cumin. Chap.416. 
*'T he hindes,/ 
Dioſcerides maketh one kinde of the, garden or tame,andorhers wilde, 


Cuminun /atiuum Dieſeeridls | 
_ Gateand umin, | | |  * Thedeſcription. 


"He garden Curnin is a loweor aſchetbe, of | 
a footehigh: the ſtalke diuideth it ſelfe into 
diuers ſmall branches, whereon do grow lit. 
tle iagged leaues very finely cut Deo kncll parcels 
like thoſe of Fennell, bur more finely cur, ſhorter 
and leſſer :the ſpokic tufts groweat Ks ropof the 
branches and ſtalkes, of a darke purpliſh colour, 
after which come the ſeede, of aſtrong or rancke 
|  ſmell;and abiring taſte: therootei is lender,whieh 
| . periſhethwhenit hath veopgheti ſeece to fipe- 
neſle, 
* The he ice. 
Cumin is husbanded and ſowen in Italic and 
Spaine, and is very common in other hot conn- 


rries,a$1n AEchiopt AEgypr, Cilicia, andallthe 


lefler | 
Ic - x ro growe eſp Ily in purrified and 
hor ſoilss: Thaue {- rar 10 mba inmyegarden, 
where they haue brought foorth ripeſcede much 
a Or pon 


yond thi 


| * The time. 
kr is to boa raior che bins, ,q 
. ſhewer of raine preſently following doth much 


hinder the 
ws ik dan 
endofTuly, . 


ſprung vp in fixe, daies gr al the ſeedewas ripe in the 
| *% The names. ©.” | 

Itiscalled in Greek vs wiurer fueepr , Nat is , tame or garde Cumin, "pe it may differ from the 
wilde ones; it is namedin'Latine Cummmam: in ſhops C hk Darch Nennſche kymmel; 
n [ralian C 620 :in Spanifh Cominchos : in French Comm: inFEn Cumin, 


16 $6 Ht which 


The 


Ss Rwellras faith, "20 


} 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| * T he remperature. 
The ſeedeof garden Cumin, 25 Galen ſaith,is bt anddryinthe, thirde dye: Diofeorides ſaith, 


thatithath i in it alſo abinding qualitic. | 
+ The mertues. 


A The ſeedes of Cumin ſcattereth and breakerh all the windines of the Roach ,belly, guts, Ll 
watrix: it is good againſt the griping torments,gnawing,or fretting of the belly , nor one! y recei- 
uced inwardly bythe mourh\ but alſo in gliſters, ad outwardly applied tothe belly with wine and 


barly meale boiled cogither tothe forme ofa pulris. 
Being handled according to Art citherina Caraplaſine,pultis, & plaiſter,or boiledin wine and fo 


£ 
B applicd;rakerh away blaſtings, ſwellings of the cots, or genitors: ir conſumerth windytwellings in 


the ioints,and (uch like, _ 
Being raken in a ſupping broth,i jit is good for the cheſt, and for colde lungs, and ſuch as arc op- 


prefled with abundance of rawe bumours, | | 
It tancheth bleeding at the noſe, being tempered with vineger and ſmelt ynto. 
- Being quilted in a little bagge with ſome. {yall quantity: of baic ſalt, and wade hot vpon abed 
pan with fire,or ſuch like,and ſprinckled with ggod wine vineger, and applied to the {ide very hor, 


raketh away the ſtirch and _ therof, and _ the pleuritte very much. 


903 


Of i vilde Comin. (hap. 417. 


*% The kindes. 
__ ohne from another] in atape gd yer alcompretes 


Here be diuers plants difering very 
ded vnder the title of wilde C 


I Cuminun fecftre. | 
Wide Cumin, aA 


wu 


MT  ">.x 
—_—_— 


_ 
8 


2 
Z 
F 


a $2.9 
? 
| - _ 
» 


0 


' HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


999 


— 


\. *%* The aeſeription. 


He wilde Cumin hathſmall white rootes with ſome fibres thereto appendant ; fromwhich 
ariſe ſundrie little jagged leaues,confiſting of many leſſer leaues , finely dented about the 
edges,in faſhion like the fmalleſt leaues of wilde Parſne9:among which ſpringeth vp aſlen- 
der bending ſtalk a footchigh,like vnto Pecfen Yerers, bearing ar the top therof white, round, and 
hairie butrons or knops, like Arctien.as Dioſcorides hath right welbobſerued:within which knops is 
conteined a tender downie ſubſtance, among which is the {cede , like the ſeede of Dexs Leoni, bur 


& 


> Thefecondkinde of Cumin is verylike vnto the aforeſaide wilde Cumin , faue thatic beareth 
x niimberofhornedor crooked cods,after the maner of Scorpzo;aes, but thicker and lefſe crooked, 
and the ſeedes within the cods areſeuerally diſtin andſevarated one from another by equall par- 
titions,in ſpall crofles,yellow of colour,and ſomewhat long: the ſtalkes arelirtle and render, beſer 
with leaues muchlike vnto the {mal leaues of Carur,or Petter Veneris : and at the rop of the ſtalkes 


there do grow pretic yellowe flowers, like thoſe of great Celandine orRocker, ſaving that they be 


ſomwhat lefler, 


3 Cumintun Corniculatum,ſiue Hypecorm Clusj. 
Hornedwilde Cumin. 2. 
os ti 


% 7 he deſcription, 
3 The thir@kinde of Cuminis very like vnto the 


laſt before menrioned , but the leaves are nwch 
greater, more ſlender, ang morefinely cur, or iag- 
ged, like the leaues of Sze/; of Maſſj/ia : among 
which riſeth vp a ſtalke a cubitehigh or ſomwhar 
more,very ſmooth and whitiſh, at the rop whereof 
ſpring fogrukfine yellow flowers, like the former, 
but in my opinion more like the Paunſey or Harts 
eaſe: theſe flowers being yaded , there ſuccecde 
crooked cods, greater , and more full of knots or 
diniſions thenithe former , wherein is conteined a 
ſmall and flat yellowe ſeede like Ga/ega:the rooteis = 


long,thicke,and ſingle, 


4 Theplace, b=: 
Theſe wilde Cumins do growe in Lycia, & Ga- 


' Htia, aprovince of Aſia; and 'in Carthage acitic 
© of Spaine 3 ſeldome ſeene in theſe northern parts ; 
 " notwithſtandink at the impreſſion heerof, > 

- did lowerand floutilh in my garden,” ” 


Elaſt 


, 


'% Thetime. 


They flowerin Atiguſt, and perfe@their ſeede 
in September. ht 6 


* Thenames. 
Their names hatiebeene rouched in their ticles in as ample maner as hath been fer downe by any 


author, - 


| * The temperature and vertnes. 
| Their temperature and vertues are referred tothe garden Cumin; notwithſtandingT can nor 


readin any author of their vic in phuſicke, 


of 


Of Flixeweede. Chap.418. 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF: THE 


" 1 SephiaChirurgoran. I 2 Sophia latifolis. _ 
Flixeweede. | [ | Broadleated Flixeweede, 


L> 


I 142 | 
R - 
Tl 4 


4 The deſcription. . 


2 TÞ Lixeweede hathrounde and harde ſtflkes , a cubige anda halfe high, whereon dogrowe 
T? leaues moſtfinely cut and diuided into innumerable fine iags,like thoſe of the ſea Worme- 

wood called Seriphium or Cab/inthiumitenuifelium , but much finer and ſmaller, drawing 

| neere vntothe ſimalleſt leaues of Corianders, of an ouerworne greene colour: the flowers growe 

_ alongſtthe tops of the ſpriggic branches, of a darke yellow colour:after which come long cod; full 

. of ſmallred ſeedes: theroore is long,ſtraight,and of a woodic ſubſtance.” 

2 Theſecondfort differeth nor fromthe precedent, ſauing that theleaues of this plant are broa- 
der , wherein eſpecially confiſteth the difference; notwithſtanding in mine opinion 7 «ber Mor- 
ear found this ſecondſortgrowing in ſome tertill place, whereby theleaues did growe broader 
and greater,which mooued himto make of this.a ſecond ſort, whereas in truth they arc both bur : 
one,and the ſclfe ſamic plant. = | ELM | g 
2 ih % Theplace. «Bi pe | 

This Flixeweede growcth inmoſtplaces of Englande, almoſteuery where inthe ruines of olde 

buildings,by high waies.,andin filthy obſcure baſe places. Wh F— 

7 oof RTM > "ff 7; 
It fowrerh and ſeedeth from Iuneto the end of September, + 
| \'f | % Thenaves. Halo 3 0þt =o 
Flixeweedis called Thafretrwn, & of ſome Thalittrum , bur vnproperly; for Tha/ii7rum belong- 
, ethroEnglub Rubarbe: the Paracelians do vaunt and brag very much of an herbe called _ 
Bal! ER m_ OO 


BISTORIE. OF PLANTS. — 66 


adding thereto the ſurname Parace/gwherewith they imagineto do woonders;whether this be the 
ſame plant iris diſputable,rhe controuerfienot as yet decided ;neuerthelefle we muſt be contentro 
acceprofthis for the true Soph7a, vntill ſome diſciple or qther of his do ſhewor ſer foorth the plane 
wherewith their maſter Farace/ſms,did ſuch great matrers: in Engliſh we call irFlixeweede, of his 
faculric againſt the flixe, 
| % The temperature. 

Sophia crieth without any manifeſt ſharpeneſle orheare. | 

R * The wertues. ME | 

The ſeede of Sophia or Flixeweede drunke with wine, or Smithes water, ſtoppeth thebloudie A 
fixe,thelaske,and all other iſſues of bloud. ts bat . 

The herbe bruſed or put into Ng 4 hey ys and healeth vicers,or olde ſores and woundes, as B 
Paracelſus faith,and tbat bicauſe it drieth without acrimonie or ſharpenes,/ oo 


Of the great Celandine,or Swallow woort.. Chap.qto. 
Chelidoniam mains, | p N16 OT ates pt 
Great Celandine, »% The deſeription. wt all 


He great Celandine hath a tender brittle 
. Ralke,round,hairie and full of branches,ech 
whereof hath diuers knees or knottic ioints, 
ſer with leaues not vnlike to thoſe of Culumbine, 
bur tenderer & deepercut or iagged, of a grayiſh 
reene vnder ,.and greene'on'the other fide ten- 
Gin to blewnes : the flowers do grow atthe top 
of the ſtalkes, of agolde yellow colour, in ſhape 
like thoſe of the Wall flower; after which come 
. long cods,full of bleake or pale ſeedes ; the whole 
+ plant is of a ſtrong ſmell, nothing pleaſant, and 
yeeldetha thicke 1uice of amilkie ſubſtance, and 
| of the colourof Saffron: the roote is thicke and 
knobbie,with ſome threds annexed therto,which 
being broken or brufed, yeelderh a ſap or juice of 
the colour of golde, | | 
| * Theplace, _ 
| It groweth in vntilled places, by common way 
fides,among briers and brambles,abouroldwals, 
and inthe ſhade rather then in the ſunne, 
*% Thetime, Gf 
It is greene all the yeere,it flowreth from April 
to a good part of ſommer, the cods are perfected 
inthe meane time, OS 
| %* The names. - 3 
WYG Itis called in Grecke 29u%r: in Latirie Chels- 
donium mains, and Hirundinaria maior : among the Apothecaries Chelidonia, divers milcall it by 
the name Celidowiam: it is named in Jralian Celidonia : in Spaniſh Celiduenha, Teru: de las golun- 
arinhas + in high Dutch -Hzofz Scholwurtz : in lowe Stinkende Gouwet in French Z{lere,or 
Eſclayre and Celzdoine: inEngliſh Celandine, great Celandine , common Celandine, Swallowe - 
wooot,and:Tetterwoort., .- G'3 4 erat 4 [ PE : | 
 Itiscalled Celandine,notbicauſcit then firſt ſpringeth at the comming inof the Swallowes,or 
dicth when, they go away: for as we haue ſaide, it may be founde all the yeere, but bicauſe ſome 
bolde opinion, that with. this herbe the damsreſtore ſight to their yoong ones when their cies 
beone, the. which "ings are vaine andfalſe: for Corne/ins Cel/ay in his fixt. booke doth witneſle, 
thatwhen the ight of the cies of diuers yoonghirds be put foorth by ſome outward meanes, it 9 
© | | cer 


A 


C 
D 


F 


o 


912 THE:SECOND/ BOOKE OF: THE 

afrera time be reſtored ofit ſclfe , and ſooneſt of all the fight of the Swallow , whereupon (a5 the 
{ame author ſaith) that the tale or fable grew how thorowan herbe the dams reſtore that thin 
which healerh of tſelfe : the very fame doth Ariforte alleadpe in the fixt booke of the hiſtoric o 
liuing creatures: theeies of yoong Swallowes, faith he,that are not fledge,ifa man do pricke ther 
out,do grow againe,and afterwards do perfeQtly recouer their fight, _ | 

81 i | *% The temperature. 

The great Celandine is manifeſtly hot and dty,and thar in the thirde degree,and withal! fcoureth 


and clenſeth eftcQually, bibs 
briotdet: droanoht hobo b4hintt 0 oe Thewertacs.: |. + Þ 46; | 
The juice of the herbe is good to ſharpen the {1ght, ſorit clenſethand conſumeth awaie flimic 
things that cleaue about the ball of the cie, and hinder the ſtght, andeſpecially being boiled with 
hony ina braſen veſſell,as.Dofcorides teacheth... s Prpih 1: Grugtd dan 
The roote cureth the yellowe iaundiſe, that commeth of the ſtopping of the gall, eſpecially 
when there is no ague iogped,for it openecth and delivereth the gall and liver from itoppings. 
The roote wy; ORE HAY 8 to be goodagainſt the toorhach, 
= juice muſt be drawne foorth in the beginning of ſommer,and dried in the ſunne, ſaith Diofe 
cortdes. | $44 Lo : F208 | 
The roote of Celandine boiled with Anniſe ſeede in white wine, openeth the ſtopvings of the 
liver,and cureth the iaundiſe very ſafely,as hath beene often prooued, = _ 
;"/Fhe roote cur itviniall peeces is good ro be ginen vato Haukes againſt ſundry diſeaſes, wherun- 
to.they are-ſubieCt,as wormes, craic,and ſuch hike. ' 


Of Coxcombe,or yellowe Rattle. (hap.420. 


Ofecath.. | | pro 0 
YellowRartle,or Coxcombe. \vi *Thedefeription. 


Rifts Gall, or Criffa gallinaces, hath 2 
ſtraight vpright ſtalke,ſer about with nar- 
row leaues,ſnipt rounde about the edges: 
the flowers growe atthe top of the ſtems, ofa 
yellowe colour ; after which come vp lictle flat | 
uches or purſes, couered oucr or contained 
| withinalittlebladder,or flat skin, open before 
|. like the mouth of a fiſh, wherein is contained 
'* flaryellowiſh ſeede , which being ripe and drie, 
| will makeanoife orratling when it is ſhakenor 
\  mooued, of which properrie it tooke the name 
| 7 yellowRartle, 5 
Be 44 |.  %Thephace. p 
Tr groweth indrie medowes and paſtures,and 
isto them a greatannoiance. | 
Py % The time, | 
It flowrerh moſt part of the ſommer. 


1 tu The names. | 
It is called in low Durch Ratelen, and gcele 
Ratelen : commonly in Latine Cr: Gal, and 
#110 GallenacedCrifta: mEng] Coxecombe,Penic 
4 1: grafſe;yellow or whiteRartle* in bigh Durchir 
14> 1s called gertRodel: in French Cree dr Cor: 
++» - diners takeirtobe the oIde writers CAledforole 


+ The 


HISTORIES (OF PEANTS Fi | [wy _ þ4 
*% The temperature and vertues. | 


nero remperature or vertue this herbe is of, men haue notas yet becne carefull to knowe, 
ſeeing itis accounted vnprofitable. 


Of red Rattle,or Louſewoort. Chap.421. 


oa dRattle % The deſeripti 
Louſewoort,or red Rattle, | e deſcription. | 
wy \'y T1 EdRattle (of Pr called F;/talaria,and 


BY according to the opinion and cenſure of 
Caroluns Cin/jus, Pena and others, the true 
CAletorolophss) hath very ſmall, rent, or jagged 
leaves, of a browne redde colour, and weake ; 
ſmwalland render ſtalkes, whereof ſome lic along 

[trailing ypon the grounde; within verie mooriſh 
medowes they grow acubite high and more, bur 
4n moiſt and wet heathes, and ſuch like barren 
grounds nor aboue an handfull high : the flowers 
grow round abour the ſtalke, from the mid{(t ther- 
of cuen to the top,and arcofa brownered colour, 
in ſhape like the flowers of dead Nettle z which 
being paſt , there ſucceede little flat pouches , 

' wherein is contained flat and blackiſh ſecede, in 
ſhewe very like vnto the former: the root is ſmall, 
white,and tender, 

* Theplace. 
It groweth in moiſt and mooriſh medowes,the 
herbe is not onely vnprofitable, bur alſo hurtfull, | 
and an infirmitic of the medowes. ST 


% The time. 
It is founde with his lowers and ſtalks in Maie 
and Iune, | 
*% The names. 


Ir is called in Greck eSewnt in high Dutch Bzaun 
Roni tinLatine Pedienlarisof the effet, bicauſe 
iefilleth ſheepe and other cattle that feede in medowes where wn 1 full of lice: divers of 
po later Herbariſts cal it F;/#/eri4,of ſome Cri/{a Galh,and diuers takeit tobe Mmmnulxe herba: in 

ngliſh Rattle grafſe, red Rattle graſſe,and Eouſewoorr. | 

milo 12:7 5Ui : :”  Thetemperature. 
Itiscolde and drieand aſtrinpent. on 
| % Thewvertnues. | 
It is helde to be good for fiſtulaes and hollowe vicers, and to ſtay the ouermuch flowingofthe A ES 
menſes,or any other fluxe of bloud,if it be boiled in red wine and drunke, 


| Of Yaroweggr Noſebleede. Chap. 422. 


* Thedeſeriztion. 


t FNOmmon Yarrowe hath ver many ſtalkes comming vp a cubite high,round, and ſomwhat 
_ hard :about which ſtande long leaues,cur in the fides ſundrie wiſe, and as it weremade vp 
of many ſmaliagged leaues euery one of which ſceme to come neere to theilender —_— 

. Mmm1i- | (n) 


—_ THE SECOND |BOOKE OF' THE 


of Coriander : there ſtande atthe top tufrs or ſpoked rundles, the flowers whereof are either white 


orpurple, which being rubbed do yeelde a ſtrong ſmell,but vopleafant 5 the roote ſendeth downe 


many ſtringes. | E4 * | | 
2 Theſecondkinde of Milfoile or Yarrow,hath ſtalkes, leaues, androotes like vnto the former 


ſauing that his ſpokie tufts are of an excellent fairered or crimſon colout, and bein li 7 
in the hand,is ofa reaſonable good ſauour, | | | 1; $4 rlerubbeq 


= ”* I ! 
i, > F 
* 
p 
, s » , : , 
» 


1 Miltfolium terreſtre vulgare. al: 2 Mfoi flore rubyo, 
- Common Yarrow. |: || Red flowred Yarrow, 


ol Ls 
= " 


, 
# , *:% 
* 


, 


"6d; 
LW 


as Ty I fre 
, aA TIC 
_ v8 d *# bv s ? 
_ \ 0 
” - ' ir 
» s 
+ ww 1 
” 
W - 
+ ». "X » 
. s + 
. > <4 - &F 
EAC - 


l i 

[4 ['N F #+ »} 

* $4. 35 : : ' 
. | 


| 


HISTORIE. OF PLANTS. 


; | % The temperature. | 
Yarrow,as Galen laith,is not vnlikein tEMPErature tO the Sideritides,or Iron worts,that is to ſay, 
clenſing,and meanly colde,but it moſt of all biadech. POSTS # 
| . % The vertues. 4.4 
| Theleaues of Yarrow doth clofe vp wounds,aad keepeth them from inflammarion,or fiery fwel- A 
_ ling : it ſtanchech bloudin any part of the body , and iris likewiſe put into bathes for women to ir 
in: it toppeth the laske, and being drunke it helperh the bloudy flixe; ; 
Moſt men ſay,that the leaues chewed, and eſpecially greene , are a remedlie for the roothach. B 
The leaues being purinto thenolſe,do cauſe ir to bleede, and eaſerhthe paine of the megrum. C 
It cureth the inward excoriations of the yarde of aman comming by reaſon of pollutions or ex- 
treme flowing of the ſeede, although the iſſue do cauſe inlammanion and felling of thoſe ſecret 
parts,and though the ſpermatick matter do come downe in great quantitie, ifthe iuice beiniected 
with afiring, orthe decoctign, This hath beene prooued by a certaine friende of mine,fomerimes a 
fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, who lightly bruſedtheleaugs of common Yarrowe with 
Hogs greaſc,and applied it warme vnto the priuic parts and therby did divers times helpe himlelte, 
and others of his fellowes whenhe was a ſtudeat,anda fingle man liging in Cambridge. . 
One dram in powger of the herbe giuen in wine, preſently raketh away the paine of the colick D 


Of yellow Yarrow,or «Xfilfoile. Chap. 423. 


1 Milefolrwn luteum. 
Yellow Yarrow, 


Sls 


EC IENS) 


* 


2 CAchilla fue Millefolium nobile. 
Achilles Yarrow. _- 


%, WW, p 


Wy VOTT 


| 


. 
£ is \ 
« 
" 


_— 


, 

= \ U 4 F 
F 
Be w i 
V £ i 
& m 

'v ji 

4 : o 


o 
+ «a % 
" <a DTS 
ry 


- —_— 


vvigh anty's <1, f 27 ren ao "DG 4 9 | 
1 FEllowe Yarrow.is a ſmall plans, ſcarce a ſpan high : the ſtalkes whereof are coucred 
with lohg leaues; very finely cut in the edges like feathers in the wings ct licile birds ;the 
-:1:3bN hte froied ndeaaing foodtd yailes howeroy abatic fume hapiond forma.df the 

common Yarrow : the rooteconſfiſteth of threddic ſtrings. lat] ; 
A 5 | Mmm 32 | 2 Achilles 


916 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
2 Achilles Yarrow ornoble Milfoile , hatha thicke tough roore , withſtrings faſtned thereto. 
from which immediately riſe vp divers ſtalkes ,' very greene andcreſted , whereupon do growe lon 
leaues compoſed of many ſmall tagges,cut euen tothe middlerib : the flowers ſtande on the top kt 
the ſtalkes in ſpokie vmbles or tufts,of a yellowiſh colour and pleaſant ſmell, 
| | *% Theplace. | 

| Theſe kinds of Yarrow are ſeldome found Av grow ina fat and fruirfull ſoile, and ſomtimes in 

medowes,and are ſtrangers in England. [1 | 


| _*Thetime. , 

They flower in Maic eſpecially,inthe moneth of Auguſt they are likewiſe ſeene, 

| | | *% The names. | | | 

Disſcorides deſcription doth ſufficiently declare, that this herbe is Stratiores Mille folium: in 
Greeke reenwns 4bgwacs: theheight of the herbe ſheweth it, the forme of the leaues agree ; there 
is ſome ambiguitie or doubt in the colour of the flowers, which Dioſcorides deſcribeth tobe white 
as chevulgar capned haue; but Andreas Lara addeth out of the old booke, of a yellow colon : ir 
is named of the later age Mukefolium minus, ot little Yarrow, and Millefoleum luteum , yellowe Yar. 
row,or Note bleede: the Apothecaries and common people know itnot, | | 

| ; & The temperature. wore 
Yarrow is meanly colde,and ſomewhat binding, 

A lis aprincipall herbe for all kinde of bleedings,and ro heale vp new and olde vicers and greene 

wounds: there be lome ſaith Galexthat vie it forfiſtulaes. | | 


'B Thisp'ant Achilkeis thoughr to be the very ſame, wherewith Achrlles cured the wounds of his 
{oldiers,as before in the former chapter, | | 


Of 0, Werian,or Serwall. (hap. 424. 


*% 7 he kindes. 


T Here be diuers ſorts of Valerians,ſome of the garden ſome of the fiel | ,andalſo ſome of the 


| i 
wu || ; 


* The deſcription. 


1: *T'Herameor garden Valerian hath his firſt leaucs long,broade; ſmopth,greene and vndeui- 
ded; and the leaves vponthe ſtalkes greater, longer , and deepelygaſhed on either fide, 
like the leaues ofthe greater Parſnep,bur yer leſſer : the ſtalk is aboue a cubite high,ſmooth 

and hollowe,with certaine iointsfar diſtant one from another :out of which joints growe foorth a 
couple of leaues, andin the tops of the ſtalks vpon ſpoked rundles ſtande flowers heaped rogither, 
which are [mall, opening themſelues our of a long and littlenarrowe hecke,of colour whitiſh, and 
withall of alight red purple: the roote is an inche thicke growing allope, faſtned on the mee part 
ofthe earth by a mulritude of ſtrings , the moſt part of ir ſtanding out of the grounds, of aplea- 


fant ſiveere ſmell when it is broken. [| 1 
2 Thegreater wilde Valerian hath leaues diuided and iagged,as thoſe of the former; thoſe about 
the ſtalke hereof arealſo ſmooth,hollow,and iointed,and aboue a cubire high:the flowers ſtand 0n 
ſpoked ruridles like to thoſe of the former,bur of a light purple colour : theroores areſlender , and 
full of ſtrings and {mall chreds,not alcogither wathour ſmell. | we A 
3 Theotherwildeone is much like in forme to the garden Valcrjan, bur far leſler : the firſt leaues 
+ thereof be vndiuided , the other are parted and ourin ſunder ;rhe ſtalkes a ſpan long : the flowers 
which ſtande on ſpoked rundles atElike to thoſe of the others pf alight whitiſh purple colour? the 
rootes be lender,growing aflopefreeping,andfull of fine ſirall threds;6flirtleimell. 7 * 
4 There is a mall Valerian growing vpon rocks and ſtonie places; that is like mto thelaſt deſcri- 
bed,{auing it is altogither leſſer, 1! Fane: 230720} voter GOTHPpF3 


a 4 


1 Y alcrians 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. | $iq- 
1 YValeriana horten(is. 2 Valeriens mair frineftyls, 
Garden Valerian,or Serwall, Great wilde Valerian. © 


B 


+. 
Won 5 Os > 45 u 


ea ade a cn EL OTIS Ie 4 <4 A 


_ Toore 1s ſmall and fingle, with ſome 


THE SECOND/\(BOOKE OF THE 
5 Valerian Graes, | |. 
* Greekiſh Valetian, 1 mir, 5 0000 | ; 
TO D. at | 5 The fift fort of Valerian hath divers fna!! 
ng 5; WWE Ve 82 « | | hollowſtalks, afootehigh and ſomewhat more, 
LEEDS: jc) EE NZEITRD  garmiſhed with leaues like vnto thoſe that doe 
SE LIE SCILLY IE grow onthe | per part of the ſtalks of common 
| | Valerian,butſmaller cur or jagged almoſt to the 
| | middlerib: attherop of theſtalkes do growthe 
| "flowers cluſtering togither, of ablewe colour 
| | conliſtingoffiue leaues apeece, hauing in the 
| | |middlethereof ſmall white threds tipped with 
| | | amen : the ſeede is ſmall, growing in little 
| huskesor ſeede veſſels: the roote is nothing clſe 
| | |burtasitwereallofthreds. 
| | | T haue anotherſort of Valerian, the ſecede 
| | whereof was fentme from that reuerend Phifi.. 
W i | | tion Bernard Paladane, vader the title of Pater; 
C, \ \ L. \ 1» \ | | ana Mexitana, having ſmall tender ſtalkesrrai. 
Q, > LIL WA """4F/ 108 ling vpon the grounde, very weake and brittle ; 
PAY UPRAUUTTRY whereupon do growe moot greeniſh lewes 
VION, | | |likethoſe of Corne Sallade (which we have ſer 
| | foorthamongthe Lettuce, vnder thetitle La. 
/ | ca Agnima,, or Lambes Letruce :) among the 
| | Jeauescome foorth the flowers cluſtering togj. 
| | |ther, like vnto the great Valerian in forme, bur 
| | ofadcepepurplecolour: the rooteis verieſmall 
| | andthreddie hen $1ratgrn with the reſt of 
UPS SS | | theplant, whenitharh brought his ſecde roma- 
euriticor ripenes,and mult be fowen anewe the next yeere in Maie and nor before, 

There is alſo anorher ſort or kinde of Yalerian calledby the name Phyteama,of the learned Phi- 
fictions of Montpelier and others (ſet foorth vnder the ſtocke or kinred ofthe Valerians, reſembling 
the aforeſaid Corn Sallad,whichis called of ſome Prolifera fidm the Greek title Phytewna as if you 
ſhould ſay,goo0d to make conception, and ro procure loue: ) the loweſt leaues arc like thoſe of the 
ſmall Valerian, of a yellowiſh colour; the Yar leaues become more iagged: the ſtalkes are an 
handfull high.on the tops whereof do ſtande ſmall rounde ſpokie tufrs of! wiking flowers; which be- 
ing paſt,the ſcedes appeerelike ſmall rounde pearles, which being ripe, groweto be ſomewhat flar, 
hauing in the middle of each ſeede rpriocef an hole, as it were grauen or bored therein, The 

bres annexedthereto, | _ | 


\\ 


i )  w Theplace. eh | 
The firſt and likewiſethe Greeke Valerianarc planted in gardens; the wilde ones are foundin 
moiſt places hard ro rivers ſides,dirches,and waretie pits ; yet the greater of theſe is broughr into 
gardens where it flouriſherh,bue the lefler hardly proſpereth, | 
= j * The time. TY " 


— 


Theſe flower in Maic,lune and Tuly,and moſt of the ſommer moneths, 


Generally, the Valerians are called by one name,n Larine Yalerirna:in Grecke 5*: and in ſhops 
alſo Pha,which for the molt part is ment by the garden Valerian,that is called of Dio/cor.14p*+ 2 
in Latine Sy/u2ri,or ruſtica XN ar dus; of Pliny ® aber] Cretica, which names are rather referred w * 
thoſe of the next chapter, although theſe be reckoned as wilde kinds thereof :of cerraine in our age 
JAarinella ha V alentiana,Genieularts, Ee SITID moſt eps yy 
ana Domeſtics of Theophraſtus Paraceiſas Terdzna : in high Dutch Gzof5 balbytan: in lowe utc 
was Kg SD. J Mr (ny erin Engliſh Valerian (ti raile,and Serwall, but 
vnproperly; for that name belongerh to Zedearze, which isnot Valerian: what hath becne ler 
downe in the titles ſhall ſerue for the diſtinCtions of the otherkinds, | 


* 


% The 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 919 
| | * The temperature. | | 

The garden Valerian is Not, as Dzeſcorrdes ſaith, bur normuch, neitherthe greene roote, butthe 
dried ones3 for the greene is ealely perceiued tohaue very little heaze, andthe dried tobe horter, 
which is found by the taſte and linell. | : "= 
x * The vertnes. | 

The dry roote as Dieſcoridesteacherh,prouoketh vrine , bringeth downe the deſired ſickneſſe, A 
helperh the paine 1n the tides, and is pur into counterpoiſons and medicines preleruatiue againſt 
the peſt:lence,as are treacles, mithridates, and ſuch like z whereupon it hathbeene had (and is to 
this day among the poore people of our northerne parts)in ſuch veneration amongſt them, thatno 
broches,portage,or phiſicall meates arc woorth any thing , it Setwall were not at one end: where- 
won ſome woman poet or other hath madetheſe verſes: 

| Theythat will hate their heale, 
Mult put Serwallin their keale. 

Iris vied generally.inflightcuts,wounds,and fmall hurts, | 4-1 B 

The extraQtion of the rootes'giuen, 1s a molt ſingular medicine againſtthe difficulric of making C 
water,and the ycllowe iaundiſe. | F 

Wilde Valerian is thought of the later Herbatiſts to be good for them that are burſten, for ſuch D 
as be troubled with the crampe.and other conuulſions , and for all thoſe that are bruſed with 
falles, | ; [5 

The leaues of theſe and alſothoſe of the garden, are good againſt vicers and foreneſſe of the E 
mouth and gums,it the decoctionthercof be gargarized or helde in'the mouth, 

Some holde opinion that the rootes of wilde Valerian dried and powdered, anda dram waight P 
thereof taken with wine,doth purge vpward and downward, 


Of «MM aatieine $ etwall,or Nara. Chap. 425. 


I Nardas Celtica. 2 NardusCelticarepens. 
Mountaine Spikenard, Creeping mountaine Spikenard, 


N 
d\) 
CID 


X xl \\ \ 
\ NA 


ON NOVARNEY/ 
DNS! WL 


'Þ; ' / 
4 ; 
14+ 87; 
ll, / 
i / 
/ 


| 


LT) 
Wl 
N { 
Wh 
NA \ 
© FP : 
WAV; 
SRTA%V [ ” TLOER 
A \) 4 ! AE, 
, P $I n\ 
Py 


; | b; if | $ {! Hi / " 
A W4WAv? 4Yh 


' 


920 - THE SECOND |BOOKE OF /THE 
I -7* He Nardus named Celtits,bur now Lj | , Pica X ardwsflouriſheth in high mounraines. The 
Valicfians in their mother roong call it Seliga, thatis Sa/iunca; ncither do I d oubt; bur | 
.** thatitisthe ſamewhichY7rgi/doth ſpeake of intheſe verſes, | | 


Puniceis hunilis quantum Saliunca roſetis, | | 
Iudzeta noftro tantum tibi cedit.CAmintas. 


A 


For it is a very little herbe creeping onhe ground , and afterwardlifting \ 4s ſelfe with a ſtalke of 
a handfull high; whereupon from the tower part groweſmall thin leaues, like thoſe of Gnephalians 
or Cortonweede, whitiſh and fotnewhat yellowiſh: vpon the roughneſle of the roote, there are 

- many ſcales,plarred one ypon another ;bur vndet the roote there are many browne ſtrings and hai- 
ric chreds,in ſmell like the rootes of A#rabaccentaſte ſharpe and bitter. The flowers growe along 
the vpper branches yhite and very ſmall, { &.2 [ork | 
2 Theſecondfortof Spikenard hath many threddie rootes, from the which riſe vp many ſcalie, 
rough,and thicke ſtalkes,hauing at the rop certaine flat hoarie leaues, growing vpon ſmall and ten. 
der footeſtalkes. The whole plant is of a pleaſant ſweere ſmell. | = fees 
Z 3 Hirculue. | 4 4 N araus Montana. 

[|  - {Wilde Mountaine Spikenard, 


_— PAC 8.9% 
XII» 
PPS 4.99% WF - - 
[3 "Ws 
| V WJ; 


F- | * The deſcription. |. | 

3 Hirclwis aplantvery rare, which as yetIneuer ſawe, notwithſtanding we are greatly behol- 
ding to Carols Cluſaes, the father of forren {imples, who finding this plant among many bunches or 
handfuls of Spikenard,hath made it knowen vnto/poſterity,as he hath done many other razc plants, 
in tranſlating of Gaya the Luſitanian pens ty ſerreth it forth with alight deſcription,ſaying it 


is a baſe and lowe herbe two hands high,bringing foorth Kaucs withour any ſtalkes at all. 
| ++." .F} 44 11-1 4 Mountaine 


"= 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © | 921 

PE Mounraine Spikenard hath a great thicke knobbed roote, ferhere and there with ſome render 

fbres,of a pleafant ſweer {mell: fromthe which comeforth threeor fower finoorh broad leaues,8& 

likewiſe iaggedleaues deepely cut, cuen to the middle rib ; among whichriſe vpnaked ſtalkes, gar- 

niſhed in - middle with a tuft of ſmall iagged leanes, The flowersgrowe at the top of the ſtalke, 
vmble or euft faſhion, like thoſe of Fennell, The ſeede is ſmall and chafhe. 


5 Nardus Indica. | 6 Nardus N arbonenſis. 
Indian Spikenard. | French Spikenard, 


; a : 
| ll | | bi] 
Lo | | | | 
% t | ; 1 
\ F j | : 
« ET. ; p 
þ : 3 Y % : nn #264” : P " 
1.464 — x Hi. 7 ”y. Y | 
” | * 4 4 4 
# / ® ; E p % 4 hi \ py 
: ; | 
b | 
: 


18 
Oo 
. 
i 


A ; | iN 
f\ 
at | 


\ Fi PRYOR ji {0 
WW 8 HCO Rt HR Oe ant Pb: 


| 1141 "il 


[ ' tf 
\ $11 vid $11 ! I M; f 
MALO L0G I IL NTTL'S 
HH: H,..4 þ oy : $754 : 
: 153138 v4 : 7 $318 $344” / 
' IH : ' '| | IHPERIT. 
" i" : ' l l a |. 
{i THTH! 
' ; 
7 'P % : , G 4 . 
3-53 : : : 1 
it : : | li 
þ4 : [ : | {y : Ff 
: . > * 
' \ / 
: 1H 
j : 
4 1 To ſ 


z 5% 
24 
: 


+ The deſeription. 


5 The Spikenardof India is a lowe plant, growing cloſe vnto the grounde ( as doth our Thiſtle, — * 


which we call Carduwsa cautis ) compoled of many rongh ſcalie cloves, of a pleaſant ſmell. The 
rote is ſmall and threddie. 
6 The French Spikenard, being a baſtard kinde, growerh cloſe yponthe ground like the prece- 
dent,compadt of {alic rough leaues:in the middle whereof commeth foorth a great buſh of rough _ 
graſſe, ſharpe and curting; —_ the which ſhoote vp diuers round ſtalkes, The roote is ſmall 
andthreddie, The whole plant is alcogither withour {mel}, which ſheweth ic to be a baſtard kinde of 
Spikenard, | 
 *+ Theplace. | 
Theſe plants are ſtrangers in England,g! —_ in great plentie vpon the mountaines by Luden- 
berge and Heluetia,on the rocks among the moſle. 
The firſt and ſecond,if my memorie tailemenot, do == in afield inthenorth part of England 
called Crag cloſe andinthe foote of the mounraine called Ingleborrow Fels. 
| o % The t7me. 
|  Theleanes growe towithering in September, at which time they ſmell more pleaſantly, chan 
when they flouriſhed and were greene. | er | 9 
| *% The names. Ls 
Xurdas is called in Pannonia or Hungarie,of the countrey people Spezck, of ſome Betzfin, that 
21 | is, 


% 


— 


_ 


923 THE SECOND-BOOKE| OF' THE _ 
is.the herbe of Vienna, bicauſeic doth growertbere in you abundance, from whence it is broughr 


into other countries ; of Geſnerws Saljunca: in Engliſh Spikenard : of the Valletians Se Hes Hi 
Nardus Celtica. 99! | | | | | J yo | 


% The temper ature and vertwes. 


It mightily proucketh vrine, as recordeth Rondtietives, who trauelling through the deſartcoun. 


: Þ 


trie, chanced to lodge in a monaſterie, where was|a Chanon which could not make his water . but 
WAS PIC lently helped by the decoction of this plant,through the aduiſe of the faid Ronadtletins, 


Of Larkes heele, or Larkes clawe. (hap.426. * 
There be diuers Larkes heele s,{ome wilde and others of the garden. 


£ _ 


I Conſolida regalss ſatiua. | WH. 2 Conſolida ſativa flore albo. 
Garden Larkes heele. | I | White Latkes ſpur. 


IG > Y } ——— —( | 
» / > Nt 
ACNE 


\B\IE 


# 
<>Q_\ 
44h 


* The df rigtion. 


I He garden Larkes ſpurhath a rounde ſtem full of branches, ſet with tender iagged leaves, 
very like vnto the ſtall Sothernwood: the flowers grow alongſt the ſtalks toward the tops 
of the branches, of a blewe colour, confilting of five little leaues which grow togither and 

make one hollowe flower,having a taile or ſpur at the ende,turning in like the ſpur of Io ade flaxe. 

Theſe flowers are ſometimes of a purple colour, ſomtimes white,murgey, carnation, and of ſundry 
other colours, varying infinitely according tothe ſoile or countrey wherein they live : atter come 

the ſecede very blacke, like thoſe of Leckes : the roote periſheth at the firſt approch of winter. 
2 Thelecond Larke ſpur is like the precodent,'but ſome thing ſmaller in ſtalkes and leaues: the 
flowers arc allo like in foxme,but of a white colour, whercineſpecially is the difference. | 
| GS TY Ho BE Rs 23 Conſoliu 


1 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS; 


D,:; 
1 x 


3; 


\ 
\% 


ZN 


- 
j _ 
/ 
: 
” "| 
Py 
= 
q 
, > 
k 
% 
oy 
- \ 
, 
1 


% The deſeription. 


3 Latkes ſpur withred flowers hath leaues,ſtalkes, rootes,and ſeedes like the others, ſauing thar 
the flowers heerof are of a brightpurple tending ro rednes,wherein confiſteth the difference. 
4 Thewilde Larkes ſpur ba molt fine iagged leaues,cut and hackt intodiuers parts,confuſedly 
let ypon a ſmall middle tendrell : among which growe the flowers , in ſhape like the others, bur a 
greatdeale lefler,ſomtimes purple,otherwhiles white,and often of a mixt colour:the roote is ſmall 
andthreddie, | | | | | | 

| * Theplace. 


Theſe plants ate ſet and ſowenin gardens : the laſt groweth wilde in come fieldes, and where 
cone hath growen. | | : FLO | 
| 17% % The time. 

They flower for themoſt part all ſommer long. 

| *% The names. © | | 2% 6D 

| Larkes heele iscalled Flos Regime, of diuers Conſclida regal, who makeit one ofthe conſounds 
or Comfreies: it is alſocalled Delphinmm,which Dzoſcorides delcribeth in his thirde booke, where- 
withit may agree; itis reported by Gerardawof Veltwijck , who ge with the great 
Turke from the Emperour Charles the fift , that the ſaide Gerard awe at-Conſtantinoplea copie 
which had in De/phzmio, not leaues, but flowers like Dolphines z for the flowers,and eſpecially be 
fore they be perfe&ted, haue a certaine ſhewe aridlikenes of thoſe Dolphines, which old piftures 
and armes of certaine ancient C30 59s rhe expreſicd with acrooked and beneing figure or ſhape; 
by which ſigne allo the heauenly Dolphin is ſer foorth : Andiir skillerh not, though the Chapter of 
Delbbiniambe thought ro be falhified and counterfeited : for alchough it be ſome other mans and 


not Dioſcoridles, it is notwithſtanding ſome one of the ole writers , out of whom it is taken, and 
| | oulte 


92s .. THE $200ND/n ORE! on: THE 


foiſtedinto Dyofcerideshis bookes ; of ſomeitis called Bucinws,ot Bucinwn: in Engliſh Larkes ſpur, 
Larkes heele, $, Larkesclawe, and Munkes hoode: in bigh Ducch Riover ſpoozen, 
that is JEquirnalear Knight putt in Italian Sperone : in French Pjed Jalonerte, 4 
*T temperature. | 
_ Theſe herbes are rewper xee,gnd warme of nature. | | "0 
 *% The vertues. | as; 

We finde little exrant of che verwes of Larkes heele, either in the ancient or later writers 
woorth the writing,orto be credited, for it is ſer downe that the ſeede of Latkes ſpur drunken is 
good againſt the ſtinging of ſrarpions,whoſe vertues are ſo forcible, thattheherb onlythrown a 
fore the ſcorpion or any other yenemous beaſt , cauſeth them to be wicthour force or ſtren 
hurt, infonuch char they cannot mooue or ſtirre yt the hetbe be taken Wha » with many other 
ſuch crifling toies not 15 want the reading, . | | | 


9 Gut, or Ni gell. 7 ae. 
Kh * The kindes. [32 [1 


"Herebe divers ons of Gith,or Nigella Aiffering ſomei in the colour of the flowers, others in 
the doublenes cherefandin nel ofcbe ſeed, 


, 


- j 
P/ " 
: 
- " 
% 
s. 
RV 
- 
a 


” <- - 7A On 
RF 


WL PN 


He Giſt kind 4N tigell a hath weake and brirtle Cakeyof the height of a foote,full oftiran- 
 ches beſer with ne elembling rhe leaues of Fumiterr#,but 
much greener : the hOwers WO OO HE! Ee branches pan whitiſh blew en 


OWCTL 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 925 
fower being parted into five ſmall leaues , ſtarre faſhion : the flowers being vaded, there come 
vp ſmall knops or heads, hauing attheend thereof fiue or ſixe litcle ſharpe hornes or pointels, and 
euery knop or head is divided into ſundrie ſmallcels or partitions , whercinthe ſcede is conteined, 
which is ofa blackiſh colour, very like vnto Oinion ſeede, in taſte tharpe,and of anexcellent fweer 


{auour. | 
2  Thewilde Nigella hath a ſtreaked ſtalke a foote or more high, beſer full of grayiſh leaves,verie 
finely iagged,almoſt like the leaves of Dil: the lowers are like the former faue thatthey are blewer: 
the cods or knops are like the heads or huskes of Columbines , wherein is contcined the ſweete 
- andplcaſant ſeede,like the former, 


Melanthiwn Damaſcnus, | 4 Nyceleflore albomultiplici. 
, Damaske Nigella, | DoubleflowredNigella. 


W 


DN 


” 
/F 
4 


WW 


K+; \ 
F/ 8 
At - 


\ Ho DOLY ; 7 


WY 


© #Thedefeription."'- , © 
# ; MN ' | - %, 


3 Thethitde kinds of Nigellagwbichis both faire andpleaſant; called Damaske Nigella, is verie 
like mntothe wilde ues, bur his ſtalke is longer : the flowers 
arelike the former, bur greater,and euery flowerhath fiueſtn 


to ſupport and hearelnmvp: 

like the former, bur without ſmell or fauour. 
4 Thefourth kindeof Nigella harh many ſmall and ſlender 
leaues deepel dnctingait.ofa faint yellowiſh greeneco ac 
ſtakkes,of awhitiſh coloar, and exceeding double, which being. 


knobs,full of fiveete blacke ſeede like the former: the roote is nall anc IS 
{20% 8 0 AN! 2 The place. Lanes — EY 
iran wa thewilde ones do grow of themſelues among Corne andother 
grainc,in diuers i the ſeas. | 


#74 


926 THE SECOND |BOOKE OF THE 


| | | * Thy tame.  . i | 
The ſeede muſt be ſowen in Aprill : it Aowreth in Iuly and Auguſt. 
C] 14 % Thenames. up b-+ 

Githis called in Greek «7%»: in Latine alſo Melenthiwm : in ſhops Nzgelia,and Nigells Romg. 
a : of diuers Gith, and Seluſandria, and ſome arnong the former baſtard names Papauer Biprun: 
in high Dutch Swartzkymmich : in low Ducch J2ardus ſaet: in Icalian Nege/a: in Spaniſh 
Axenuz, Altpiure: in French Niete odorante :in Engliſh Githgand NigellaRomana,in Cambridg. 

ſhire Biſh6ps woort : and alſo Due Cathar me flos,Saint Kathetines flower, | 
| * Thetemperatwre. || | | 


The ſcede of the garden Nigellais hot and dty in the third degree,and of thinne parts. 
| | | *% Thewvertues. | j | 
A Thefecd of I jgella Romana drunke with wine , is a remedie againſt the ſhortnes of breath, gif. 
ſolueth and putterh foorth windines,prouokech vrine,the menſes, increaſerhmilke mthe breſts of 
nurſes ifitbe drunke moderately, otherwiſe itis not onely hurtful to them, but any that take there- 


of too often,or in too great a quantitie, he E4 | " 
B Theſeedekilleth anddriueth foorth wormes whether itbe taken with wine or water, or laide to 


% : 


the nauell in maner ofa plaiſter,, | þ. =] 
'' C Theilethatis drawne foorth thereof hath the fame propertie , whichthe vnskilfull Apothe- 
cariesdo take and vſe in ſteede of oile of Nard,not without great errour. | | 


- : > . . 


The ſecede parched or dried at the fire , brought into powder, and wrapped in apeece of fine 


lawne or ſarcenet,cureth all murs.catarrhes, rheumcs,and thepoſe,drieth the braine,and reſtorerh 
the ſence of ſmelling vntothoſe which have loſt it, being often finelled vatofrom day today, and 


P ſeudomelanthium. 1 | 
Baſtard Nigella,or arfeription. || 
| EL 1 and hurtfull weede in 
well knowne bythe 
<< C which Penacalleth P/cu- 
PCS = domelanthiwn, and Nigeh , by whichnames 
f / if | | Dodonamwang- Fuchſinus dd terme it 5 Mutonus 
/ >  calleth it Lalewnzand Tragecallethit Lichmoides 
/ ARC ' [egetum. This plant hath ſtraight , flender, and 
TA $ . hairie ſtems,garniſhed with Jong hairic and gray- 
_ | iſhlleaues , which growe togither by couples, in- 
| . Cloſing the ſtalke rounde about: the flowers arc 
_ | of apurplecolourgdeclining to rednefle , confiſt- 
+.1---Ing of five ſimallleaues , in proportion very like 
'; towilde Campions : when the flowers be vaded 
||: + there followeound knops or heads fulof blackiſh 
if | ſecde, like yntothe ſeedeof A ggeb; burwithout | 
| any ſmellorfauourartall.: | | 
| | | The placeofhis growinggandrimeof his flo- 
-|: 3:\: wring,are better knowne then deſired; | 
- , | Cockleiscalled Pſeadoinramnthiims, and N/- 
| 1 gellaſtrun "wilde otbaſtarde Nigella of Fuch/in 
4: Loltwm: of Mouton Lichnoides ſegrtum , of Tragus 
-- | Gubago:inhigh dutchKomegitcrin low Ducch 
| | Copie-roolth-rinBrench 2zele des Bleas : 
[ | in 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. 927 


:n Engliſh Cockle, ficlde Nigella,or wilde Nigella: in Italian Girhone , whereypon moſt Herbarilt 
being mooued with the likenes of the word,hauc thoughtit to be the true Gith or Melanthiunes bir 
how far they are deceiued,itis better knowne then necdfull robe contuted: for it doch not one'y 
differ in leaues fromthe true Gith,bur alfo in other properties, and yet it is called Gith or Me/an-" 
thu, and that 15 of the blacknes of the ſeede ;yer nor properly,but with a certaine adGirion,th..t it 
way differ from the true Melanthmm: tor Hippocrates callethit Melanthium ox Tritico,of wheate : 
Otanims Horatianm calleth that Gith which groweth among corne, and tor the fame cauſe it is 
named of the learned ofthis our time Nrgellaſtram,Githago, and P feudemelanthium : Ruelltts laith, 
it iscalledin French Nzele;and Flos Micancatin. | | 
$::iþ:9/ , % The temperature. 
The ſeede of Cockle is hot and dry aboutthe later end of the ſecond degree. 
| | *: The vertues. | 
The ſeede ade in a peſlarie or mother ſuppoſitorie with honie put vp, bringeth downe the de- A. 
fired fickngs,as Hippocrates in his booke of womens diſcaſes doth witnes, | 
Otis Heratianms giueth the ſeede parched and beaten to powder to be drunke againſt the 
vellow iaundilc. | | 
Some ignorant people haue vied the ſeede heereof for the ſc ede of Darnel), to the great danger C 
of thole who haue received the ſame : whar hurt it doth among corne,the ſpoile vato bread,as well 
in colour,taſte,and vnholſomnes,is better knowne then deſired. - 


Of Fumitorie. Chap.429. 


| *% The kindes. | 
"] on be diuers herbes comprehended vnder the title of Fumitorie, ſome wilde, and others of 
the garden;ſome with bulbous or tuberous rootes,and others with fibrous or thredGie rootes: 
_ and firſt of thole whoſe roates are nothing bur ſtrings, IF] 


1 Funaria purpurea. 
Common or purple Fumitorie, 


# 
_— 


2 F _—.; 
White flowred Fumitorie, 


FI > 


| STEW 
pY 


THE SECOND BOOKE, OF THE 


* The deſeription. 


Vmitorie is 2 ve tenderlitcle herbez the ſtalkes thereof are ſlender,hauing as it werelittle 

knots or ioints full of branches,that ſcarce grow vp from the grounde withour proppings 

but for the moſt part they growe ſidelong : the leaues roundeabourare ſmall , cut on the 
edges as thoſe of Coriander , which as well as the ſtalkes are of awhiriſh greene :the flowers be 
made vp incluſters at the tops ofthe ſmall branches, of ared _—_ colour : then riſe vp huckes, 
'* roundandllitrle,in which licth the ſmall ſecede: the roote is ſlender,and groweth ſtraight downe, 
2 The ſecond kinde of Fumitorie hath many ſmall and tender branches, whereupon growe little 
iagecd leaues,in colour, taſte andfaſhion like vnto the former,but much lefler,h auung at the top of 
the branches many ſmall claſping tendrels, with which it raketh holde vpon hedges, buſhes, and 
whatſocuer groweth next vnto it: the flowers are: ſmall and cluſtering togither , of awhite colour, 
mixed with a little blewgafte which do ſucceedecods,conteining the ſcede; the roore is fingle, and 
of a fingerlengrth, F-e+ 74 | | | 


3 Fumariatenuifolis. | : 4 Funaria lates. | 
Fine leafed Fumitorie, | | Yellow Fumitorie, 


*T b deſeription. 


3 Thethirdkind of Fumitorie hath a very ſmall root,confiſting of divers little ſtrings,from which 

ariſe ſmall and tender branches,trailing heere and there vpon the grounde; beſer with many {mall 

and tender leaues ,moſt finely cur and 1agged,likethe lieedolexn of Dill, of a deepe greene colgur 

tending to blewnes :the flowers ſtande on the tops of the branches, in bunches or cluſters thicke 

thruſt rogirher,like thoſe of the medowe Clauer,or three leafed graſle,of a moſt bright red colour, 

and very beautifull to behold: the roote is veric ſmall and threddie, - | | whe 
= þ —_ =} 4 | - 


HISTORIE) OF: PLANTS/'''/' many 


The yellow Fumitoric bath many cra 


wbling thredgic rootes, ſomewhat thicke,groſle, and-far, 
like thoſe of Aſperagan: from whichriſe diuers vpright Ralkes a cubirehigh , diuidin | theinſelues 
cowarde the top into other ſmaller branches, whereon: dre confuſcdly placedleanes like thoſ&of 
Thalitrum or Engliſh Rubarbe, butleſſer and:thinner: alongſt mac 6 of tie:branches-grow yel- 
low flowers,reſembling thoſe of Sage,which being paſt there followeth ſmall ſeede like vnto duſt, 


Ls . - * ® 4 
O71 10h SN O10NGT 


9P11T Fro t:5:m5i5 DOE 
Fumaria alba [atifolia. wt ts 6 Fumarialatifoliaminor, 
White broade leafed Fumitorie,/!-- - | 
; | | 


71] 


* 7 hedeſeription. 


5 Thewhite Fumitorie with broad leaues hath a very ſmall roces ne thruſt intothe ground; 
from which ariſe ſmall tender branches trailing heere and there vpon the grounde, garniſhed with 
divers leaues confuſedly ſet vpon ry v7, or footeſtalks,{mooth,very greene of colour, and 
ſet togither by three and three, like vnto the Trefoiles or three leafed grafle : among the leaues 
come foorth cluſters of white flowers, ſet togither in bunches, reſembling a cluſter of filberd nne; 
when they are but yoong,of a white colour, tipped ar thepoinrs with a little light bluſh of purple 
hard tobe diſcerned,except it be aduiſedly looked vpon. | 
6 The ſmallexbroade leafed Fumitoric is like vntothe laſt deſcribed in each reſpec, ſaving it is 
altogitherleſſer,whercin onely conſiſterh the difference, | 
| * The place. | 
The Fumitories do grow in corne ficldes among Barley and other graine, in vineyards, gardens, 
andſuch like manured places; I founde the laſt and thirde in number growing'in a cornefielde be- 
bvcene a ſmall village called Charleton and Greenwich, 
| *% The tome. | | | 
Fumitorie is ſowen with his flower in the beginning of Maie, and ſo continueth tothe ende of 
ſommer,then is it the beſt time to be gathered to keepe drie = diſtill, | | : 
by | nn 1 | '' |} W750 


> - 


930 THE; ECON D//B OOKE OFUTHE 


| WpRlomeanericn oh ed otro in ac, 
+a Fumitorie incalledin Greekda-ards eve ws andoften wmiris: jtiEatine EY of well 
Capnost inſhops Funterre:in high Durch Erdtrauch tin lowe Duech Smfecom, Duynen 
Keruel zin Spaniſh-Fa/amphe :iri French and Englith Funnizene, . as | 
b 47 4 thontÞ! 4. 1th Thetomperaturt.s Rach gn ce? 
; Funjtoriei is nothot as ſome hauc thought ir ro be, bur colde] and fomerhing drie » it openeth 
and cr vrine, | ; | TY 9h 
SIRE 7% Y + Ti \ubrrmes. | | 
A It good fo Mlabem tharkaneeithe ſcabs« orany other filth growkngon the Skin ul for them 
alſo that have the French difcaſg./ 

B Itremooneth toppings from? c & liver and ſpleeneyjr purfiet the bloud,andi is + ER good 

for them thathauea. quartaine agve, | 
- C / The decoctionof the hetb Hevicd robs given, or elſe 7 TOR chat is made of the iuice: the 
diſtilled water thereofis alſoprofitable forthe putpoſes aforeſaid, 
D Itisoftentimes boiled in whaje, andin this maner it helperh in the ende of the ſpring andin fom- 
mer timethoſe thatarerroubled with ſcabs, | - + 

E Pauls CAEginetsaith,that plentifully proubkerh vrinc, and takellns bra theſtoppings of the 
liver and feeblenes thereof,that ſtrengthneth the ſtomacke and makeththe bo ſoluble. 

F  Dioſcorides afficweth, that thei mice of Fumitoric,of that which growethamong Barley as AEgi- 
nets addeth,with gum Arabi dorh take away vnprokfitable haires that prick the eies,growing vp- 
on the eic lids , thehaixes thatp| c being fi | p ucked away) for it will not ſuffer others to growe 
in theirplaces, | | 

G. | 'ThedecoQtion of Fumitorie 750 Aripeth forth by vrine and ſiege, all hor, cholerick, burner, 
and burcfull == $41 Þ is a moſt _ ar offalr and FR Ro urs, | 


o blba Funinri, or Holler rote. Oo 430. 


*T he hinder, 


6 6 Here be diversfonk & Hollow rootes ſome preatet,others leſſer, locks of one colour and cli- 
mate,and _— of diuers rod, as ſhall be declared. 


t» 


*T be rr, 


Heleaues of great Hollow roote are age andcurtin ARPIEN be thoſe of C beldnder of 
alight greeniſh colour, thatistofay, hke the gray colour of the leaues of Columbine, 
 whereunto they bealſo in forme like, bur leſſer: the ſtalkes be ſinooth, rounde, and {lender, 
an handfull long ; about which, on the vpper parrſtande lirtle lowers orderly placed, lon , with a 
little horne at che ende,like the flowers of Toadeflaxe,of alight red tending to a purple our: the 
ſeedelieth in flat cods, very ſoft and greeniſhwhen iris conc to yeclde vp his blacke ſhining ripe 
leede: the roote 15 bumped or bulbus,hollowe within, and on the vpper part preſſed downe ſom- 
what flat,couered ouer with a darke yellaw Skin or barke, with certaine ſtrin gs faſtned thereto,and 
of a bitter and auſtere raſte. 
2 Theſecondis like vato the firſt in each reſpect, {auing chat it bringeth flowers of awhitc c0- 
lour,andthe other not ſo. ; 
3 The ſmall purple Hollow roote. hath roote)-feoues, ſtalkes, flowers, and ſeedes, like vnto the 
precedent,the eſpeciall difference is,thatthisplantis ſomwhar leſſer. 
4 "Theſmall white Hollowe roote likewiſe agreeth with the ſexier in each reſpec, caving that 
chis pls ga white flowets,and the — not ſo. | wY9 
I 


Ry 


HISTO 


1 Ralis cautmaior purpurea. 


Greatpurple Hollow roote. 


* 


{ ' 


2 Radix Fans miner purea. 
Small purple Hollow roote. 


RIE OF' PLANTS. | gar 


_— 


2 Radix canamaiar alba. 
Great white. Hollow roote: 


M770! 7 


* 
-- 


1 
\. 
"Rr 


) 


- 


NY \ | 
\ | ” 
. 1 
;: #; 
: | il Fg 
. v; , ; n_ 
_ / "x 4 L a 
\ ; 


ZN 


2 
ly 


"4 
RM dW- > 


W. }, 


yew 
zz 


F 


> Ya 
. _ 


4 Radix cans minor alba. 
Small white Hollow roete, 


25S 27 


THE SECOND: BOOKE OF THE 


| _—_— variegata. || 6 Radixeaaalbavariegats. 
zoqte of twocolours, || White Hollow roote diuerſly mixed. 


Az 


/ .V q A. ITN 
7 aw | - BS BN Wk Je 


FE £4 % "1 —— 
DE NE 
» > - h 
[4 4 I 


SIJ-- > [+ 
<A do ah 48 


Vonnged 
F k Y\ X- 
WY ANS 
S\\ML/2 


| 


5 This kinde of Hollow roote is alſo like the laſt deſcribed, ſauing thar the flowers heereof are 

mixed with purple and white, which maketh it to differ ſromthe others. = 

6 Thercisnotany diffcrence that is poflibleto be diſtingniſhed fr6m the laſt deſcribed, ſaving 

that the flowers heercof are of a mixt colour, white and purple , with ſome yellowe inthe hollow- 

nes of the ſame,wherein cqnſiſterh the difference from the precedent, | 

7 ' This thin leafed Hollow rooteghath likewife an hollow ropte, coed locks with a yellow pil- 
[ 


% The deſcription. 


ng;of the bignes of a tennice ball : from which ſhoote vp leaues ſpred vpon the ground, verie like 
vnto the leaucs of Columbines,as well in forme as colourbutmuch thinner, more iagged, and al- 
rogither leſler: —_— riſe vp ſinall tender ſtalkes, weake, and feeble, of an handfull bigh, 
bearing from the middle thereof to the top very fine flowers, faſhioned vnto one peece of the Co- 
lumbine flower, which reſemblech a little birde of a purple colour, | | ] 
8 Thisother thin leafed Hollow root is like the precedent, fauing thatthis plantbringeth foorth 
white flowers tending to yellownes or as it were the colour ofthe field Primroſe. - ; 
9 Bunnykens holwoztele,as the Dutch men do callir, hath many ſmall iagged leaues growing 
immediately from the ground:among which riſe vp very ſlender ſtalkes , whereon do growe ſuc 
leaucs as thoſe next the ground:on the top of the branches ſtand faire purple flowers,like vnto the 
others of his kinde, ſauing thar the flowers heeteof arc'as it were ſmall birdes, the bellies or lower 
parts wherof,are of a white colour,wherein it differeth from all the reſt of the Hollow rootes. 
19 . Thelaſtandſinall Hollow roote is like the laſt deſcribed;fauing that it is altogither lefer,and 
the flowers heerof are of a greene colour,nor vnlike in ſhape to the flowers of Cinfoile, 


b Q 
4 


7 Radix 


42 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 977 


| | SP IIK | x cand tenmſolia alta. 
41x 6404 Henne olia prerpurea. S Ra arx " ol | , . 
7K 1 e Hol wr, with thinleanes, | Whurc Hollow roore with thin leaues. 


Sa VO. 4. >:09 bs YES WP +77 
CJ - Pm DN D WES 


% <I> = 
TIES bn T 


\ Ns \ 

x > \\ (if 
/ %),F4) 
F = 


' # Rad 2” | = 10 Radix cans minima wvirid; flore. 
9 x Caitug mrnor | Smal Bunnikens Holwort with green flowers. 


Bunnikens Holwort,or Hollow roote, 


| | Theplace. WE | 
Theſe plants do grow about hedges [Ohm ger in the borders of fieldes be vineyardes 
low and fertill grounds,in Getmanie and the lowe countries , neuertheleſle the 


the ibed | 
wo laft deteibeddo grow iamy guen. | Mov 2 


two firſt, andalſe 


934 THE SECOND! BOOKE OF THE 
| x = *% Thetime. | | 

Theſe do flower in Mareh', and their ſeede! 1sipe in Aprill: the leaues and ſtalkes are gone in 

Maic,and nothing remaming fauc onely the rgotes,ſo little a while do they continue. 
/ * The names. | BYE | 

Hollowroote is called in high Dutch Holwurtz: in low Durch Haokwortele,char is, a4; x 4. 
v4: in Englith Hollow roote,and Holewoort: it is vied in ſhops inſteede of £.r5ſtolochza,or roung 
Birrhwoort,which errrour is betrer knowne then needtull ro be confured: and likewiſe their errour 
is apparant,who rafhly judge it to be P:ff-/och14,or lictle Birthwoorr, It ſhaulde ſeeme the old wr. 
ters knew it not,for ſome haue made it Leontopeti/; ſpectem or akind of lions Turnep;others Eriphig 
& others ſom Theſawm, moſt men Capnos Chetidenia:it ſeemerh to agree with Leonteperaton,in bulbed 
rootes,and ſomewhat in leaucs, but inno other icipeCts, as Dieſcorides and Plmy do teſtific, And if 
Eriphiuom have his name &m 74 ies, that is to lay, of the ſpring, then this roote may be not vnpro-. 
| a Ergphium,and Verbs Planta,or the plant of the ſpring: fof iris euidenrthar it appeererh and is 
greene in the ſpring onely ;ſome thinke it hath beene called Er/phium ab Hed, or of the goat; but 
this Eriphton is quite another plant, as both Lpulcizs writeth, and thatbooke alſo mentioneth 
which 1s attribured ro Ga/ezn,and dedicated to Paternianu. In the booke which i3 dedicated to pa- 
ternianm, there be read theſc wordes z Eriphion is an herb which is found vpon high mounraines,ic 
hath leaues like Smallage a fine lower like the Violer, and a roote as great as an Onion tit hath 
likewiſe other rootes which ſend foorth rootes/ after rootes. Whereby it is euidentthar this roote 
whereof we intrear is notthis kinde of Eriphizyn at all, for Eriphizm howſocuer the ancients: have 
foiſted this long diſcourſe of controverſies ,is the ſelfe ſame buſbe mentioned inthe firſt part of our 
hiſtorie by the name G/adzo/us, whichis alſo called Er5phium, and Zyphiam, Concerning Theſam 
the old writers haue written but little : Theophra/us ſaich,thart the roote thereof is bitrer,and bei 
ſtamped purgerh the belly : P/xxy in his 21.booke 17. chapter ſhewerth that the roote which is = 
led Theſawn 1s like the bulbed plants,and is rough in taſte: Arbenews citing Timachida for an author 
{aith,that Theſimis called a flower, of which 1r;adnes garland was made. Theſe things ſeeme well 
to agree-with hollow roote 3 for it is bumped ot bulbous, of raſte bitterand auſtere, or ſomething 
rough; which is alſo thought to purge; bur what certainty can be affirmed , ſecing the olde writers 
are 10 briefe > What maner of herbe Capnos Chelrdonia is, which growerh by hedges, and heerupon 
is ſurnamed 2-574, CAHet2iues doth not expounde, onely the name thereof is founde in his ſeconde 
Tetrab. the thirds booke,, Chapter 110. in Aartiznw his Colyriwn, and in his Tetrib. 3.booke 
2. Chapter,among ſuch things as ſtrengrhen theliuer. But if Capnos Chel;donia be that which Pliny 
in his 25.booke,chaper 13. doth call Prima Capmos, ofthe firſt Capnos, and commenderh it for the 
dimnes of the cies,it is plaine inough that Raaps caxe, or the Hollow roote, is not Capnos Chelide- 
n/a: for Plinies firſt Capnos is branched, and foulderhir ſelfe ypon hedges; but Hollow rootc hath 
no ſuch branches growing on it, andis a loweherbe , and is not helde vp with props,nor needeth 
them. Bur if A#t:ms his Coonch Cheltdonia be an other herbe differing from that of PLae, ( which 
thing perchance was the cauſe why ir ſhould be ſurnamed Chelrdenia ) rhere is ſome reaſon why it 
ſhouldeþe called Capmos Che/zdonia, for it is ſomewhat like Fujnitorie in leaues,though greater,and 
commeth vp at the firſt ſpring,which is about the rime when the Swallowes do come inz neverthe- 
leſſe itdoth nor follow , that it is true and right Cepnos Chelidonia; for there be alſo otherhetbes 
comming vp at the fame ſeaſon,and periſh in thor time after, which notwithſtanding are not cal- 
led Chepabanic. tt 3 |. | | \ | SBT 


* The temperature. 


£3 


Hollowroote is hot and dry, yet more drie then hot, thatistoſay , dryin the thirde degreeand 
hot in the ſecondzit bindeth,cleaſeth and ſomwhar waſterh, *' | 
=  w% The vertues. | | 

Hollow root is good againſtold and long laſting fivellings of the almonds in the throte, and of 

the iawes:it likewiſe qr mw againſt che paines of .che Hemorrhoides,which are fwoln and pain- 


.. 


A 


full,being mixed with the ointment of Popular buds,called /xg. Populcon. | 
It is reported,that a dram waight heercof being raken inwardly, doth purge by ſiege,and draw- 

cth foorth flegme, [7 1] | 1d | | 
of 


|. 3: Of Columbine. Chap.433. 


, , . IX IS L %* | Fs FI BF | oy f 
1 Aquilegia cerulee. , |. 2- Aquileia ruby. E471 
Blew Columbines, _ | 


1' "THe blew Columbine hath Jeaues like the great Celandine,but fomwhar rounder,indented 
on the edges,partedinto divets ſections of a blewiſh greene colour, which being broken 
ycelde foorth little juice ornone at all : the ſtalke is a cubite anda halte high, flendec red. 

diſh,and {!eightly haired: the ſlender ſprigs wheteof bring foorth euery one , one Mower with fiue 

little hotlowe hornes,as it were hanging foorth, with ſmall leaues ſtanding vpright, of the ſhapeot 
littlebirds :theſe lowers are of colour ſametimes blewe, at oth<r times of a red or purple, ofren 
whitc,or ofmixrcolours, which to diſtinguiſh ſeuerally woulde be to ſmall purpoſe, being things fo 
familiatlyknowneto all; after the ned 

and glittering ſeede : the rootes are thicke , with ſome ſtrings thereto belonging, which continue 

many yeeres, | | TILE. | 

2 Theſecond doth notdiffer ſauing in the colourof the flowers, for like as the othersAare deferi- 

ded to be blew fo theſe ate ofa purple red,or horſe fleſhcolour,yhichmaketh the difference.” , 

3 Thedouble Columbine hath ſtalkesleaues, and rootes like the former : the towers heerof are 

le, that is toſay,many of thoſe little lowers(hauing the forme of birds)are thruſt one in- 

ly of another, ſomtimes blew,often white,and otherwhiles of mixt colours, asnarutelilt 
to plaie with hir little ones, differing to infinitely that to diſtinguiſh them apart , woulde require 
more time then were requiſite to leeſc; and theretore it ſhall ſuthice what hatl beenefaide fortheir 


{1 HISTORTE OF! PLANTS. 


Red Columbines. | | A 
$. TEEN 
- s Tp 


{<D FJ LAN, | - ' FE 2. 
». f < "> f "> #þ 1 \ ” — 
BY N 'F £ & » ”Y JL Al p x4 A Y —_ 
phy 1 4 \/ =M\\ Y; Z 
eNZ- A $= Zo == 
% j* AA, Þ=.. — C Z J 
q of #& 4 2 \ # - 9 3 , v2 P14 \\ 
? 4m 74 i oO NL - A / Q 
>: ” A\ - '\ \ "2s 
, — + FJ >a fs 


2. 


*% 


* The deſeription. 


5 growe vp coddes , in which is conteined lirtle blacke 


© 2 ; 
- 


Nnn 4 | 3 Aqnilins 


B 


- 


THE. SECOND\/BOOKEi OF' THE 
Aquilina multiplex. J | Te 
if Dauble ent. Lid | Us xr, 4 he place. | 
I's Ak |=" Theyareſet and ſowen in gardens for the beay.. 
|. ticandyvariable colours of the flowers. | 
it  %Thetime. 
They flower in Maie,lune,and Iuly, - * 
| we Thenanes. 
': Columbine is called'of the later Herbatiſtes 
|| Aquileta, Aquilins,avd Aguilegia: of Coſteny py- 
 thos,of Geſnerus Leontoſtamum, of Dalecampius of 
'  Louaine, Joutsflos : of ſome Herbs Leoni, or the 
| | herbe wherein the Lion doth delight: in high 
/; Dutch nyo low Ducch Akeleyentin French 
|. Apncoiles:in! gliſh Columbine. 1 
[| + The temperature, | 
|. Columbines arethought tobe temperate be- 
|| tweene heateand moiſture. | 
[ El. El dong | 2P 
\ otwithſtanding what temperatureor yer. 
|, tues Colombines haue,;, is A ſufficiently 
| | knownez for they are vſedeſpecially to decke the 
gardens of rhe curious, garlandes, and houſes: 
; | neuertheleſſe Tragwe writeth, that adram waight 
' . | oftheſeede, with halfeaſcruple or ten graines of 
* | | ſaffrongiuenin wine,is a good and effeQuallme- 
| dicine forthe ſtopping ofthe liver,and the yellow 
| Jaundiſe; burfaith he, that who ſo hath taken ir 
- | muſt bee well couered with clothes, and then 


= 
W 


£154 3 Get | ſ\weate. - | | | 
Moſt do attribute vntoit the yertues of wilde Otes ; others of Centory, bur raſhly and withour 
any reaſon ;z moſt in theſe daies following others by tradition , do vie robbie the leaues in milke 
againſt the ſorenes of the throre, falling & cxcoriation of the yuula: burche ancient writers hauc 
ſaide nothing heerof: Reeſl;zs reporteth, that the flowers of Columbines are not vſedin medicine, 
etſome there be that do affirme they are good againſt the ſtopping of the liver , which effc& rhe 
res do alſo performe. | [| | | | 


Of Wormewood. | Chap.432. 
| | * The kinde % | bt. 
& Kanon be divers forts of Wormewood , one with broade leaues that excelleth thereft: other 
wwo hane ſmaller and flenderer leaues; the reſtarebaſtardkinds : Dzoſcorides makerth mention of 
wage forts of Wormewood, Ponticamn, Seriphiun,and Santonicum , which are to be referred to the 
formerkindes. | lf TY | | | 


—_ x 


I Hefirſt kinde being our common and beftknowne Wormewood, hath leaues of a grayiſh 
| colour, very much cut or jagged,and very bitter : the ſtalkes are of a woodie ſubſtance two 
ubites high,and full of branches alongſt which do grow little yellowiſh bortons, wherein 
is found ſmall ſeede like the ſeede of Tanſey, bur ſmaller: the roote is likewiſe of a woodie ſubſtance, 
and full of fibres. | PI 1 IF S | 
2 Theſecond kinde of Wormwood bringeth foorth ſlender ſtalkes about a foote high or ſome- 
what more,garniſhed with leaues like the former, bur much leſſer, and cut or iagged into molt fine 
and ſmall cuts or diuifions :the flowers are likethe former , hanging vpon ſtems _— 
/ 


 HISTORTE OF PLANTS. | 937 
heads downward: the rootes are whitiſh , ſmall and many, crawling andcrambling one ouer ano- 
ther, and chereby infinitely do increaſe, of ſauourlefſe pleaſantthenthecommon Wormewoode. 
Some haue termed this plant _46b/anthium ſantonicum , bur they had ſlenderreaſon foto do : for ifit 
was fo called bicauſe it was imagined to growe in the prouince of Santoinge ; it may very well ap- 
>ccre tothe contrary;forin the Alpes of Galaria a countrey in Alia minvr,it groweth in greatplen- 
ry,and therfore may rather be called Gelsrium Sardonicwnand no: Saptonicum: but icauing contro- 
acrſies impertinent rothe Hiſtory, itis the Ponticke Wortmewood of Ga/ensdelcription, and ſo 

holden of the learned Paludane,who for his ſingular knowledge in plants, is woorthie triple honor, 
 andlikewiſe manic others. ee 1 | Py 


I Abſcnthiun latifolium /iue ponticum. 2 Abſanthium tenuifolium ponticun Galeni. 
Broad leaked Wormwood. | Small Ponticke Wormwood. 


a "> 


; > 
Y - 
W CEEGES ,- 
F SLAC; # 
= 
[/ 


* Theplace, 

This broad leafed Wormewood delighteth to grow on rockes and mountaines, and in vntilled 
placeszit groweth much vpon dry bankes, itis common every where in all countries ; the beſt faith 
Dieſcorides is founde in Pontus , Cappadocia, and on mount Taurus; Play writeth that Ponricke 
Wormwood is better then that of Italic ; Ox;4 in theſe words doth declare that Ponticke Worme- 


A 


wood is extreme bitter: | 
Turpia deformes gignunt abſmthia campi, 
Terraquede fruttu,quem ſit amara docet. 
Vntilled barren ground the filthy lothſome Wormwood yeelds, 
: Andknowneits by the fruite how bitterarethe fieldes. | 
And Belbniwsin his firſt booke of ſingularities chap.76, doth ſhewe, that there is alſo a broade | 
leafed Wormwood like vnto ours growing Mm the prouinces of Pontus, and is vied in Conſtantino- 
iy by the Phiſitions there it is likewiſe founde incertaine colde countries of Switzerlande,which 
reaſon ofthe chilnefle of the aire riſeth not vp, bur creepeth vpon the ground, wherupon diuers 
callitcreeping Wormwood, A 4 
*7 he 


938 - THE SECOND BOOKE: OF/ THE 


| 1... % Thetime. | | 
Thelittle flowers and ſeedes ate perhred m July and Auguſt;then may VWormwoodbe gathereg 
and laid vp for profitable ſes. bond | rg | 
| Te $14 | * The names. | | 
It is called in Greeke 44%»: it ts named of Aputcius Abſinthium ruſticum,countrey VWegrmwong 
or peſants Wormwoodzyc haue named it Ab /inthinm latifolrum,broad icated Wo rmwood, that 
_it may differ fromthe reſt: the ihterpretors: of the Arabians call the better ſort, which D@w{. 
rides nameth Ponticke VWormwgod, Romymmuw Abfjorthium, Romaine Wormwood, and after ele 
the barbarous Phiſitions of the later age : the Italians name Wormwoode)Aſexſo : the Spaniards 
Axenxios, Aſſenſos, moſt of them Donzel!: the Portingales Ab/na: in high Dutch UCUrronmut 
Uermut z in French A4gze : inEugliſh commgn Wormwgod, 6 5. BK : 
Victor Trincawtl/aa fingular Phiſigion, in his praRtiſe tooke it for Ab/anthiunm Ponticam, 
: | ET. Thetemperature, (Lt | | 
© Wormwoodis of temperaturehot and dry,hotin the ſeconde degree, ant dry inthe thirde: it is 
birter and clenfing,and lkewiſc hath power to binde or faſten, | b-4 
” al. | *% The wertues, | | his | 
A Iris very profitable to a weake ſtamacke that is troubled with choler, for it clenſeth ir thorongh 
his birternes , purgeth by ſiege and-vrine : by reaſon of the binding quality, it ſtrengthneth and 
comforteth the ſtomacke,bur helpeth nothing at all ro remooue flegme conrained in .'s ſtomacke 
as Galenaddeth, * || | A RA! 4 | | 
B lItitberaken before a ſurfeit itkeepeth it off,and remooueth lothſomnes,faith Dioſeorides: andit 
helpeth not onely betore a ſurteir,; but alſo it quicklyretreſheth the ſtomacke and belly after large 
_ eatinganddrinking, |! .. +} X2 Hi. | | 
C Iris oftentimesa good remedieagainſt long and lingering agues , eſpecially tertians :foritdoth 
not onely ſtrengthen the ſtomacke and make an appetite to meate , but it yeeldeth ſtrengthrothe 
| liner alfo,and riddeth it ofobſtruQions or ſtoppings,clenfing by vrine naughtic humours, 
| D Furthermore Wormwood is excellent good for them that vomite bloud from the ſpleene, the 
which hapneth when cheſpleene being overcharged & filled vp with grofſe blouddoth vaburden ir 
ſelfe, and then great plenty of blqudis oftentimes caſt vp by vomitre. It hapneth likewiſethat ſtore 
of black & corrupt bloud mixed with excrements paſſech dowhwards by the ftoole & it oftentimes 
hapnerh that with violent and large vomiting the ſicke man fainteth or ſwouneth}, or when he is 
reuiued doth fall into a difficult and almoſt incurable rympanie,eſpecially when the diſeaſe doth of- 
ren happen; but from theſe dangers Wormwood candeliuer him, if when he is refreſhed after yo- 
mite and his ſtrength any way recquered,he ſhall a good while yle it, in what maner ſocuer he him- 
 ſelfe ſhallthinke good, | -- | | | 


E - Azgaine,VWormewood yoideth away the =! of the guts,nar onely taken inwardly , but ap- 


_ pli:doutwardly: it withſtanderh all purrifactions; it is good againſt a ſtinking breath it keepeth 
garments allo from the Morthes; it driueth away gnats , the bodice being annointed with the oyle 


thereof. | | | | 
F Likewiſeitis ſingular good in pulteſies and fomentarions to binde and to dry. 
G Befidesall this Disſcortdes declareth,that it js good alſo againſt windines and griping paines of 
the ſtomacke and belly,with Sefeli and French Spikenard: the decoRion cureth the yellowe taun- 
diſc or the infuſion,jit it bedrunke thriſe a day ſome ten or twelue ſponfuls at a time. | 
H Ichelpeth them chat areſtcangled with cating of muſhrumes,or road ſtooles, if it be drunke with 
_-vineger. | 8 | | 
And being taken with wine,it is gocd againſt the poiſon of Miſtletow , andof Hemlocke, and 
againſtche biting of the ſhrew mouſe,and of the ſea Dragon, it is applied to the ſquincic or inflam- 
mations ofthe throte with hony and niter, and with water to night wheales , and with honyto 
{wartiſh markes that come vpon bruſes, 1 ns 
'K lrisappliedafterthe ſame maner rodim eies,and ro mattetingeares. £ 
loachimus Camerariusof Noremberg commenderh it greatly againitthe iaundiſe, giuing of the 
flowers of Wormwood,Roſemarie, Sloes,of each a ſmall quanritie, and a little Saffron, boiled in 
wine,the body firſt being purged and prepared by the learned Phiſition, 


= - of 
2 . —_ % 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


Of ſmall leafed Wormwood, which is called Romane 
Wormiwood. Chap.433. 


Abſinthiwn tenuifolium ſeu Ronanum. a | 
Romiſh Wormwood, | *% The deſcription. Fe 5 
; 6 ; Mall leated Wormwood bringeth foorth 
W,; very many little branches flender,a ſpan or 
a foote high, full of leaues, leſſe by a great 
deale, and tenderer then the former, moſt finelie 
and nicely minced : the flowers like thoſe of 
the former , hang vpon the little branches and 
ſprigs : the rootes are {mal creeping ouerthwarrt, 
from whence do-riſe a great number of yoong 
ſprouts : this VVormwood alſo is ſomewhar 
white , and lefle bitter a good deale then the 
broad leafed one,and hath not ſo ranck;or ſo vn- 
pleaſant aſmell,bur rather delightfull, 
&% Theplace. | 
Itgrowethplentifully in Myſta, Thracia,Hun- 
garic, and Auſtria, andin other regions neere 
adioining it isalſo founde in Bohemia, andin 
many vntilled places of Germanie ; it is a gar- 
den plant in the low Countries, and in England, 


; *% Thetimme. DT, 
Ic bringeth foorth flowers and ſeede in Au- 
tumne:a lied while after when winter commeth 
the herbe withereth away, butthe roote remai- 
neth aliue, from which, leaues and ftalkes do 
come againe inthe ſpring. | | 
*% Thenames. 

It is commonly called Ab/arthinr Romanum :& 
in low durch Roomſche Alſcne,by which name it is known to very wany Phiſitions8 apothecaries, 
who vſe this in ſtecd of Pontick VVormwood : furthermore it hath a leate and flower farrelefle then 
theother Wormwoods : likewiſe the ſmell of this is notonely pleafant, bur it yeeldeth allo x ſpicie 
ſent, whereas all the reſt have a ſtrong and lothſome ſmell : and this Pontick Wormwgod doth 
differ from that which D zoſcoridescommendeth, for Droſcorides his Pontick Wormwood is ac- 
counted among them of the firſt kinde, or of broad leafed Wormwood; which thing alſo Ga/ep 
_ affirmechinhis fixt booke of thefaculties of medicines, in the chapter of Sothernwood. There be 
three kinds of VVormwood(laith he) whereof they vie to call one by the generall name, and thart is 
eſpecially Pontick: whereby it is manifeſt that Galen inthis place hath referred Pontick tono other 
- thento the firſt Wormwood ; and therefore many not without cauſe maruell,that Ga/ex hath writ- 
ten in his booke of the method of curing how Pontick Wormwooad is lefſe in lower &leafe ; ma- 
nicexcuſe him,and lay the fault vpon the corruprion of the booke,and in his 9. booke of Methode 
theleſſer they would haue the longer. Therefore this Wormewood with the leſſer leafe is nor the 
rizht Ponticke Wormwood, neither againe the Arabians Romaine Wormwood, who haue no 
other Romaine then Ponticke Wormwood of the Grecians. Alſo many belceue that this is called 
Santonicumn, but this is not to be ſought for in Myſia, Thracia, or other countries Eaſtward; bur .in 
Fraunce beyond the Alpes, if we may beleeue Droſeorides his copies: there be that woulge have it 
growe not beyond the Alpes of Iraly, but in Galatia a countrey in Afta, and in the region of the 
Sardihes,which alſois thelefler Afta, whereuponit was called in Greeke £:%%y, which was chan- 
pedinto the name Santonicuwn through the errour of the tranſlators: Dzoſcorrdes his copies keepe 
the word Sardoniumand Glens copies Santonicwn, which came to poſterity as ir ſcemeth. It is cal- 


\ led 


949 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
tedin Engli | : BY Ys POT IOOP T7 7 OP bo 
and French — ann? TY Oy Wormntod, garden in Cypres Wornwood!' 
Small leafed Wormwood tay | "iriob han | 
mall leated Wormwood is of facultie hot anddry, it is bitter alſo, butleſſe 2 
the broad leafed one, the greateſt forceitharh is in ke Oz L lefle a good deale then 
| | , * The vertues. | | 
The tacultics are referred vnto the common YVormwood. 


Of) « Wormnooed. Chap.434- 


1 Abſinthium marinun py Tl 2. fot him iv 
WhickaWommoo,” |” Broaden Wennteed” 


K. i 
SM 
o 
M1 


2, - 
WALL j-< - 


ij 
- / Y 


k 8 - x wa | A p ” E . . . l , ® k 
; ” 4 , hs, £ _ N 
"/ —— ” {/ * ar . 
. # - 
PAN . / , _— 4 
g j SD” F, 
[ _— , 
i - "4 - _ - - , 
ze j - " 
"4 y >; - of 
4 Z pet is” - _— W = WW _ = a g "_" , 
F_—_— ox oY a ator " % y uHbES 
— n 
Wl >. þ 2 


: IDE 


| % The deſeription. 
» *T" Hewhite ſea Wormwood(which Pex and Z'Obelcus call 4b /onthinm Ponticurm, or Triden- 
| tinum, Dodonews in his laſt Edition Sergphiams ) hath many leaues cur and diuided into 
infinite fine iagges, like thoſe of Sothernwood , of a white hoaric colour and ſtrong ſinell, 
butnor vnpleaſant : among which riſe vyptough hoarie ſtalkes ſet with the like leaues, on the top 
whereof dogrow ſmall yellowiſh/flowers : the rooteis tough,and creepeth farre abroad,by meanes 
whereofirgreatly increaſeth. | | $99 | | 
.* 2 Thebroadleafed ſea Wormwood hath very many ſoft leaues , growing cloſe by the grounde, 
' ofadarke ſwartcolour,nathing ſo finely cut or iabped as the other of his kinde: the flowers grow 
vpon the tops of the ſtalkes of a yellowiſh colour: the roote is togh and creeping. 
| | _ | * Thep/ace. m2 Vis 
Theſe Woormwoods do growe vpon the des grounds inthe ſalrmarſhes necre vnto the ſea, | 
1 ; } | ut 


HISTORIE\ OF PLANTS. |” _ 


moſt plcesof Erighad y —_— tintogardens doth'there flouriſh as 9s. ehineyoai 
place, and retaineth his ſinetl rafte;andma dens hath beene often RO of bas 
ma res ven: | | WY RF 

Theſebting foorth dowersand ſeedes;ihen theother Wornmroods do. | 

114+ he nawes.. - 

Sea Wormweodi is called ity Grohe: ddr): Inidiver; in Lane hin merine, andlike-- 
wiſe Seriphinm: n Durch Ste Afſene tof divers Santomremm,as witnelleth D :nete | 
there is anorher Santonicam: ER tea Wotmivood : I ſome wore of the 

 *countrey,garden No ns 9! 1 21/67 Nototoc 
: hco3thicanperayees ; : 207 07 1:11] af 
| Sea Wormwoodis ofnature hot and a 
* Theverrues. 


Piofeerides affirmerh that being rak&Fof it ſelfe,or boiled with Rice;andearen wich Koop JE A 
the mall wormes of the gurs,and gently looſeth the belly ;the which Pliny alſo doth affirme. 
Theiuiceof lea Yenninggd drunke with wine reſiſteth por , eſpecially the poiſon of Hew- B 
lockes. 


Theleaves ſtamped ſilpererand the meale of Darnell andappliedrothe belle des 'C 
or flanckes help the ſnipbeaif and ſachas are ſplenirike. : 


The ſame is fingular againſt allinflammarions , and heateof tnbdrectthnr exceeding D 
all the kinds of Wormwood for the fame purpoſes that common VWormwood ferueth, 

Itis reported by ſuch as dwell Negte the ſeaſtde ,tharthecartle which do feed whey i it growerh E 
become fat and luſty very quickly.. | 

The herbe with his ſtalkes laid in cheſtes preſſes, and wardrobe, keeperh clothes from n morbe: b 
and other Vermine, | 


La Bn -* 
"of bole wr unmoad. Uhp. og 
GY 
cometing. 9-4 | > 9 acla 
Holice Wormwood. _ *%Thedeſeription. 


His Wormwood called Sementina & Semen 
ſandwn, which we haue Engliſhed Holie, 
is thatkinde of VVormwood which bearech 
that ſeede which we haue-.in vie z Ealled Worm- 
ſcede: in ſhoppes Semen ſantolinwm : about which 
there hath been great controuerfie amongſt wri- 
ters, ſome holding that the ſeede of Saptonicum 
Ga/at:um to be rhe true Wormſeede , others dee- 
mingjc to be thatof Rynanum Ab oubimm; doth 
muche reſemble the firſte of the ſea Worm- 
woods in ſhape and proportion: itriſech » p with 
a woodie ſtalke,of the height of a cubire, divided 
into divers branches and wings; whereupon arc 
ſer very ſmall leaues, among which-are placed 
- cluſters of ſecede in ſuch abundance, t ahe 
firſt view it ſecmerh to be a plant conliſtingall of . 
leede. 
* Theplace. F 
Itis aforaineplanc, the ſeedes ple pn in 
the gardens of hor regions do proſper wellz in 
thete colde countries it willnotgroweat all. Ne- 
uerthefle there is one or two..companions abour 
London , who haue reported ynto methar they 
had great ſtore of it growing in their gardens 
yeerely,which they (olde at a great price vntoour 
n 


042 THE .SECOND |BOOKE' OF THE 
London Aporhecaries, and gained much money thereby; one of the meri dwelleth by th; 
and Borilevecks London, &, a name is _—__ into whoſe-garden I) was br = he ” 
thing that I would not belecuc for being oftewwoldethat there ic did growe, I ſtill perſiſted it wa; 
not true: but when I didbehold this great quantitie of VVormwood, 1t was nothing elſe bur chi. 
mon Ao. How many Apothecaries hauebeenedeceiued,how many they haue robbed of their 
Toru andommey child u hacebecne nothing the bertet for taking it, Ireferre ittothe indge.. 
ment of the ſimpleſt ; conſidermg-their ownexeport; to-haue folde manic hundrech poundes 
waight 6fity theanoreto their ſhame beut poken,,/ and the efle wit or skill. in-the Apothecaries. 
therefore haue I fer downe this as a caucat vnto thoſe thar buie of theſe (eedes;firſt to taſte ang tie 
the ſame before they giuc it to their children,orcommitirtoany other vic, 


nalſo the Latines name 
and Seven contra Lum. 


This ſeed is very bitrer,and for thar cauſe of nature hot and dry. 


£* 


= 
it 
# 


| 6 4 1 * The wertaes, | | | 

A Iris goodagainſt wormes of the belly and intrailes, rakeſi jy , and berter alſo ifa little 

Rhe be mixt withall, for/ſo the worryes are not onely killed, burlikewiſe hey are driuen 
 _downe bythe ſiege,which ching muſt alwaicsberegarded. | fl. | 

B The ſcedmixedwith alittle les ſuccorrneand brought to the forme of a plaiſter,and applied 


to the naucll ofa childedorh the like. 


Of forrein and baftard Wormmwoods.. Chap 436. 


EET Wo 2] ; *T he kindes, | | 
Therebe divers ſorts of forrein Wormwoods, as ſhallbedeclared inthispreſent Chapter. 


* The deſcription. 

x Ree Wormwood , Pengthat painfull Herbariſt hath deſcribed, which the ancient writers 

' hauvenot mentioned, tohaue atruncke or ſtocke growing to the height of three or fower 

cubits,of a woodie ſubſtance like vnto the Hollihocke, dividing ar branching it ſelfe into 

ſundry armes toward the top,ſet full of ſmall iagged leaues, not much vnlike the Pine tree, but of 

an hoarie colour , andranke ſmell : the flowers. and ſcedes are like vnto the common Vorme- 
_woode. | þ 4 | [ 

2 M/enthiam albumbach ſtraight and vpright ſtalkes , a cubite and a halfe high , beſer with 

broad leaues, but verie deepely cur or clouen, in ſhewe like vnto Mugwoort: at the top of the ſtalks 

do growe ſinall flowers ſtatre faſhion, compatt of ſixe ſmall leaues: the roote is long with ſome 

fibres annexed vnto it, HEY | PER. =. 


by 
"; - 

- 
z 4 


r1.4 b/ant hign 


943 


2 Abſonthiumn «lbam. 
White Wormwood.- 


HISTORIE (OF (PLANTS. : :: 


1 Abſanthium arbor 
' Tree Wormwoo 


%7 hs 


- —_— 


1 __ 
i 


- p 


4 4b/anthius vagerpn. | 
Vnfauoric Wormwood, | 


- 


#4 
o 
— 
= 
_— 
_ 
» Sina 
a & F = 
>. 
> 6. _ 
— - p 


{ 


> Sl) £2 - 

>, At a 0) 
\DNO1 Li! SLLIZCG 

ol - _ DEFENDS $00 25 25 


Cp ==RIR. 4 


5 


- 


© —_— x. 
RA 


. 


; at 
For 


PL SVN 


DJ D , 

> PEE 1d of bd {gn 

>= F #7. lat HAAS - | 
: WR \ \D Dp WF 


3 Abſinthium AEy 
Wormwood of 


rr - 


944 THE SECOND /BOOKE\/OF THE 
| 7 + The deſeription Bake = fa 


3 Thiskindeof Wommvood ans and thatlearned Apothecaric Yglerendus Donor , Called 
Mb/mthium Egyptizon, but LU Oheljus _Abſinthiam Ponticum,and Trident a, do differ verie little 
inſhape and ſhew one from another; yerall ſuch differences as there are he knowne and diſterneq 
by the place and countrey where they grow: the leaues of thisplane are veric like to the'leanes of 
Trichonanes, which is our common Maidenbaire,of a white colour, cucry ſmall leafe ſtanding one 
Wagons fx a ns corn uti ere . 2 26.1 Jos nate 

4 This Wormwood which Dodonew calleth 4b/inthium inodorum;and Inſpidum, is very like vntg 
the ſea Wormwood, in his ſinall and tender leaues: the ſtalke beareth flowers alſo like vato the 
foreſaide Seawormwood, but itis of a ſad or deepe colour, hauing neither birter taſte, nor any fa. 
nouratall, whereupon it was called and that very firly 4b/anthiur inodorum , or Abſinthium inſipi- 


£ 


dum :inEngliſh fooliſh,or vnſauory wormwood., 


- « 


\ ; | 
5 Aſenthium m1yinum, Abrotoni famine facie. | 
Mugwoort VWVormwood, | cat % Thedeſeription. | 
——Y | | 5. This kinde of ſea Wormwood is aſhrubbie 
and woodieplant, in face and ſhewe like to Mug. 
 woorr, of a {trong ſmell; hauing flowers like thoſe 
' of the common wormwood, at the firſt ſhewelike 
thoſe of Lauander cotton: the roote is tough and 
| woodie, | | 
BY WF:  %Theplice, | 
| Theſeplants are ſtrangers in England, yet we 
: haue ſome fewe of them in the gardens of Her- 
'bariſts. "| 
E | % Thetime. 
| | The timeof their flowring and ſeeding is re- 
: ferred to the other wormwoods, 
| % Thenames. 
| | The white Wormwoode Conrad: Geſnerus 
; nameth Serjphium famine, and faith , that it is 
: commonly called Herbeaba, or white Herbe ;an 
; other had rather name it Santonrewn, for as Dicſ- 
' corides\aith, Sautonicum'is founde in Fraunce be- 
| : yonde the Alpes, and beareth his name of the 
| countrey where it groweth : bur that part of Swil- 
' | ſerlandwhich belongerhto Fraunce is accounted 
of the Romaihes to be beyondthe Alpes; and the 
. | prouince of the Santons is far from it: for this is a 
| part of Guines ſciruated vpon the coaſt of the 
| | Ocean, beneath the floude Gerond northward: 
: therefore Santon wormwood if it haue hisname 


from FY FIR crowerh farte from the Alpes ; burif it growe necre adioining to the Alpes 
chen bath itnort his name of the Santons. | 7 ; f | | S : 


| 


[ | ; + The temperature and vertues. | 
| White wormwoodis hot and ſomewhat drie. 1} | | 
'A Vnſauorie Wormwood as it is without ſmell and taſte, ſois it ſcarſe of any hot qualirie, much 
leſſe hathit any ſcouring faculrie; theſeare not yſed in Phiſicke where the others may be had , be- 
ing asitwere wilde or degenerate kindes of VVormwood,ſome of them participating both of the 


forme and ſmell of other plants. 


Of 


HISTORIE (OF PLANTS. ay 


Of eMugwoort. Chap. 437. oh ing | 
I... * The kindes. 4b * | b- 
There be diuers forts of Mugwoorts.as ſhall e declared. F 


1 Artemiſia mater Herbarum. 


= of I” 47; -; ; 
"4 ED - \ ks 

"4% We 

S "0 Yn 

Wes AZ 

, m OJ 
” ® 


\ my > 
tA M5 x 
PENG 'Þ 
+ L 


: 
- 
v % - 
N - ; 
o » - 
" - *s 
& * 
. of 0 =\ T - v 
»% = FT % 
, **, = 
» 4 7*, NY = - 
= E, LJ) bs þ” 
* \4 Wn 4 
/ 4 D,\ 7 « 
,- oy 
AL PA CT ® 
- \ a) Yom % 4 
. KY 


+ The deſcription. 


I He firſt kinde of Mugwoort hath broad leaues, very much cut or clouen, like the leaves of 
common wormwood,but ſmaller,of a darke greene colour aboue, and hoarie vnderneath : 


the ſtalkes arc long and ſtraight, and full of branches, whereon do growſma!lrounde but- 
tons which are the flowers ,finelling like Marierome when they waxe ripe: the roote is greatand 
of a woodie ſubſtance. | KdtE..- eq 


2 - Theſeconde kinde of Mugwoort hath a great thicke and woodie roote : from) whence ariſe 


-fundrie braunches of areddiſh colour , beſet full of ſmall and fine iagged leaues, very like vnto 


ſeaSothernwood: the ſeed growerh alongſt the ſmall rwiggie branches. like vnts little berries 
which fall not from. their "6d ay a _ time afrer they be ripe, Tn] 7 
3 Thereis another Mugwoort of the ſea;that hath leaues like vnto ſea Purflane,thick farand oile- 
Pn grayiſh colour:among which riſeth vp a ſtalkerwo cubits hi gh,dividing ir felfe into ſundrie 
ae 1 a full of ſmall and barren flowers , like ſea wormwood : the roote is thicke andofa 
licſubſtance. | ES 


Ooo 1 3 Artemiſia 


246 THE-SECOND/|BOOKEVOF |THE 


3 Artemiſia marine. io ld 
pH 4000 01% 1 $Thedeſeription. 
| There is alſo another Mugwoorrt which bath 
| many branches riſing from a woodie roote 
|. © Nanding vpright in diſtances one from another 
; ofanaſhiecolour, beſet with leaues not much 
: +! Ynlike {ea;Pureelanez abour the lower part of 
|  theſtalkes, andtowatdthe top of the branches 
| they arenarrower and leſſer, and cutwith great 
;  anddcepeijagoes, icke in ſubſtance , and of a 
whitiſh colour, as all the reſt of the planc is: it 
yeeldeth a pleaſant ſmell like _1bretonwrn mg. 
1:12, and in taſte is ſomewhar ſaltiſh :the flo- 
wers are many and yellow, which being yaded 
| there followeth moſhe ſcede, like vnto thar of 
| | common wormwood. | 
Y 11%] wTheplace, | 
The common Mugwoorrt groweth wilde in 
'  ſundryplacesaboutthe borders of fields. a 
| | high CURMG=RNS and ſuch like places. 
Sea Mugwoort growethabourRie and Win. 
chelſey cal le, and atPort{mouth by the Ile of 
Wight. | | Mt 
£ | & Thetime. 
They flowerin Iulic and Auguſt, 
[| -  *% Thenames. | 
\PESY  Mugwoortiscalled in Grecke X'pmude: and 
| | alſoinLatine Lremiſfia, which name it hadof -_ 
of noble Meuſolu king of Caria, who adopred it for hir owneherbe: before that ir wascalled - 
wnpbire, Parthenis,as Play writeth.. Apulegus affirmerh that it was likewiſe called Parthenion, who | 
hath very many names for ir,and many of them/are placed in $0, 95(ary among the baſtardnames: | 
moſt of theſe agreewiththe right Arremiſia and divers of ther witttorherherbes, which nowe and | 
then are numbred among the Mugwoorts : it is alſo called Mater Herbarwn: in high Dutch | 
Berfuſz, and Sant Johanus Gurte!l: in Spaniſh and Italian _Aremg@: in French Armojſe: 
in lowe Durch Bijuoet, int Jans kruyt : in Engliſh Mugwoortand common Mugwoort, 


3 Thetemperature. | 


> 


Mugwoort is hot and dry in the ſecond degree, andſomwhat aſtringent, 


| | w*% Thevertnes. | | 

A Phnyſaith that Mugwoort doth properly cyire womens diſeaſes. © 

B Dieſcorides writeth that it bringeth downe the termes,the birth and the afterbirth. 

C_. Andthartin like manetithelpeth themorher,and the paine of the matrix,to be boiled as bathes 
for women to ſirinzand that being put vp wich myrth, it is of like force that the bath is of ; and that 
the tender tops are boiled anddrunke for the ſame infirmities, and thatthey are appliedin manner 
of a pultis to the ſhare to bring downe the monthly courſe, -| ie | 

D Pinyfaith,that the travailer or waifaring man, that hath theherberied abouthim, feeleth no 

 weariſomnes atall.,and that he who hathit abqurhim can behurt by no | en qr medicines, Of 
by any wilde beaſt, neither yer: by the ſunne irſelfe ; and alſorhar iris drunke againſt Opium , 

the iuice of blacke Poppje. Many cther fantaſticall deviſes invented by Pocts are to be ſeene 
in the workes of the auncicnt writers,rending to witchcraft and forcerie,and the greatdiſhonor 

God: whereforeI do of purpoleonut them| as things vawoorthie of wy recording or your It 

WLEWINS. dt -3 l | | 


Mugwoort 


&3. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 947 
Mugwoort pound with oile of fivecte Almonds,and laid to the ſtomacke as aplaiſter ,cureth all E 
rhe ainesandigriefes of the ſame. 


Itcureth the ſhakings ofthe joints declining to the palſie, and helperh the contraRtion and F 
cringrogit och the neruceandiinencs. 


Of Sorhermwood. Chap.438. 


+ The kinaes. 


ps Miqrend tha Sothernwood is of two kindes, the female Saas , which ate 
D** he bibogs ty the names of the eater , andof theleſſer: beſides theſerhere is 3 
takin mhichisof aſwectr mel, and leficr then the others; pdelctien of a baſtarde 


| *7 w Ted in, | " = 
: | 


and facly 


_ he mad tg he rep ropgfcolouyllom and acthe | 
ſecede: : the rock hachivesſxings, 


lows, f full of little ſlender ſprigs, of awoodyſibltince : the 
wa jt 7 LG Fs burtons: the / 


2 Tone ny 
leaues are more indented 
Do RC Om E ISS. FE 3; MOBI. 124) 


Po 


ky 


THE SECON 


; Abrotanum humile. 


Dwarfe Sothernwood. 


- w 

WH. 

; © 
Wall”; 
oy Pl 
A F 


te FT 
WO Sz 
IL YET 
" Ga "57 | 
LE f 
« 1/82 


* al _ 
dn. I d 
a mh 


}þ 


” a \ 
\®. 
TEMAS 
IÞ 5 t,Y 

» 


aL - 


V's 


| c _Abrotengn 
Wilde Sothernwogd. | 


PEO. 


14 - 
/ 


x 230 v 
—— i. bo = 
BY ® : g 7% k 
Ch! {4 : 4 
"4 » ,.* A « 
<0 == 
Ko %. , x 
\$\/ - I, 4 n 
\ EP 
OP 4+ * Yo 
L p*.X 4 
F 2 SY N - 
= 
/ 
” N V . 
[} ' AM 


compeſtre. 


OF THE 
4 Abrotamuon Inodoruny, 
Vatauorie Sothernwood, 


F, 


DB-BOOKE 


I), 
& -# 
 / 


Wz 


EZ - 
24 i, 


Jef” 


4 
: 


% The deſcription. 


oo 
»” © 


1.3 TUO ne 6lanchage -6:25aca] 
 - this be iaggedand deepely cut after the manner 
[; of OK. Ckerotrend bur they arenot ſo 
white,yet more {weete, wherein they arelike ito 
Lauander cotton. This kinde 3s veric full of ſeede: 
the cluſter, buxtons Rande alongft on the ſprigs 
euen to the very top and be of a , hte yellow: 
the roote is like to thereſt. , | 
4 The wnſavoric Sotheryyood growes flat'vp- 
on the grounde with broade leaues , deepely cut 
or iacged inthe edges like thoſe of the common 
Mugwoort : among which riſe vp weake and fee- 
ble ſtalkes, trailing likewiſe ypon the ground, ſer 
| confuſedly heere & there with the like leaues that 
+ 4, grow niexe the ground, of a grayith or hoary color, 
| alrogither without ſmell, The flowers, grows a- 


Pl | \ | } | Jongeſt the ſtalkesof a yellowiſh colour,imal and 


+ chaffte: ther6oreis tough and woodie withiſome 


 ſtringsanneved thereto. 4 > va HOI 
5" this wilde Sothertword hath a preat long 
! | thickrootegoughand woodic ; couered over with 
* a {calicbarke like the ſcaliebacke of an adder, and 
'+ of thefarie cofout : from Which riſe verie many 
' 7 leaveshkethofe of Ferinielſ;of an overworne green 
colour: among which grow ſmall twiggic qr 
ches; 


HISTORTE OF plants. |: I? 


ches on the tops, and —_ the ſtalkes do grow ſina!l cluſtering flowers of a yellow colour : the 


whole plants of a darke Colour as well leaues as ſtalkes ,andofattrong vaſauoric ſmell. 


[| "|  Theplace: , | 
Theophraſi us ſ: aith,tharSochernwood delighteth to grow in places open to the ſunne: Diofeort- 
des affirmeth that it porgeh m Cappadocia, and Galatia acountrey in Afia,,andin Hierapolis a 
- citicin Syria :it isp anred in gardens alnioſt euery where; that of Sicilia and Galatia is moſtcom- 
mended of Plrmie. | | "TEN © I 


4 
, FB 


| * The time. * 
The cluſter buttons of Sorhernwood do flouriſh and be in their primein Awguſt , and now and 
then in Seprember, | 7 | ey 


| % The names. Sd 3 Es. FR | 
Itis called in Greeke A'&5nvr:the Larines and the Apothetaries keepe the ſame name _4bro- 
tanwn : the Italians and diners Spaniards call it Abrotans; dacherborkiarde Terua lombriguera ; 
in high Dutch Stabwurtz : in low Dutch Aueroone, and Ayertriu't 3 the French Aurore, and 
Auroeſne : the Engliſhmen Sothernwood:; ithath diuets baſtarde name 
rerkinde is Drſcorides his Famina , or female Sorhernwood , and Play | 
faine Sothernwoodz the mountaine Sothernwood we take forthe female, & the championtor the 
male. There be notwithſtanding ſome thar'take Lauander Catton to be the temale Sothernwood, 
rounding thereupon,bicauſe it bringeth foorth yellowe flowers in the top of the rigs like cuſter 
Su 5: bur if theyhad wore diligently pondered D72ſcorides his words, they would not haue been 
ofthis opinion:the lefſer Sothernwoodis 45 the male, & 15 alſo Phwies champion Sothernwood, 
in Latine Campeſtre. The thirde as we have ſaide is likewite he female, andis viually called fiveete 
Cohertieond Micanls it is ofa ſweeter ſentthen the reſt; D;oſcorides leemeth to call this kind Sicu- 
ln, Sicilian Sothernwood, | | F 


: 
" 
: 


bot Dinſeorides : the grea- 


Is CMort 2mm Ot MOU - 


* The temperature, | | TP 
Sothernwood is hor and dry in the endof the third degree : it hath alfo force ro diſtribure andto 
rarifie. + The wvertues. | 


The tops, flowers, of ſeed boiled or famped rawe with water and drunke,helpeth them that can a 
not take het breath without holding their neckes ſtraight vp,and is a remedie for the crampe,and 
for finewes ſhrunke and drawne togither 3 for the ſciatica alſo , and for themthat can hardly make 
water,and it is good to bring downe the termes. 
Itkillerh wormes and driueth them out :if it be drunke with wine, itis a remedie againſt deadly B 
ſons. | | | 
PAI it helpeth againſt the ſtinging of ſcorpions and fielde ſpiders, bur it hurteth the ſtomacke. © 
Stamped and mixed with oile 1t taketh away the ſhiucring cold that commeth by the ague fits, 
and itheateth the body if 1t be annointed therewith before the fits do come. 
If itbe pouned with barly meale and laice to puſhes,it takerh them away. E 
It is good for inflammartions of the cies , with the pulpe of arofted Quince , or with'crums of x 
bread,and applied pultis wiſe, Wy | | | 
The aſhes of burnt, Sothernwood with forme kinde of oyle , thatis of thinne parts, as of Pahna G 
Chr:ti,Radiſh oyle, oyle of ſweete Marierome, or Organie, cureth the pilling of the haire of the 
head,and maketh the beard to grow quickly : being ſtrowed about the bed ora fume made of it vp- 
on hot embers it driueth away ſerpents: if buta branch be laid vnder the beds head,they fay thatir: 


prouoketh venerie. 


The ſeede of Sothernwood made into powder,or boiled in wine and drunke, is good againſt the "I | 


-difticultic and topping of vrinc , it expelleth, waſterth, conſumerh, and digeſteth allcolde hu- 
mours,tough {lime,and flegme, which do vſually ſtop the ſpleenekidneies and bladder. 
Sothernwood drunke in wine is good againſt all venome and poiſon. = I 
The leaues of Sothernwood boiled in water vartill they be ſoft, and ſtamped with barley meale x 
and barrowes.greaſe vnto the forme of a plaiſter , diſſolueth-and waſteth all colde humours and 
Iwellings,being applied or laide thereto. : | 
Female $18 or Lavander Cotton,drunk in wine,is good againſt thebitings of ferpents, [, 
andexpelling of poiſon. by 
Irkilieth wormes in children ,as daily experience prooueth, for woraendo vie it tothat purpoſe 14 
with good ſucceſlc. | 


Ooo 3 4 


'BOOKE/ OF THE 


eruſalem,and Oke of Cappadecia. Chap-439- 


2 Ambroſus, 
Oke of Cappadocia. 


+ The deferirtion. 


I Ke of Terufalem'or Zorrys, hath ſundry ſmall ſtems, a foote and an halſc high, dividing 
themſclues into many/ſmall branches,beſct with ſmall leaues,deepely cut or iagged,very 
, _ muchreſembling the leafe of an Oke, which hath cauſed our Engliſh women to call it 
Okes of leruſalem; the vpperſide of the leafe is of a deepe greene and ſomewhat rough and hairie, 
bur vnderneath it is of a darke reddiſh or purple colour: the ſeedie flowers do grow cluſtring about 
the branches , like rhe yeong cluſters or Liowides of the vine : the roote'is ſmall and thredcie :rhe 
whole herbeis of a pleaſant ſmell and ſauour ,and of a faint yellowiſh colour z and the whole pant - 
dieth when the {cedeis ripe, | 1 4 |] : | 
2 .. Thefragrant ſmell that thiskinde of Ambroſie, or Oke of Cappadocia yeelderh , hath mooued 
the Poets to ſuppoſe thatthis herbe was meare and foode for'the gods : Djoſeorices ſaith it growerh 
three handfuls high; in my arden it groweth to the height of twocubirs , yeelding many weake 
crooked,and ſtreaked brahc hes Hiuiding themlclues into ſundry other ſmall branches, having from 
the midit to the top thereof , many moſſie yellowiſh flowers not much vnlike common Worm- 
wood, ſtanding one before another in- good arder, and the whole plantis as it were conered over 
with'bran or a mealie dult: the flowers do change into ſmall prickly cornered buttons , much like 
vato Tr ;bulwterreftzu,wherein.is contained blacke round ſeede, not vopleafant im taſte and ſmell: 
the leauesare in ſhape like the leaues of Mugwoort,butthinner & more tender, all the whole plant 
_ is horie,& yeelderth q pleaſant ſabor:the whole plant periſhed with me atthe firſt approch of I 
y | | FF | | BEE 1ere 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 4: Fe 
There is another kinde of Ambroſia, which hath along ſmall andſlendertoote, witha few fibres 
| annexed thereto: fromwhichriſe vp diuers ſmall hoarie ſtems of a cubite high, ſer full of hoarie 
[eaues a great deale' leſſer thanthe former, and more finely cut or iagged: the flowers growe vpon 
ſmall rwigs without any leaues among them, in ſhew like little rough berries, of a duski(h colour : 
the wholeplantis very hairie and ofa good ſmell. | * [- 

There is likewiſe another kinde of Ambroſia very like vnto the laſt before mentioned, bur thar 
his leaues are thinner and morefinely cur, reſembling the ſmall leavesof Engliſh Saxifrage zthe 
flowers and feedes are miich ſmaller and the roote greater, | 


%* Theplace. 
Theſe plants are brought vntovs from beyond the ſeas,cſpecially from SpaineandIralie. 
| | ' % Thetime. | 2 
They flower in Auguſt and their ſeedejis ripe in September, 
*% The names. 


Oke of Ieruſalem is called in Greeke &rvs: in Latine Fotyys + in Tralian Boys : in Spaniſh Ben 
graraaa : in bigh Durch Traukenkraut,and Krottcnkraut 2 in Frenchand lowe Dutch Pyment : 
in Engliſh Oke of Ieruſalem, and of fome Oke of Paradiſe, Oke of Cappadocia is called in Greeke - 
euCe;oie: in Larine Ambroſia; nenher hathit anyotherknowen name. Plzxieſairh that Ambroſezisa 
wandering name, and is giuen vnto other herbes. For Botyys Oke of Ieruſalem, as we haue written, 
is of diuers alſo called CAnbroſia :in Engliſh it is called Oke of Cappadocia. | 4 


5 5116 - *%* 7 hetemperature, 
Theſe plants are hot and drie inthe ſecond degree,and conſiſt of ſubrill partes, 
* The wertues. 


Theſe plants are good to be baſed in wine and miniſtred vntoſuch as haue their breaſts ſtopped, A 
and are ſhort winded, and cannot eaſily drawe their brethz for it cutteth andwaſteth grofſe humors 
_ andtough flegme, The leaves are of the fame force being made vp with Sugar, they commonly call 
ita Conſerue, __ | M | 
* It guethapleafant taſte to fleſh that is ſodden with ir;and eaten withthe broth 7 © B 
Iris dried and laid among garments not onely to make them ſinell fiweere; burallo to preſerue C 
them from moths and ather vermine :which thing it doth alſo performe. | | 


Of Lauander ( otton. Chap.440. 
RES kindes. ND 


+ Hamecypariſſus, or Lavancer Cotton, whereof there be two ſortes, of which one is very com- 
mon in our Engliſh gardens: the otherleflc knowne, which the Italians call Santoling, 


4a a 


136 S$> 
$ & T9 * 


_ | | ; H Ws, PO431 19 w + 
* The deſeription. 


Avander Cotton bringeth foorth claſtered buttons of a golden colour, and of aſiveete ſinell . 
andisoften vied in ;Barlands anddeckingvp of gardens and hotiſes, Ithath a woodie ſlocke, 
 Olt of which grow foorth branches hike fad obevetnn dean very many, a cobite long, ſer 
abour with little leaues, long, narrow, purledor crumpledy:onvthe topsof the branches ſtande v 
flowers, one aloneion every branch, made vp witk-ſhorr threds thruſt cleſe togither, like to the 
fiowers of Tanfic,and to themiddle buttons ofthe lowergof Cammomil,buryer ſomethinghrox: 
der,of colour yellow ,which be changed into/feede of anobſeureeolodr!” The roore is of a woodie 
lubſtance. Theſhrub;xſelfe is whixe both in branches and ſeaues;and hath ſtrong Feere ſmell] © 
| There are ſet foorth two figures,one by Taber Monteonu,vnder the ritle' Ab/ort chnr med bins es: 
#uifolrum:the ws is {et forth in divers written copics for Abyotoriu famin,difterite ET 
In kinde,yer fo like that they cannotbe diſtinguiihed: doubrleſie l rake they e&be one plant; rhe. 
fore vith the anciencs we hold igforxthe ferale: Sothernwoad,] orlavandet Cotton. Tt abtecth 
pA FOO Lender Comonin eachreſpett, Jauing rharic is lo icherlefſe# ani the 
caues more finely cur and hackt,andef agreetereotour; yerwhitiſh as welt feincs asbranghts.” 


Ooo 4 | Cham 4- 


4s THE SECOND noors OF THE 


Cham 1(ſans. | [1 
prnner cap, ra | | 111 LH + Theplae. 
8 WE OE =: Lauander Cotton growethin gardens almoſt 
= everywhere, 
|  þ *% The time. 
They flower in Ivly and Auguſt, 
* The names. 
| | Theyarebothcalled byonename Sexreling, 
| . or Lauander Cotton, of moſt Chamecypariſiu. 
| Bur Plinyconcerning Chemecypariſſie,is ſoſhort 
y. - andbricfeghat by him (his ſucceſſors) their OPi- 
2g  nions canneither bereieed,nor receiued. 
| They are doubtles much deceived that would 
| |  haue Lauander Cottonto be Abrotarum fami- 
| | non, orthe female Southernwood; and likewiſe 
Y they are in the wron __ , who take ie to be Serjphi- 
| wn, Sea Wormwood; andthey'who firſt fer it 
| abxeach to be a kinde of Southernwood, we 
| leauethemtotheirerrors: bicauſe it is not abſo- 
| | lutelytobe' referred to one, butaplant partici. 
, parting of Wormwood and Southernwood, 


| Thetemperature. 

|  Theſeedeof La r Cotton hath a bitter 

| | taſte,beinghor anddripl in the third degree, 
| * 7 hevertaes. 
| Plinie faith , that the herbe Chamecypariſſn® 

———— WD | being inwineisa good medicine againſt 

| the porſons of all ſerpenrs and venemous beaſts, 

B HIrkilleth wormes ckbitr giuen greene or dry,and the ſeede hath the ſame vertue againſt wormes, 

but auoideth them with ome forced tis wii to be cou with the vuall worme ſcede. 


LY 


of gorge or Aſp paragus. Chep 4 
| * The kinder. 


Treat e en forces of Serage te gen andthe ide Serge Thela- 
ter writers haue found more ofthe wilde kinde. | 
Fy-.--1 .*T he defeript jom. | F 
{He firſt ting manuredand ind S 


- £0447 - " 


4gu: puluitris. 


Wi5woh voriaebs.. 
* 


Q 


aine Sperage, M4 


O 
= 
z 
< 
5 
© 
-# 
© 
fe 
Oo 
8 


ratiu petr ew... 


ſa 
Ston 


Ce ormountr 


£4 | | {| | 

7950 THE SECOND BOOKE OF;THE 
3* Stone or mountaine Sperage, is one of the wilde ones, ſet foorth. vnger the title of Coryys 
which Z'Obelcalleth Aſparagus Petr ems , and Galen 6 0g -9on , that doth veric well re fem. 
ble thoſe of the garden, in Ralkes , rootes and branches , ſauing that thoſe fine hairic leaues 
which are in the garden Speragegbe ſoft,blunr,and tender; andin this wilde Sperage ſharpe,harge 
and pricking thornes though they be ſmall and lender: the fruite heereof is round.,of the bignes þ; 
a Pcaſe,and of a blacke colour: the roortes are ang, thicke,fat,and very many, _ 

This fourthkinde differeth from the laſt deſcribed, being a wilde Sperage of Spaine and Hun. 
gxie :theplant13 alrogither ſer with moſt ſharpe thornes, as are the branches of Whinnes,Gorſe 
or Furſen: the fruit is red when it is ripe : the roores are like the others, but greater and tougher, ' 


Aſparagus fylueſtris Spinoſus Clusy. | | | 
| : Set py = * The deſcription. 
RN 5. Carolws 'Cluſies delcribeth alſo a certaine 
We : | wilde Sperage with ſharpe prickles all alongſt 
; the Ralkagpyetly Pannet eueric ioint one,hard, 
| ſtitfe, and whiriſh,thepoints ofthe thornes Poin- 
' ting downwards: from the which ioints alſo do 
| growoutafewelong greene leaucs faſtned rogj. 
' ther,as alſo alittle yellowe flower, and one ber- 
' ric three cormered,and of a blacke colour, where. 
| 1n is conteined oneblacke ſcede, feldome more : 
| therootes are like the other, 
| Manyandſundry authors haue taken this for 
| a kinde of Sperage called Nepz, for theplant 
| Scorpio,bicaule of his ſharpe prickles; and there- 
| fore irwas called Nepa# Seorpione, ofthe ſmall 
| beaſtcalled eps, whoſe taile is verie dangerous, 
| as are the prickles of this plant :4t is verie hard to 
| diſcerne this plant from Corxada, which hath 
| cauſed Mathio/ms his errout to be the greater , in 
| taking Nepe for Aſparagus marit im: this plant 
| hath r-any woodie rootes, one folded ouer an 
' other: from which ariſe ſmall ſtalkes, beſerwith 
| ſharpe thicke leaues, reſembling Corrads, verie 
i na to be touched by reaſon of his prickley 
; | Jeaues,which are of a bitrer taſte, 
WF ui | Drigis being likewiſe a kind hereof hath long & 
PRI | | | ſmallrootescreeping in the ground like Couch 
| RNA  graſſe: from which ſpring vp branches a cobire 
high,full of knottie ioints : theleanes are ſmall like vnto Iuniper, not much differing from Corruda, 
ot Neps: the flowers grow at the x ag the ſtalke'in ſpokie cufis or pk white colour,cloſcly 
togither : the ſeede beforc it be taken our of the huske is like yntoRice. ,. 


* The place. | 


Thefiſt being our carded Aſperaguegroweth wilde in Efſex', inamedowe adioiningto a Myll 
beyond a village called Thorp, and alſo Singleton, not farre from Carbie, and in the medowes 
neere Moulton in Lincolnſhire: likewiſe it groweth in greatplentie neere vato Harwich, at a place 

ing,andart north Moulton in Holland, apart of Lincolnſhire. | 
Oo growin Portingale and Biſcaic'among ſtones, one of the which Perras 
ndic,in his firſt booke of lingulatitics,1 $.Chapter. 
* Thetime, | [9 | 


. 
« 


prill, at what time they are caten inſal- 
er. Br 


The garden Sperage ops Spar- 
gwe,and Speragas: in hig] 2 that = 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS: 955 


ſay Herb Coralli, or Corall woort,of the red berries, which beare the colour of corall :in Spaniſh 
Afarragos:in] ralian Aſherago: in Engliſh Sperage,& likewiſe Aſparagus afterthe Latine name: in 
French Aſperges. It is named Aer ags of the excellencie,bicauſe Afparegzor the ſpringes heereof 
_ are preferred before thoſe of other plants whatſoener: for this Latine word Afpareges doth pro- 
perly ſignihe the firſt ſpring or Þrotit of every plant, eſpeciallywhen irisrender, and beforcic do 
grow into an harde ſtalke,as are the buds, tendrels;or yoong ſprings of wilde Vine, or Hoppes,and 
{uch like, ©! me: LYTS] | 2333} 1 241 * 

Wilde Sperage is properly called in Grecke wwe, whichis as much ro fay as Mouſe prickle, 
and darzggho mwraier, that is to ſay, Petreus Large, or Stone Sperage: itis allo named in Latine 
Afperagin ſylneſtris and Corruda. © | 4  SUOTTE | 

| .. OED * The temperature. 350 34 | 65 {0h 
 Theroores of the garden Sperage, and alſoof rhe wilde do clenſe without manifeſt hear and 
drineſle. hes ae ; | * The vertues. & POT MT «He $34 am 34, 

The firſt ſprouts or naked render ſhootes heerot be oftentimes ſodden in fleſh broth and caten, A 
or boiled in faire water, and ſeaſoned with oile,vinezer,falr,and pepper, then are ſerued ar mens ta- 
bles fora ſalladez they arepleaſant to the taſter eaſily concoRed,and gently Toolen-the belly, 

They ſomwhar prouoke vrine,good forthe kidneies and bladder , bur they yeeld vnto the bodie B 
litcle nouriſhment,andrhe ſame moiſt, yer not faultie : they-are thoughtro increaſe ſeede, and ſtirre 
vwluſt, == | | 4 | | FZ 


=] Of Horſe taile,or Shaue grafſe. Chap. 442. 
= - % The kindes. TK \} 
T Here be two kindes of Horſe taile deſcribed of the ancients,one oreat,the ather little: the later 
age hath found more. 2 FS 


* ** 


1 Fquiſetwon mejas. | 2 Fquiſctum nudum. 
| ! enTT. 


- 


Great Horſe raile, 


| 
| 
| 


— 
SUES s 
_ UI + 
SRJAV2Z 


O 
RD 


. 
— 
By 
—_ 


< 


— - 
7 
, 
, FL -w SH 
—_ - 
P_- 


fs Þþ 


95 < | LP ek | | Ty 
"946 THE SECOND|BOOKE \OF//THE 
| S114 ; | |. bella <5 hr | , |” Ut | 
x Rear Horſe taile,tiſerhivp with arounde ſtalke,hollowe within like aReede, a cubire his), 
(lea as it were of many ſmall peeces,one pur intothe end of another, ſometimes of a 
reddiſh colour,very rough,and ſet at euery joint with.many ſtiffe ruſhlike leaues, or rovgh 


1 


briſtles, which maketh the whole plant torclemble the taile ofa Horſe, whereofir rooke his name: 

on the top of the ſtalke da ſtand in ſteed of flowers cluſtered and thick Carkins, not vnlike vnto the 
firſt ſhootes of Sperage , which is called Myacanihe : the roote is iolnted, andcreeperh in the 

rounde, | j+.-{ ab dt | tat rh 

: This ſmall or naked Shave grafſe, wherewith Fletchers. and\ Combemakers doe rubbe and 

poliſh their worke, riſeth our of the ground like the firſt ſhootes of Aſparagas, iointed or kneed by 

certainediſtances like the precedent, but alrogicher wichour {uch briſtleyleaues , yer exceeding 

rough and cutting: the roote groweth aſlope jn the carth like thoſe of the Couch graſle, 


3 Equiſerum ſegetals, | | 4 ve rai aleftye. 
Le nlerry; raſle. | [ Wn Fe Grer Horſe tile 


{4 


\ 


\ 
| | 


[ 


/ 


\\ 
\ 


\ 


) 
[ 
, 


| 


| 


| 


FO on 
"MF; 
cr 
jd , 
X 4 
; 4 HO, mum 
V/zZ — 
n - = ——— # 
”, Gr 9 
- , 
p » 
m_— a 


wilt | % The defeription., © _ 

3 Horſe tailewhich forthe ob groweth among corne, and where corhe hath beene,hatha ve- 
 rieflender roote and ſingle: from which riſe vp diners jointed ſtalkes , whereon doe growe veric 
long,rough,narrow iointed leaues, like vato the firſt deſcribed, bur thicker and rougher, as is the 
reſt of the plant. 1 [ 1 | 
4 Wehatcr Horſe taile that groweth by the brinkes of riuers,and running ſtreams, and often in the 
middeſt ofthe water, hath a very long roote , according tothe depth of the water, groſle, rhicke, 
and ionted, with ſome threds annexed thereto: from which riſeth vp a great ghicke,toined ſtalke, 
whercon do growelong, rough, ruſhic leaues, pyramides or ſteeple Shona: the whole plant 1s 
likewiſe rough hard,and fit tothaue and rub wooden things asthe other, | 


. HISTORIE OF. PLANTS. 


5 Equiſctum ſylucticww. X 6 Candecquing famina. 
Wood Horſe taile; | The femate Horlte taile. 


_ % w* 


<- _— 


" . _ _ 
| ERR 


. 
F 
b] 
F 
x 


, 


Kh 1 0) 1 $Thedeſeription. rt eb ue 6 agent 1 
5. This kindeof Horſe taile that groweth in woods and ſhadowie places, hathaſmall roote and 
ſingle : from which riſeth vp a rough chamfered ſtalke ioinred by certaine ſpaces, hauing at cach 
joint two buſhes of rough briſtley leaues, fer one againſt another like the other of his kind. . '0 | 
6 - The female Horſe taile groweth forthe moſt part. in wateriſh places, and bythe brinks of ſmall 
rilsandpirling brookes , it hath a long roote like thatof Couch graflez from which riſevp divers 
hollow Nalks8 fer aboucatcerraine diſtances,with ſmallleayes in-tundles like thoſe of Woodroof, 
alrogither barren of ſeede and flower,whereof it was,.called Sernitie Vidus..: 1: JET S014 
7 Cluſaw hath ſet foorth a plant, that|he referreth-vrito-the ſtocke of rhe Hoſe ves , which 
he thus deſcriberh : It hath many ewiggie or ruſhie ſtalkes, whereupon it was called 7ancaria, and 
may be engliſhed Ruſh weege. The leaues growe vpon the branches like tholeof Flaxe; on the rops 
of the ſtalkes growe fnattchyic Jowerivf whitiſh cofout.” The fetde is and blacke of co 
lour.The roote is little and white. The whole plant is ſiveeriſh in taſte. | 

Dodonemſerreth foorth another Hotſetaile, which he called Climing Horſe taile, or Horſe 
raile of Olympus. There is;faith he,anotherplant like Horſe raile; bur greater and higher. Ic riſerh 
vp oftentimes with a ſtake ay digs a mans arme,diuided into diuers branches ;z ourof which there 
prow long _—_— veryfull of ioints, like to the firſt Hotſe taile.” The flowers ſtarid aboiit the 
lointes of #Moffie ſubſtance, ſmall as are thofe of the Cornell rree, in places whereof growe vp red 
finite full of fower juice not vnlike co little Mulberies, in which is the ſeede. The roote is hard and 
woodie. Thisgroweth now and then-to'a great height, and ſometimes lowet. Belonize writethin 
his Singulatities, charit hattrbeene ſeen ro be <quall in height with the Plane tree: ir commetrh vp 
lower, neeretdfhoreerandleſſer trees orſhrubs, yer doth irnor faſten it ſelfe ro the trees with-any 
rendrels ot claſping aglers 4 much lefle doth ir winde it ſelfe about them,yetdoth it delight to ſtarid 
necre and cloſe vnto them, | | | 


b e 
7 Juncaria 


9;8 THE SECOND BOOKEOF THE 
7 Tuncaris Salmantienſis.. | 
'_ Iraliatruſhie Horſeraile. |  % Theplace, 

21; ' The titles and deſcriptions ſhew the place of 
their growing, The laſt Bellenjas reporteth to grow 
in divers vallies of themountaine Olympus, ang 
not far from Raguſa a citie in Sclauonia, 

; | we Therime. 
They flowerfrom Aprill to theend of fommer, 
|, *% T he Mames. 
| | Horſetaile isealled inGrecke immer, Hipparic: 
in Latine Equiſerwn and Equmalis : of Plinge in his 
'I5, booke 2 _—_ Equiſetis, of the likeneſle of 
a horſe haire : of ſome Sa{4x Equins : in ſhops 
'Cands equine : in high Dutch Schaffthew ; in 
lowe Dutch Peertſteert 2 inlralian Code di Cauct. 
4: in Spaniſh Cods de mule : in French Queze de 
 cheual, and Ca-quexe: in Engliſh Horſetaile, and 
| Shaucgrafle. | | 
|  Shavegraſſeisnotwithout cauſe named Aſrel- 
' s, of his ruggedneſe, which is not vnknowento 
' women , who ſcowre their pewter and wooden 
| things of the kitchen therewith, which the Ger. 
- mainewomen call Rannenkraut, and thereupon 
: fomeof our huſwiues docall it Pewterwoort, Of 
| ſome it is called Ephedra, Anaba/is,and Carcon, 
| * Thetemperature. 
| | Horſetaile, as Galex ſaith, hath a binding facul- 
| tie, with ſome bitterneſſe, and therefore it doth | 
| mightily drie,and that withour bicing, 
* The wertues. | 


* 4 
% } = 
. _ 
- 


1 
- 


A —— faith, that Horſe raile being ſtamped and laid to 2 doth perfeRly curewounds (yea 


thoughthe ſinewes be cut in ſunder) as Galex addeth. Iris of fo great and fo ſingular a vertuein 
” healingof woundes, asthar itis thoughtand reported for truth, tocurethe woundes of the blad- 
der,and other bowels,andhelperh ruptures or burſtings., * - i | my 
B * The hetbedrunke eithefwith water or winezis an excellent remedie againſt bleeding at the noſe, 
and other fuxesof blood. . It ſtaicth the ouermuch flowing of womens flowers , the bloodie flixe, 
and cheorher fluxesof the belly. 1 nt |. 4: 2 | 
C The juice of the herbe raken/in the ſame manner can do the like,and more effeQually. att | 
D Horſeraile with his rootes boiled in wine, is very ptofirable-for the vicers of the kidncies and 
bladder,thecough,and difficultic of breathing, *4Þ 3 


Of Sea dluſter,or Sea Raiſon.  Chap-443 


I Ea Grape is not ynlike to Horſe raile,but it is lefſer and lower:itbringerh foorth lizrlc ſtalks, 
| g {lender,ſmall,ang round.almoſt like ruſbes,ſet with very many lietle; ioints,fuchasthoſe are 
” ofthe Horſeraile.and diuided into many wings and branches 3 the tops whereof are ſharpe 
pointed, ſomewhat hard and pricking: itis withour leaues :rhe lowers growein cluſters our of rhe 
toints with little (tems, they are Call and of a whitiſh. green colour: the fruire conſiſterh of manic 
lictle pearles,like to the ynripe berrie of Raſpis, or Hindberryzwhen it is ripeit isred witha fat- 
froncolour,intaſte ſweere and pleaſant: the ſeede or kernell is hard, theee e, ſharpe on everie 
fide,in taſte binding: the rootets ioinred, long,andereepeth aſlope;' rhe; plancir ſelfe alſodoth 12- 
= lie onthe ground then ſtance vp: it growerh all tull of ſmall ſtalkes and branches caſting theme 
ſclucs all abroad. | F- LErts £1 = | 


bl 


2 Carelus 


HIST ORIE OFPLANTS. ii hos 


fruire like v 


des like thoſe of Miller, blacke without and whice within: the roote is hard,tough,and woodie, 


1 Vue marine. 


Sea Grape. 


| ke | | | | 
2 Thiskinde of fea Grape differerh nor from the lait deſcribed in any onepoihr, ſauing tharir is 
altogither lefſer, wherein eſpecially conliſterh the difference, bs: | 
4 Tragon Mathieli,orrathet T regos improbus Mathioli, which he vnaduiſedly called Tragon, is 
without controuerſte nothing elſc but a kinde of K2/z, or a kinde of Crithmum alterum, or Ong 
neere to the plant called Paitizacamaring, or Secacul: this plant rifetlivp outof the grounde wit 
ſtalkes a cubite high diuided into ſundry other grofle, thicke, and writhen branches, ſer,or armed 
with many pricking leaues, ofthe colour and ſhape of Ajzoon, and ſomewhat thickeand fleſhic: 
among which come foorth ſuch prickley burs, as are to be ſcene in Tribulo terreſtrs, as that it is 
harde tor a man to touch any partthereof, without pricking of the handes: the flowers are of an 
herbic colour,bringing foorth flat ſeede like vnto Fat: the roote is {lender,and fpreadeth vndet the - 
turfe of the earth: the whole plant is full of clammie iuice,not any thing aſtringene, but ſomewhat 
faltiſh,and of no ſingular vertue that is yerknowne : wherefore I may conclude, that this cannot be 
Tragos Disſcoridis, and the rather for chatthis T ragon of Mathiolus, is an herbe and nor a ſhrub, 
as L have before ſpoken in Yue marina, neither beareth it any berries or graines like Vheate , nei- 
therisir pleaſant in taſte and ſmell,or any thing aſtringent, all which arerobe founde in the; right 
Tragos before exprefled,which(2s Dioſcorzdes laith)is withour leaues , neitheris it thorney as/7 ra 
gs mprobus Mathiolt: thisplantI haue found growing in the Ile of Shepey , iniecract leading 
to the houſe bf Sir Edward Hobbre,called Sherland, ; 3304975 
| EEE 3 YVua 


960 
956 THE SECOND \BOOKE) OF THE 
1 i; Sram, gb 26) $2452) £2 1c 246! 12dgafps * HMathiole, 
j1 495) 
as 


%* the 
 Itloueth to grow ypon drybanks and ſandic Hep neere to the ſca : its founde in Langiedock 
not far from Monepelier,and inother places bythe ſea ſide,and i isa ſtrangeri in England, 
* Thetime, 
When it groweth of it ſelfe the fruite is ripe, in Aucumnegthe planti it ſelf remaineth long green, 
forall the co deinwinter. | | 
* The NAMES. | 
 Iriscalledof the lates Herbariſts Vaa marina: in French Raiſm de Mer, of the pearled like, 
andthelikenes tharit bath with Raſpis berrie, which is as it were a Raiſon or Grape, conliſting of 
many little ones: it is namedin Greeke 7255, but itisnot called Trages, or Traganos, of a Goate, 
(for ſo ſignifierh the Greeke word)or of his rankeand rammiſhyſorell bur bicauſe itbringeth foorth 
fruite fit ro be eaten,of the yerbe 73%» which ſignifierh to care tir may becalled Scorpion, bicauſe 
the ſprigs thereofare ſharp poinred like to the Scorpionstaile, 
| * Thetemperature. 
Theberries crnalia . and eſpecially the ſeede thatis in them have a « binding qualitie , as we 
haue {aide,and theyare dric in che later endof the ſecond degree. 
|  *% Thewermes. | 
A Digfeoriderwriceth, tharcheRaiſonsof —_—_ do ſtaierhe flixe , and alſo the whites in wo- 
men,when they ach abound. 


Of AM add Gaps 444- 


| %* The kindes. | 
 Pizeei is but one kinde of Madder onely: burifall thoſe that are like vnto itin leaues and maner 
ofgrowing were reſerredthereto,there ſhoulce be many ſorts : as Goole graſle , ſoft Cliuer, 

our Ladies Bedftraw,VWoodroofe and Crofſewoott, all w ich are like to Madder in leaues, 21 
therefore they be thought to be wi.de kinds thereof. 


I Rubia 


- & 


$SLO (8 V3 


I 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
1 Xebiatintloram. Red Madder. 


þ : 
i 
1 
[ 


963 


_ 2 Rubiaſylueſtris. Wilde Madder. 


S + 4 #&— + 


LL 


AL 


© % Thedefeription. 


"> 5! Bank cbs ured Madder,, hath 


\ \Þ long ſtalkes ortrailing branches diſper- 
- * Jed farte-abroade*yppon the groamde, 


ſquare, rough,andfull of ioitirs, at cuiery loinr fer 
roumde with Hil 


leaues, in matier of a 


ſtarre, or as thoſe of Woodroofe: the flowers 
growe at the top of theb 's , of a faint yel- 


lowe colour:afrer which comethe ſecede, rounde, 
pu de red, andlaftly of a 
lickecolour7 the roote long, fat, full of fub- 


"ante, creeperhfatre abroade roach, 


cruſt of the earth,and is of a reddiſhrcolour; 
ir isgreeneandfrefh. PA nah e's 
2 Wilde Madder is like itf6rme vnto that of 


| thegarden, but altogither' ſmaller, and nor fo 


ph: the flowers are white the roote 15 verie 


{inal and terider;and oftentimes of a reddifh co- 
"Jour, on bn 5:28: "ih 


3 - Sea Madder hath a roote two foote long, \. 


with many dry threds hangjng thereat, of a t 
diſh colour like Alkanct, ori the outſide of the 


 ſaine forme andbignes , but within it of the co- 
- Jour of the ſerapings of Inniper, or Cedar wood} 


ſending foorth divers ſlenderſtalkes roviideand 
Ppp I ful] 


BY 42H | 
248 THE SECOND! BOOKE OF THE 
- Fullof ioints:from which comefoorth ſmall thin leaues,ſtiffeand ſharpe pointed, ſomewhat 1,1; 
in number commonly fower,ſtandinglike a Butgonion croſle ;from the boſome of which core 
foorth cerraine tufts of ſinaller leaues thruſt rogither vpon a heape : the flowegs grow ar the top of 
 theſtalkes of a pale yellowiſh colour." | bs 


if. | *7T, he place, | 
Madder is planted in gardens,and is very common in moſt places of England, 
The ſhconde growerh in moiſt caedowes, in mooriſh grounds , and vnder buſhes almoſt ever; 


' where, £% ba | 

Thelaſt groweth by the ſeaſide in moſt places. 

ab * The tome. | ER 
They flouriſh from Maie vnto the end of Auguſt: the rootes are gathered and dried in Autumn 
and ſolde to the vic of Diers, and Medicine, | s 
, E-1 * T he names. 116 HM 

Madder is called in Grecke ix/%6/zror, Erythrodamwn: in Latine Rubia,and Rabers : in ſhops Rebig 
tinftorwn: Paulus AEginete(heweth thar it is named Thepſon which the Diers vie, and the Ro- 
maines call it Herba Rubie+ in Iralian Rubbje, and Robbia: in Spaniſh Runia, Roja, and Granzg: in 
French Geraxce : in high Dutch Rotte : in lowe Durch Mee,and Mee crappen: in Engliſh Mad- 
der,and red Madder, | | | | SE rn, 

'W * The temperature. © Ye we, 

_ Ofthe temperature of Madder,it hath beene diſputed among the learned, and as yet not cenſit« 
red, whether it do binde or open; ſome ſay both, divers diuerſly deeme : a/great Phiſition (I donor 
ſay the great learned) called me to account as touching the faculties heereof, although he had no 
commiſſion ſo to do,notwithſtanding I was content to be examined vpon the point, what the na+ 
ture of Madder was,bicauſe I haue written that it performeth contrary effeCts, as ſhall be ſhewed: 
the rootes of Madder, which both the Phiſicions and Diers do vſe,as they haue an obſcure binding 
power and force ſo be they likewiſe of nature and temperature colde and drie: they are withall of 
diuersthin parts,by reaſon whereof their colour doth eaſily pearce : yer haue they atthe firſt acer- 
raine little ſweerenes, with an harſh binding qualitie preſently following itz which not onely weour 
ſclues haue obſerued, but alſo Cewicen the prince of Phiſitions, (the great Phiſitions maſter) who 
in his 58.Chapter hath written,rhat the roote of Madder hath a rough and harſh taſte : nowe ma« 
ſter Door,whether it binide or open I haue anſwered,artending your cenſiue : bur if Thaue erred, 
itis with the mulcicude,and thoſe of thebeſt,and beſt learned, BY 

bf ib 47-7 | The vertwes.” | | | 
A - ThedecoCtion of the rootes of Madderis every where commended for thoſe that areburſten, 
| bruſed,wounded,and thar have fallen from highplaces, * | 
B yaa bleeding , mitigateth inflammations , and helpeth thoſe parts that be hurt and 
C Fortheſecauſes they be mixed with potions , which thelater Phiſirions call wound drinkes : in 
which there is ſuch force and vertue, as Mathi/m alſo reporteth, that there is likewiſe greathope 
of curing of deadly wounds inthe cheſt and intrails. 1 b 


don Johannes Spiringas,yhoinhis] ous hath noted, that the decotion of Madder giuen with 
Tripher, that great compoſition is {ingular good to ſtay thereds, the hemorrhoides and bloudie 
flixe , and the ſame approoued by diucrs experiments : which confirmerh Maddet to be of an 
aſtringent andbinding qualitie, Woke a I. NY | 
E Ofhe ſame opinion asit ſeemerh is alſo Eros Julie hir freed man (commonly called Trets's) 
who in a compoſition againſt vntimely birth doch vie the fame*for if he had thought that Madder 
wereof ſuch a qualitic as Dirſcorides writerh it to be of he woulde notinany wiſe haue added itto 
choſe medicines which are good againſt an vntimely birth. | | <S 
For D4sſcoridesreporteth , that the roore of Madder doth plentifully prouoke vrine , and that 
groſſe and thicke,and oftentimes bloud alſo, and iris ſo greatan opener, that being but onely ap- 
plied,it bringeth downe the menſes, the birth, and afterbirth: bur the extreme rednes of the vine 
deceiued him , that immediately followerh the taking bf Madder , which rednes- came 35 he 
thought, from bloud mixed therewith, which notwithſtanding commerh no ocherwiſe then from 
the colour of the Madder, het 01.cedbh | A y 


D - Our opinion and judgement is confirmed by that moſt expert man, ſdwtimes Phiſition of Lon- | 


, 
HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. : 963 

For the roote hereof taken any maner of waydoth by & by make the vrinc extreme red: no other- G 
wiſe then Rubarb doth make the ſame yellow, not changing in the mean time the ſubſtance therof, 
nor making it thicker then it was before, which is to be ynderſtoode in thoſe which are in perfect 
health,whichthing doth ratherſhew rhat ir doth not open, but binde, no otherwiſe then Rubarbe 
doth ; for by reaſon of his binding qualitic thewareriſh humours de for a while keepe their colour, 
For colours mixed with binding things do longer remain in the things colored, anddo nor ſoſoon 
 vade:; thisthing they well knowe that gather colours out of the juices of flowets and herbes, for 
with them they mixe allume,to the end thar the colour may be retained and kept the longer, which 
otherwiſe woulde be quickly loſt, By theſe things ir manifeſtly appeererh that Madder doth no- 
thing vehemently eicherclenſe or open, and that Dzoſcorides hath raſhly attributed vnto it this 
kinde of qualitic,and after him Ge/ex andthe reſt char followed, ſtanding ſiffely ro his opinion, 
 Plinie(aith,thatthe ſtalkes with the leanes of Madder,are vied againſtferpents. * | H 
| The roote of Madder boiled in Meade or honied water, and drunken; openeth the toppings of 
. the liuer,the milt and kidneies, and is good againſt the iaundiſe, | | 
. © Theſametakenin like manerproucketh vrine vehemently ,inſomuch rhat the often vie thereof x 

cauſeth one to piſle bloud, as ſome haue dreamed. | | 

Lanzimand other excellent Phifitions haue experimented the ſame to amende the lothſome 7, 

colour of rheKings cuill , and helpeth the vicers of the mouth , if yntothe decoion be added a 
little allume and honic of Roſes, | | | | | 


Of Gooſe grafſe,or Clyuers. Chap-4-45: | 


1 Aarine. | |... 2 Aparinamator Plinj. 
Goole graſle or Cleyers, | Gre t Gooſe graſke. 
7 2 HR «> v0Y7.0 | | 


% 


THE SECOND BOOKE "OF THE 


-*% The deſeription. 


Perine,Cliuers or Gooſe grafſe,hath many ſmall ſquare branches, rough and ſharpe,ful! 
ofioints,beſet at cuery ipmt with ſmall leaves ſtarre faſhion, and like vnto ſmall Madder 
+ © the flowersare very little and white, pearking on che topsof the ſprigs: the ſeedes are 
Tmall,rounde, alictle hollow in the midſt in maner of a nauell, ferforthe mot part by couples: the 
rootes {lender andfullof ſtrings: the pon 15rough,and hisruggednes taketh holde of mens 
veſtures and woollen garments as they paſſe by : being drawne along the roong ir fercheth bloug: 
Disſcorides reporteth that the fhepheards in ſteede of a Cullander do vic it to take haires ourof 
milke, if any remaine therein. , | ff RETRY Sos FE 
2 ThegreatGooſe graſle of plinje,is one of the Moone woorts of L' Obeljwe, it hath a very rough 
render ſtalke, whereupon are ſethroade leaucs ſomewhat long, like thoſe of Scorpion grafſe , or 
iyſſen Gatent, Galens Moonewoort, very rough and hairy : the flowers growe atthe top of the 
branches of an herbie colour;after which commeth rough cleauing ſcedes, that do ſticke to mens 
garments which touch it: the toote is ſmall and fingle, [| | 
| |, | - + Thepizce. | | 
Gooſe grafſe graweth neere the borders of fieldes , and oftentimes inthe fieldes themſclues 


mixcd with rhe corne,alſo by common waies, ditches, hedges, and among thornes : Theophraſts 
and Ga/en write , that it groweth among Lentles, and with harde imbracing ir doch choke it, and 
' bychatmeanes is burdenſome and troubleſome vnto it, | | 
© Iris found plemtifully cuerywhere in ſommer time, 
| ay * T he names. ES ire, 7; 
Iris namedin Greek «mein , Apparzne: in Latine Lappe minor,bur not properly : Pliny affirmerh 
itto be Leppaginis beciem:of ſom P hilanthropos,as though he ſhould ſay a mans friend, bicauſe itra. 
+ keth hold of mens garments; of diuers alſo Gr the ſame cauſe Philadelphos : inlralian Speroneli: in 
Spaniſh P7eſera,or emor dj Hortalane: in high Dutch Kleeb kraut : French Reb/e, ow grateron: in 
low Dutch Klcefcrupt : in Engliſh Gooſe ſhare,Gooſe grafle,Cleuer,or Clayer, 
a 1 1. % Thetemperature, | 
 IrisasGeler faith, moderatelyhotand dry,and forwhart of thinneparts. 7 
The iuice which is preſſed out of the ſeeds,ſtalkes, and leanes,as Droſcorides writeth,is a remedie 
for them that are bitten of the poiſonſom ſpiders called jn Latine Phalangza, and of vipers, if it be 
erunke with wine. a5 1-8 WES | 1, | | 
B Andtheherbe ſtamped with ſwines greaſe waſteth away the kernels by the throte. 
C Po _ that the leaues being applicd doth alſo ſtay the abundance of bloud iſſuing out 
ot wounds, F---<4 : BE 2005 RE; | 
D Womendo vſvally make portage of Cleuers with alittle mutton and oremeale , to cauſe lank- 
_ neſle and keepe them fromfatnes, # tes Ft | | Reg 


\ $ 


X 


Of | Erpſenoort Chap.446. 


* The deſeription. 


F NRoſlewoort is a lowe indbaſe herbe, of L pale greene colour, haui many ſquare, feeble 
hſtalks full of joints or knees,coucred ouer with a ſoft downe ; vt; arc lirtle,ſhort, 


and ſtanding croſſewiſe one right againſt another, 
| b bfche Rake nnd from _— of thoſe leaues 

'a) gaod ſauour;ech of which is alſo ſha- 

erootes arc nothing elſc but a fewe ſmall «4s or fibres. An 


* 
- 5 x 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |! | osg 


%* Theplace. > 


Craciata,or Crofſew bort | th a moiſt 


id 
ſteede 


yond Charleton, a ſmall vi 
and in ſundry otherplaces. | 
a * The time. * 
| It flowreth for the moſt part all fommer 
ong. bl 5H 
" + Thenames. | 
It-is called Craciata, and Cruciatis, ofthe 
placing of the leaues in manner of a croſſe : 
in Engliſh Croflewoort , Golden Crofle. 


woortz or Golden Mugweet. | 
av Therm date. | 
| Croſſewoort 19908 1/4 beofa binding and 
drying qualitie." | | 
%* Thewertues. 


Crofſewoort hath an excellent propertie, to A 
heale, ioine, and cloſe wounds togither \yeair 
is very fit for them, whether they be inwarde or 
outwarde , ifthe ſaide herbe be boiled in wine 
anddrunke. / | | 

The decoftion thereof is alſo miniſtred B 

| with good ſucceſle co thoſe that are burſten : 
«7 and fo is the herbe , being boiled vntill it be 

| ſoft, and laide vpon the burſten place'in man. 
ner of a pulrtis, j £1 38 


Of Woodrooffe. Chap.44-7. 

EI | * The deſcription. bed Ke Wt? 

Oodrooffe hath many ſquare ſtalkes full of ioints , and atenery knotor iointſeauen or 
* eightlong narrowe leaues,ſet round abour like aſtarre, orche rowell of a ſpurre : the flo- 

wers growatthe top of the ſtemimes,of a white colour ,and of a very fweere ſmell, as is 
. thereſtof the herbe, which being made vp into garlands or bundles, and hanged vp in houſes in 
the heare of ſommer,doth very well attemper the aire, coole and make freſh the place, to the de- 
light and comfort of ſuch as are therein. + | | | Lo 

There is another ſortof Woodrooffe called Aſperala Cerwlcs, or blew Woodrooffe: it is an 

herbe of a foote high ſoft, hairic, and ſomething branched , with leaues and ſtalkes like thoſe of 
white Woodrooffe: the flowers therofare blue,ſtanding vpon ſhort ſtems onthe rops of the ſtalks; 
the ſeedeis ſmall,round,and placed togirher by couples : the roote is long and of ared colour. | 
|  Thereis anqther herbe called Saginz ſpergula or ſpurrie, whichis ſowen in Brabant, Hollande, 
and Flaunders,, of purpoſe to fatten cartle,and to cauſethem aha ow much milke, and there called 
Spurrie,and franke Spurry :itis a baſe andlowe herbe , very tender, hauing may iointed ſtalkes, 
whereupon do grow leaues ſet in round citcles like thoſe of Woodrooffe, bur lefler and ſmoother, 
in forme like the rowell of a ſpur,at the top of the ſtalkes do grow ſmall white flowers , after which 
come round leede like thoſe of Turneps: the rooteis ſmall and threddie, [ES [Een] 


I | | 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| &*.3 
| White VVogdrooffe groweth wander hedges 
'and in woods almoſt Furr 5 nh the ſeconde 
;growerh in many places of Eflex,and divers other 
/parts in ſandie gfounds. | : 
at | %&Thetime, 
/} Thevflowermluneandluly. 


; Moſt have taken Woodrooffe tobe Plae his 
' Alyſes, which as he faith, doth Ciffer rom x7. 
| throdanum, or garden Madder ,in leaues onely, & 
| leſler ſtalkes: but ſuch aone isnot onely this, bur 
| alſo that withblew flowers: for Galendoth artri- 
; bute to, _Zyfos, a blew flower :notwithſtanding 
| Galens and Plies os, :e thought to differ 
| from Woodrooffe by Ga/ensown words, wiiting 
; of Awſesin his ſecondbook of Counterpoitons, 
. in AntonizyComhis compoſition in this manner : 
| Alyſos is an herbe verylike vitro Horehound, bur 
- | rougher and fulter ofprieKles aboutthe circles: ir 
| bearetha flower tending to blew, 
| | Woodrooffe is named of divers in Latine 
| | Aſerulaodorats, andof molt men Aſpergulcode- 
A | rata, Of others Cordzatis, and Stelaria: in high 
- + DurchHert3freydt : in low Dutch L everkrauts 
| thatis roſaie /rcorar:, Or Hepatiea, Liverwoort: 
\ in Frencli| Mguet : in Engliſh VVoodrooffe , 
Woodrowe,and Woodrowell. | 


BYE {+ þ X Thet emperature. 14+ K-24) 
 Woodraoffe is of temperature ſomthing like vato our Ladics Bedſtraw, bur nor ſo ſtrong being 
ina meane berweene heat anddrines = _ - | 4 
£ 1 * Thervertues. [yds 
Itis reported to be put into wine,tomake a ryan merrie, and to be good fot the hart and liver : 
it preuaileth in wounds,as Cracza#a,and other vulneraric herbes do. | 


# 
[IF 
i 


(hap. 44.8. 


6 hoe be divers of the herbes called Ladics Bedſtraw, or Cheeſe renning, ſome greater, others 
> lefſe,fomewithwhite flowers,and ſome with yellowe, | | 


I of 


Ed F-481 | | *% T he deſeription. o- Ld : 
I Adies Bedſtraw hath fivall,round, eucn talkes, weake and tender,creeping hither andthi- 
ther ypon the ground; whereon doe growe very fine leaues, cut into ſmall 1ags, finer then: | 
thoſe of Dill,ſer at cerraine ſpaces, as thoſe of Woodtooffe: among which come foorth 
flowers ofa yellow colour, in cluſters or bunches thicke thruſt rogither , of aſtrong ſweere ſmell, 
| but nor vnpleaſant : the roote is ſmall and threddie. _ Lats 
2 Ladies Bed{traw with white flowers is like ynto Cleauers or Gooſe grafle,in leaues,ſtalkes,and 
maner of growing, yernothing atall rough , bur ſmooth ang loft: the lowers be white, the ſeede 
round; the roores flender , creeping within the grounde: the whole plant ramperh ypon buſhes, 
ſhrubs.and allocher ſuch tiungs as ſtande necte yutoit, otherwiſe it cannor ſtande , bur mult reels 
. andfalltotheground, | | ; | K-32] he 
, | I 


 HISTORIE OF /PLANTS. | 369 
1 Gallium luteum. 2 Gilliumalbun, | 
; | Ladies Bedſtraw with white flowers, 


Gallium why am. : 4 Gallium ſme molluzo montana. 
Ladies Bedſtraw with red flowers, | Great Baſtard Made '-:1- 


#- Y *. 
Xs 

F 

- 


EIS a. / 4 Fas | SIG 
»! Vs [a k\ s — - ; - , Ny Y 
F + , =” pf 
= T . ae LAY WA 

> 8 Log & . pa 1 
L TM Y 


WG 
. 


WF. 


M 
\(\ | 
NN | 
VPAY 
NY 


N HY v4 AG 4 
| Zy 


968 * THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


= | | % The deſeription. KEE 
3 This ſmall Ga{/wnor ladies little red bedſtrowe, hath beene taken for akinde of wilde Madder. 
neuertheleſſe itisakindeof Ladies bedſtrow or cheeſrending, as appecreth both by his vertues % 
eurning milke for cheeſe , as alſoby his forme being in cach refſpeQlike vnto yellow Galam, and 
differerh inthe colour of the flowers , which are of a darke red colour witha yellowe pointle in the 
 middle,confiſting of fower ſinall leaues : the ſeede wherofwas ſent me from * comc5E or Strawſ- 
boroughin Germany, = [| © hq 
4 There is likewiſe another ſortof Galiwm for diſtintion ſake called Aollugo,which hath ſtalles 
that neede not to be propped vp,bur ofirſelfe ſtandeth vpright,and is like ynto the common white 
Gallium, but that it hath a ſmoother leafe : the lowers therof be alſo white,and very ſmall:the roote 
blackiſh. ET] | be | 
I haue receiued from a citizen of Strawsborough the ſeedes of a kind of Ga/iwm with red flowers, 


which hathnot bcene ſeene in thaſe parrs beforethis time, 
| ' | | *% Theplace. | | | 
Thefirſt growerh vpon ſunny bankes ncere tothe borders of fieldes,in fruitful ſoiles almoſt ene. 
rie where. | | T oh | 3 
The ſecond groweth in hedges among buſhes in moſtplaces. 
The third groweth in mariſh grounds, and other moilt places, 
The fourth groweth vpon mountaines and hilly places,and is not yet found in England, 


—_þ4/ 


| | * Thetime. 
| They flower moſt of the fommer moneths. | 
| | | | * The names. | 
The firſt is called in Greeke -a«v: it hath that name of milke, called in Greeke >, into which 
it is put as Cheeſe renning: in Latine likewiſe Galiwn:in high Durch Megerkraut, UWalltroo : 
in low Dutch TUalftroo : in French Pezze AMugyet : in Italian Gafs: in Spaniſh Coais leche yerus: 
in Engliſh our Ladies Bedſtraw,Cheeſe renning, Maides Haire,and petic Mugwer. 
The others are Species Lappag#ni, a kinde of {mall Burre,fo taken ofthe ancients, of the ſoftnes 
| andſmoothnes of the leaues,andis commonly called Mellygo: diuers take them for kinds of wilde 
Madder,naming it Rubia ſylueftris, or wilde Madder: but Madderthat growerth of itſelfe differeth 
not from the plantedor tame Madder, wherof we haue found none in England,thatI canlearn of, 
| % Thetemperature, | | 


2 


| Theſe herbes eſpecially rhat with yellow flowers, is dry and ſomthing binding, as Ge/er ſaith. 
| i % Thewertwes, _ 
A The flowersof yellow Maides Haire,as Dzoſcorides writeth,is vicd in ointments againſt burnings, 
andirſtancheth bloud: it is put tothe Cerote or Cerecloth of Roſes: it isſer a ſunning ina glaſle 
with oile Oliue till it be white:it is good to annoint the wearied trauciler: the roote thereof drunke 
Es in wine ſtirreth vp bodily Juſt: and the flowers ſmelled vnto worketh the ſame effeR. 

a B Theherbe thereof is vied forRennet to make cheeſe, as Marhiolmreporteth, ſaying, that the 
people of Thuſcane or Hetruria , dove it to turne their milke , that the Cheeſe which they make 
_ of ſheepes and Goares milke might be the ſweeter and more pleaſant intaſte , andalſo more hol- 

{ome,cſpecially to breake the ſtone, as it is reported. SSI | 
C Thepeople in Cheſhire,eſpecially about Namptwich where the beſt Cheeſe is made , do vic ic 

/ in their Renner,cſtecming greatly of that Cheeſe aboue other made withour'ir. 
D Wetfinde okay pare: in ancient writers of the vertues and faculties of.che white kinde, but 

areas herbes neuerhadin vſe,cither for Phiſicke or Chirurgeric, © £ 


Of Ferne.| Chap.4.49. 
$ Here be diners ſorts of Ferne, differing as well in forme as place of growing, whereof there be 


two ſorts according tothe old writers, the Male and the Female, and theſe be properly called 
Feme: the others haue their proper names asſhallbe declared, BP pilix 


4 | F * 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


: Filix mas, | 2 Filix faming, | 
"Male Ferne, | | Female Ferne or brakes, 
I 2; NT ND me | 


Ve AN, 
wy Fa RY 

{I 

DVD 


I x 
NS 


V/ gk " + 14 F 6 4 ) 
7, NNN WD Gaye 
res 16 > 4 

; 


Maj We 
Cr 


* The deſcription. 


1 *T" He male Ferne bringeth fobrth preſently from the roote broad leaues and rough, ſomwhat 

hard,cafieto be broken,of a light greene colour,and ſtrong ſmell,more then a cubite long, 

{pred abroad like wings,compounded as it were of a great number ſtanding vpon one mid- 

dee rib,;cuery one whereof is like a feather, and nicked in the edges,and on the backſide are ſprinck- 

ledas it were with a verie fine carthie coloured duſt or ſpots, which many raſhly haue taken for 

ſeede: the roote confiſteth of a number oftufts or El ,andis thicke and blacke: and is withour 
ſtalke and ſcede.,and altogither barren. > 

2 Thefemale Ferne hath neither flowers nor ſeed,but one onely ſtalke which is chamfered,ſom- 

thing edged,hauing a pith within of diuers colours, the which being cur aflope, there appeereth a 

ine forme of af} pred Eagle: about this ſtande very many leaues which are winged, andlike to 


"» 


certaine 


the leaues of the male Ferne,bur leſſer: the rooteis long and blacke,and creepeth in the ground be- 

ing now and then an inch thicke,or ſomewhat thinner this is alſo of a ſtrong imell, as is the male. 
2 N52 AN HE 

Fe the Fernes are delighted to growe in , drie,and deſert places 3 and as Horace tc- 


[De Neeteftis vrenda filix inneſcitur agris. | | 
Itcommeth not vp in mannred and dunged places, for if itbe dunged as Theophraſias in his 8, 
booke 8. chapter reporteth,it witheroth away. Nj 
ere Male ioieth in open and champion places,on mountaines and ſtonie grounds as Dioſcorides 


The Female is often found about the borders of ficlds vnder thornes and in ſhadowie wood R 


| — THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
| Both theſe Fernes wither away in winterzin the ſpring there grow foorth new leaues,which con. 
_ tinue greene all ſommer long, | | ; 


1 {| |} | & Thrawes. OE | 
 Theformeriscalled in Greeke#iz«s: Nicandey in his diſcourſe of Treacles nameth ic #57-,, . in 
Latine Fifx mas : in Italian Felce : in Spaniſh Helecho, Falguero, and Feytotin high Dutch Walde 
Farne: in French Foxgere, ot Fenchiere maſle : inlowe Dutch Caren BPannckent in Engliſh male 
Ferne. $1 0, J vo 

* Theſecond kindeis called in Grecke bmw#ies, thar is,Filix famine, or female Ferne: in Latine 
as Droſcoridesnoteth among baſtard names, Lingus cernina: in high Dutch UMaldt Farn weiblin, 
and 205 Farnkraut : inlow DurchUaren UWyfken: in French Fougere Femelle : in Engliſh 
Brake,common Ferne,and Female Fernc. 1 | | | | | 


| |* The temperature. _ 
Both the Fernes are hot, bitter and dric,and ſomthing binding, 
Eg 1f-þ | * The vertues. | Fc 
Theroote of themale Ferne being taken tothe weight of halfe an ounce, driveth foorth long, 
; flat wormes out of the belly, as Dzoſcorides writeth,being drunke in meade or honied water'; & more 
effectually if it be giuen with ewo ſcruples or two thirdparts ofadram of Stemonie,or of black Hel. 
 leborzrhey that will vie it ſaith he,mult firſt cate Garlicke : after the ſame maner,as Galen addeth ji 
killeth the childe in the mothers wombe : the roote heereofis reported tobe good for them that 
hauc ill ſpleenes: and being ſtamped with ſwines greafe and/applicd, it is a remedie againſt the 
pricking of the reed) for proofe heereof as Djoſcorides ſaith,the Ferne dicth, if thereed be planted 
about it and contrariwiſe,that the reed diethif ir be compaſſed with Ferne, which is vaintothinke, 
that it hapnethby anantipathy or natural hatred, and not by reaſon that this Ferne proſpereth nor 
B in moiſt places ,nor the Recde in drie, EA | | 
The female Ferne is of like operation with the former, as Galez ſaith : Dioſcorides reporteth that 
| this bringeth barrennes ,eſpecially to women; and that itcauſerh women to be delivered before 
their time: he addeth that the powder heereof finely beaten is laide vpon olde vicers ; and healgth 
the galled neckes of oxen and other cattle: itis alſo reported that the roote of Ferne caſt intoan 
C Hogthed of wine keepeththeſame from ſowring. | of 
The roote of male Ferne ſodden in wine, is good againſt the hardnes and ſtopping of the mile: 
and being boiledin water ſtaierh the laske in yoang chuldren,if they be ſet ouer the decoction ther- 
of to cale their bodies by acloſeſtoole, —=_| | | 


ol 


Y 


Of water Ferne,or Oſmund the water man. Chap. 450. 


f | * The deſeription. | | 
I Ater Fernehatha grene rriangled ſtalke two cubits high, beſer vpon each {ide with 


large leaues ſpread abroad like wings,and dented or cutlike Polypodie : theſe leaues 

zrelike the large leaues of the Aſhitree: fordoubrleſſe when firlt ſaw them a far off,ic 
cauſed me to woonder thereat, thinking that Thad ſeene yoong Aſhes growing vpon a bogge, but 
beholding ita little neerer, I might cafily diſtinguiſh it from the Aſhe, by the browne, rough, and 
round graines that grewe on the top of the branches , which yet are nor the feede chereof , but, 
are verie like vnto the ſecde: the roote is great and thicke, folded and couercd ouer with manic 
ſcales and interlacing rootes, hauing in the middle of the greatand hard woodie part thereof ſome 
ſmall whiceneſſe, which hath beene called the hatr of Ojmunathe water man, 


 & The 


'HIST,ORIE OF PLANTS. 


& Omani Regelis. va 
08 Ferne,or Oſmundroiall, 


. 
8 122 
4 -o WL 
* - 
p > 2! , 
CD | 
% LAT 9 _ + 
Y>) #&+." £7 


SET /——" 
2 >IG Eo 
ES 


A, 


= 70+ j\ b V6 
OF LLIALN ys 
LANG) 4A DFT © 
i; , 


. 
* / -< 74 - 
. 1, o +4 "4 "4 p 
> Fa A - © / 191.477. 12 _ 
, 
L297: , A 
LEG 4 \ 
PN KN 

of + 71> 3/3t 

0 YET + if — 4 
=- y” | SAS. - # 
$ = 
- 
a 


+ 


| % The plice, | 
It groweth in the midſt of abogge, arthe tarde: end of Hampſteede Heath from London, ar 
the botrome of a hill adioining to aſmallcortage, and divers other places, as al'o vpon divers 
bogges on a Heath or common neere vnto Burwood in Eſſex , eſpecially neere vnto a pla.c 
there that ſomehave digged, tothe ende "by finde aneſtor mincof golde: but the birdes were 
ouer fledge,and flowne away before thei wings could be clipped. | 
| %* Thetime. | 
It lovriſherk in ſommer as the former Ferneszthe leanes decaic in winter:the roote continuer!: 
freſh and long laſting,which being brought into the garden profpererh as in his natiue foile, as "7 
felfc haue prooued, | | 
*+ The names. | 
Itiscalled in Latine O /awnde;it is more truly named Filix paluſtyis,or aquatitis: ſometerme it by 
thename of Filxcaſtywm: moſt of the Alchimiſtes call it Lumeriamaror:YValerizs Cordus nameth it Fr- 
lix latifoliz: it is namedin high Dutch Gzuſ5' Farnt in lowe Durch G2oote Tiaremn wilt Clarins 
n Engliſh water Ferne,Oſmund the watcertpan, of fome Saint Chriſtophers herbe, aud Olmund, 
"BR 54] %* The temperature. | | 
Theroote of this alſois hot and dry,but lefle then they of the former ones. 
*% TT he vertues. © | | 
Theroote and eſpecially the hart or middie partchereof, boiled or elſe ſtamped and taken with A 
ſome kinde of liquor, is thought to be good for thoſe that are wounded, dry beaten and bruſed, that 
hauc fallen trom ſomehigh place: Ds for the ſame caulcthe Emperickes do pur itin A ps" 
whic 


972 THE SECOND BOOKE.OF THE 
whichthe later Phifitions do call wounde drinks: ſomerakeit to be ſo effeſtuall, and of (© great 


oh 


a vertue,2s that it can diſſBlue chittered bloud remaining in any inward partpt the bodice, and that 
it alſocanexpcllor driue it our bythe wound. | 1 16 $34" TW 
B Thetender ſprigs therof at their firſt comming{foorth,are excellent vntothe purpoles aforifaid 


and are googto be put into balmes,oiles,and confolidatiues or healing plaiſters, and into wguencs 


appropria ongy 208 ts th puriCtures,and ſuch like. 


Of Polypodie,or wall Ferne. Chap.451. 


; 


Polypodnwn. 


Wall Ferne,or Polypodic of the wall, | | | | *Th " acſeriptio " 


: | | = He leaues of Polypody might be ht to 
7 Þ ; be like thoſe of male *an-4y —_—_ 
[| 1 and farreleſſcr, andnot nicked art all in the 
edges :theſedo preſently ſpring vp fr therootes 
being cur on both che edges with many deepe 
gaſhes,ceuenhardeto rhe middle rib zon the vp- 
uf fide they arc ſmooth, onthe neather fide they 
be lightly powdred as it were with duſty markes; 
. [therooteis long, nota fingerthicke, creeping a 
lope, on which are ſcene cerrtaine little burtrons 
like ro thoſe pits and dents that appeere in the 
tailes of curtle fiſhes : this bath in ir a certaine 
ſweerenes with a taſte ſomthing harſh: this kinde 
of Ferne likewiſe wanterh not onely flowers and 
ſeede;bur ſtalkes alſo. | : | 
| '* Theplace. 
: Ir groweth onthe bodies of olde rotten trees, 
-andalfo ypon old wals, and the tops of houſes: i 
* is likewiſe founde among rubbiſh neere the bor. 
:ders of fieldes,cſpecially vndcer trees and thornes, 
and now andthen in woods : and in ſomeplaces 
it groweth ranke and with a broader leafe, in 
'others notſoranke,and with a narrower leafe. 
| . That which groweth on the bodies of olde 
| |Okes ispreferred before the reſt : in ſteede of this 
| 4: 4  {moſtdovſethatwhichisfoundevnderthe Okes, 
which for all that is not to be terthed Quercimum,or Polypodie of the Oke, 
t 4-5 * The time. | 


— 
$ = 


leaues 1n the firſt ſpring, | 


Polypodieis greene all the yeere long,and may be gathered atany rimezit bringeth foorth newe 


The Grzcians call it n=», of the holes ofthe fiſhes Polyps, appeering in the rootes: it is cal- 


ledin Latine Polypodiums after the Greeke name and many times Flicale, as though theyſhoulde 
ſay Perus Filrx,or little Ferne: the Italians name'it Polipodzro : the Spaniards Filipodro, and Polypodzos 
in high Dutch Engelfuſ3, Baumkfarn, Ozopffwurtz tin lowe Dutch Boom varen: in French 
Pooh : and weof England Polypodie: that which groweth vpon the wal we call Polypodic of the 
wall, and that on the Oke,Polypodie of the Oke.| | $1 rant 
"© þ 1 | | uh Thetemperature. | 
Polypodie doth dric,bur yet without biting as Gaſex writeth. | 
A Diofeorides wiiteththatitis of power to purge and to drawe forth choler and flegme..4 


addeth 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. || gy 


addeth that it likewiſe purgeth melancholyzothers ſuppoſe it to be without any purging force ar al, 
or elſe ro hane verie little : of the ſame minde is alſo 7ahannes Monardue , who thinketh that it pur- 
geth veric gently ; which thing is confirmed by experience, the miftris of rhings. For in verie 
decde Polypodie of it lelfe doth not purge ar al, bur onely ſerueth a littlero make the bellie ſoluble, 
being boiled in the broth of an old cocke with Beeres or Mallowes, or other like things that moove 
tothe ſtoole by their {lipperines. /oanres Aeſursreckoneth vp Polypodie among thoſe things that 
doecſpecially dtie and make thinne : peraduenture he had reſpec toa certainekinde of Arthrirsy, 
or ache inthe ioints; in which not one onely part of the bodic, bur many togither molt commonly 
aretouched: for which icis verie much commended 4 Menapits and other inhabitants about the 
river Rhene, and the Maze. In this kinde of diſeaſe the hands, the feete, and the ioints of ihe knees 
and elbowes doſwell. There is joined withall a feeblenes in moouing thorow theextremuric of the 
paine: ſomerimes the vpper parts are Jeflc greeued,and thelowermore. The humours do allo eaſily 
runne from one place to another,and hen ſettle. Againſt this diſeaſe the Geldres & Clevelanders 
do vie the decoRtion of Polypodie , whereby they hope that the ſuperfluous humours may be wa- 
ſted and dried vp , and that not by and by , but in continuance of time : for they appoint thar this 
decoRion ſhould be taken for certaine daies togither, | | 
But this kind of gour is ſooner taken away dherby bloud letting,or by purgations,or by both,8& B 
afterwardes by ſweate ; neither is it harde to be cured if theſe generall remedies be vſedin rime : for 
the humours do not remaine fixed in thoſe ioints,bur are rather gathered togither then ſerled abour 
them, | | 
Therefore the bodie muſt out ofhand be purged, and then thatwhichremaineth is to be waſted C 
and conſumed away by ſuch things as procure ſweate. 
Furthermore | Dzoſcorides ſaith, that the roote of Polypodie is verie good for members our of D 
joing,andfor _ berweene the fingers. : | 
The rootes of Polypodie boiled with alittle honie, water , and pepper, andthequantitie of an E 
ounce given, emprieththe belly of cholericke and pituirous humoursz ſome boile it in water and 
wine, and giuethercof to the quantitie of three ounces for ſome purpoſes with good ſucceſle. 


o 
4a 


Of Pobpodie of the Oke,or Oke Ferne. Chap.452- 


* The deft iption. 


1 TYOlypodicof the Oke is much like vnto that of the wall, yerthe leaues of irare more finelie 
cut,fnooth on thepper ſide,of a pale greene colour , togither with the ſtalke and the mid- 
dle ribs ;on the nearher ſide rough likethoſe of Ferne : this Fernealfo liueth withour a ſtalk: 

it groweth withour ſeede: the roore hath many ſtrings faſtned to ir, one folded within another, 

of a meane bignes,and {weete in taſte : ir ſeizdeth foorth heece and there new dodkins or pringes, 
whereby it increaſeth. by | edt. | a 

2 This kinde of Ferne called Dr yopteris,or Filix querne hath leaues bke vntothe female Fernie be. 
fore ſpoken of (called by the name Ferne or brakes ) but much leſſer, ſmaller, and morefinely cut or 
lagged, and is not abouc a foore high, being a verie ſlender and delicate tender herbe. The leaues 
we lo finely iagged that inſhewe they reſemble feathers ſetround aboura ſipall ribbe or figewexthe 
back fide bein Drinckled not with ruſſec or brown marks or ſpecks, as the other Fees are, buras 
irwerepainted with white ſporsor marks ; notwithſtanding out of the leaues inſcales,, as rheſpors 
inthe male Ferne. which are double vponeache leafe,clofe vnto the middletib or finew.The root is 
long brown, 8& fomwhathairie, veric like vato Polypodic,butmuch flenderer, of aſbarp & cauſtick 
taſte.Sundrie ignorant apothecaries ſuppoſing that this was alſo a kind of Polypoiehaue vied the 
lame intheir n:edicines for Polypodie, greatly abuſing thepatients therein , far the roote of Dry» 
opterts is verie bitter in taſte , of a perniciqus and naughtie qualitic, vtterly forbidden in medt-« 


cine, 6 


1 Folypodjium 


THE SECOND BOOKE OFTHE | 


I Polypodium Wer cimwn. = : "a Filix Quernsfac D ers, 
Polpodicof Oke,/ | Small Oke Ferne. = 


=p 


< 
- 


o 

- 
. 4 
1p 2 


” 
o _ 
AN-Y; 
4 
"Ex 
EP, þ 
ONE Df 
* U 
4, 2 
qv 


FE 


W\ 


"4 
%. % 


\ 


Y 


NS 
. FLA 


| / 

* The place, ||| o 

| Iris oftentimes found in ſunnie places iri the valleies of mountaines and little hils, andin the 
tops of the trunks of trees of thicke woods, | 

EN | *% Thetime. «4 
The leaucs heercof periſh in winter z in the fpring new come foorth, 

| | L | [7,2 Te nee | by 
This iscalled in Greeke {pvo#tes :in Latine Qerrms Flix : Oribaſaw in his 11, booke of Phiſicall 
colleQtiqns calleth it Bryqprer#4.ofthe moſle with which itis found:fot as Djoſe. writethirgrowerh 
in the moſle of Okes : the Apothecarics in times paſt miſcalled it by the. name of : bur 
they did woorſe in putting it in compound medicines in ſteed of Adrantum: Y alerins Corda calleth 
it Preredjon: in lowe Dutch Eijcken varen: the Spaniards Helecho deroble: it is namedinEngliſh 
Oke Ferne, Pettic Ferne,anditmay molt ficly be called Moſle Ferne, 


TR- ! | 
 % The temperature and vertues. 


A- Polypodieof he Oke hath many taſtes : it is ſiveete,biring and bitrer,it hah inthe roote a harſtt 
or choking taſte,and amortifying qualitie,andtherefore it takerh away haires. Dioſcorides doth allo 
report, that Oke Ferne qrnig 9 rootes and alljs a remedie to toote vp haires, ifir be apphiedto the 
body after ſweating,and the (weate wiped away. Ih [2 

B' His othervertues and faculties in working, ate referred vnto the Polypodie of the wall; bur this 


Polypodieis not holden to be fo good nor holſome for Phiſickes vie asthe other , alrhough ſome 
newe fanglers attribute more vnto this then is due. $55 | 
of 


HIST ORIE OF PLANTS. | 975 


Of blacke Oke Ferne. Chap.453. 
14 M45, 64 4-3] 2 0 ter vr { 
; Thetnale blacke Ferne, | Thefema black Ferne. 
d) Fs v3 | | Þ 


VE 
» WWE 

/ \ || 
IQ; 


' L< C's 
5 


AFEY 


Q 
o 


213k 


JT. 
- 


LY * A 
: «AY, 


*+ Thedeſeription. 


—Y Here is alſo acertaine other kinde of Ferne like to the former Oke Ferne; but the ſtalkes 
and ribs of the leaues are blackiſh, and the leaues of a deeper greene colour :this doth 
growe alfo out immediately from the root; and is likewiſe diverſly, bur not ſo finely inden- 
ted: the roote is made vp of man fraran not vnlike ro Polypodic of the Oke,bur much leſſer. 
2 Thefemaleblacke Ferne is like vnto the male, ſauing his leaues are nor ſo tharpe at thepoints, 
more whiter and broaderthen the —————— the difference; 
, * (f | 
They grow likewiſc vpon trees in ſhadowie ded med now and then in ſhadowie ſandy bankes, 
and vnder hedges. 
* The time. : 


They remaine greene all the yeere long,otherwiſechen Polypodie and maidens haire do : yet do 
By not ceaſe to bring foorth newe leaues in ſummer : they are deſtitute of fiowers and ſeede, as is 


Ivy 6 WI % The names. = | WW. 
This is called of divers of theater Herbariſts Dryopter# nigr4,o7 blacke Oke Ferne, of the like» 
nes thatitharh with Drzoprerss, which we haue in Engliſh Oke Ferne, or Moſſe Ferne : of 
others adirmtum aigrwn,or blacke Maidens haire, that it may differ from the former , which is 
falſely called _Adiantum : there are of the later Herbariſts who would haue irto be Lonchits aſþrra, 
or rough ſpleenwoort : but what likenes hath it with the leaues of Scoloperdrium? none at all: t _ 
j 


/ 


976 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
fore it isnot Lonchitis aſþera,nmuch leſſe Adijantwrs Pling which differerh nor from Adzantum 7 bees. - 
for whathe hath of Aanmmm', the ſame he taketh out of Theophraſtms : theright #0 abs KA 
will de{cribe heerafter. Notwithſtanding blacke Oke Ferne is vied of diuers vnlearned Apotheca- 
ries for ©Ad;zaztwnr , or Maiden haire of Lumbardie : but theſe mendoerre in doing fo, yetnot ſo 
much as they, who take Polypodie of the Oke for the true Maiden haire, 
_— | * Thetemperature and vertues. | 
The black Oke Ferne hath noſtiptike qualitie at all,bur is like in facultic to Trichemanes or Eng- 
liſh Maiden hairc, "LA. 1 


7. (hap 454- 


2 Phillitiomultifida. 
Finger Harts toong, 


F # 
- 
— gr pap of _ 
_ 4 
= 
_ won 
- _ 
y - - 
- - 
- » w% is 
« _ 


14 
lt 
= 


IJ 


T] 
J 


Jo 


ho. m = 
- . _ < —_ y Ry 
— —_—_— On —_ - k S 
S 4 - . © 
- —_ — > - 
- " , ſ—_ ——_ _ 7 
- ia G_ 
dS > ' * "2 
- NN > 
RN \ : _ _ ” % 
SOD . { _— » 
AN wo F'> - a> 0 - 
WV f = -X* Y x » 
4 % 
, =. G 
| ” 
£ & 
d « , JJ *s p 
*. ks * *s. 
F Y Ws - K . -_ 
5 . > 4 3" 
% " 6 
\ WC \ 


A __ Q Wd Y BY WY) NY I — 
JIRIPER W \wD y LW 


1 
4 
1 
"I J 0 
o "4 
F\ 
. _ 
" WE 1 ». T3 
3s [NF . X P 
P £& Hf) NF " 
"OS » ' - © F\ 
W.% ” - # 4 "TFT 
»\ a ov : 
F k "o& / ” - 
"» "ST, Sf -yY * 
k L % 
6 b ET AS 1 _ 
Lis 4 , 
F% k , 
Ll ' % 
Ih, , H 8 - 
4-1 L { h_ 
” « *% 
£ ” M 
' Ws f > A 
* 714 \ F gd 
. > - ad 1 
, ” 27 , # 
% ; 
>; ” 
&* > bo 
ww. þ 
>. 
'P F 
PC 
 —— - 
Wy " \ ” 
_ - 
__ "" 
of £ 
- #X 
4 me SS 4 
oQ \ "- 
. 
_ F, 
_ "4 
# 
*® _ : 
%. 
* j 
8 > F 
% ” 
F. Dm. 0 , 
* 
© = \y 
—_ 
£* 
. 
. o *. 
he 
, 
>. 
\'q => 
LY 
« \ # . 
» & 7 
" {ſs 
« g 
- : 
__ , 


A 


2% < 
»4y% 
o 


- 
P —_ 
; 
Om OG 
- __ 


4 —— 


f { x | 
- \ PO % 

©, A %.\& 
# £ L d 
# 77 F| WW.” *J 
pj , | 2 
2 4. 16).9\NN 
/ ; q | / ad) 
" The ' W N 
LCA UMTS 


1! 071 


i FF He common kinde of Harrs toong called Phylitis, tharis to ſay, a plant conſiſtingonely of 
leaues,bearing neither ſtalk, lower nor ſeed reſembling in ſhew along toong,wherofit hath 

| beene andis called in ſhops Lingus cerdine that is 'Harts toong:1rheſe leaues are a foote 
15ng, ſinooth andplaine vpon one ſidebur vpon that ſide next the ground, ſtraked ouerthwart with 


 certaine long rough matrkes,like ſmall wormes hanging ontheb therof: the roote is black, 


hairie,and twiſted,or ſo growing as though it were wound togither. -. 1 + | 
2 Thcotherkinde of Fern led Phylutis muſtifids, os Laciniata, that is iagged Harts png. 
fe 1 BY j PRES | ye; 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 977 


very like vnto the former ,ſauing that theleaues thereof are cur or iagged like a mans hand, or the 
alme and browantles of a Deare, bearing neither ſtalke,fAlower,nor ſeede. | , 

There is another kinde of Harrs toong called Hemionitis, which hath bred ſome comroverſie 
* among ancient writers:for ſome haue took it for a kinde of Harts toong as itis indeed ; others de- 
(cribe it as a proper plant by itfelf,called Hemionzris of iwleree,that is Aalis,a Mule,bicauſe Mules do | 
delight to feede thereon:it is barren of ſeeds, ſtalks, 8& fAlowers,andin ſhape agreeth very well with 
our Harts toong: the rootes arecompact of many blackiſh haires : the leaues are ſpotted on the 
backſide like the common. Harts toong , and ditfereth in that, that this Hemyzoniti inthe baſe or 
loweſt parts of the leaues , is arched after the manner of a newe Moone, or a forked arrowexthe 
yoongelt and ſmalleſt dang like vnto the great Bindweed,called Yotubilis. | 

There is a kind of Ferne,called likewiſe Hemionits fterilis, which is a very ſmall & baſe herbe,nor 
aboue a finger high,having fower or five ſmall leaues of the fame ſabſtance and colour, ſpotted on 
the backe part,andin taſte like Harts roong;>ut the leaues beare the ſhape of them of Totabora, or 

ood Henrie, which many of our Apothecarics do abuſiuely take for Mercurie : the rootes are very - 
mooth, blacke, and threddie, bearing neither ſtalke , lower, nor ſcede :this plantmy very good 
friende Maſter Nicholas Belſor founde in a grauellic lane in the way leading to Oxey parke neere 
vnto Watforde, fiftcene miles from London: ir growerh likewiſe on the ſtone walles of Hampron 
Court, in the garden of maſter Hug gens keeper of the {aide houſe orpallace, 

There is a kinde of Ferne called alſo Hemionitr,but with this addition Peregrina, that is very ſel. 
dome founde, and hath leaues very like vnto Harts toong , but thatitispalmedor branched in the 
 partnextthe grounde, almoſt in manerofthe ſecond Phllics, atthe rop ofthe leaues ; otherwiſe 

theyreſemble one another,jia natuce and forme. | 


3 The place. 


4 The common Harts toong groweth by the waies ſides, 2s yee trauell from London to Exceter 
in great plentie,in ſhadowie places, and moiſt ſtonie valleies and wels, and is much plancedin gar- 
ns, 


TheſecondTI found in the garden of maſter Cravwicha Chirurgion, dwelling at Much-dunmow 


inEſſex,who gaue me aplantfor my garden. 
It groweth vpon Ingleborough hils and diuers other mountaines of thenorth of England, 


od 


* The tame. 


Itis greeneall the yeere long, yetleſle greene in winter: in ſommer it noweand then bringerh 
foorthnewe leaues. | 5 


* The nwnes. 


It is called in Greeke owwins: in Latine alſo Phylitis: in ſhops Lingus cernina,andfallely Scolopen- 
aria, for it differech much from the right Scolopendrze, or Stone Ferne: it is called in high Dutch 
birizung ilowe Dutch Þerſtonge : in Spaniſh Zengss ceruins : in French Langue de Cerf*: in 
Engliſh Harts toong , of ſome Stone Harts toong: C4palcizs in his 83, Chapter nameth it 24- 
diols, - ds 

& Thetemperatare. 
Itis of a binding and drying faculrie. 
| | * The vertues. 
This common Harts toong is commended againſt the laske and bloudie flixe: Djoſcorides tea- A 
cheth,that being drunke in wine it is a remedy againſt the birings of ſerpents. 


Itdoth open the hardnes and ſtopping of the ſpleene andliuer, and allorhec griefes proceeding B 
ofoppilations or ſtoppings whatſocuex, | 


g33 . THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of Spleenewoort,or <Milt wafle. | Chap. 455. 


x Aſplenium ſueCeterach, 2| Lonehitiraſpera, 
Splecnewoort or Miltwaſte, 7 | Rough Splcenewoort,. 


: 


= 4 
— 
% —_— - 
py +. y 
—/ q A 
—_ 
TTX \\. 
| # 
* 
* 
: " 
»g# 
i 
|} 
"TE" * 
3. Ld - £ 
» VS5 
Ln gt L 
- C = 
F 
[5 "| % 
E Ta 
« j : , . 
_ C Fi i : _ \ 
/ - . 
” y, : k * 
, | YL 
Y C 
? n 
x, { s \ 
: Þ Y% 
£ of 7 -% \ 
| v' ! — \" : 1 
*44 ? No = 
* 
\ + 7 " pd 
, is p # 
£ | X08 &S | 
Ly TO ; - 
/ . x * * he 1 J 0 
4 » vv : . - | 
ia v4: on «+ © % 5 W «a 
$ 44 4 0 £ * 
& « *® . £ o 
Id TY oe »S C . , ot p 
ub * ; : - 
» A 0 £6 ; > 
234077 7 , —APSqE 
. 1 , 4 4 p W= | 
£ as © N : =» 
#9, £ k a XN —_ 
- ©. : _ JS 
NA | S—:—< 
- (4 
$4 ; —=  »” 
by ; $ i — - . 
. ; LANG 
$ Fees 4 _ PK 
2 4 i — Þ. 
* a\\CAND|| 
i | - =1.% 
f | | i \ j 
f bl £ , 
4 i EF 
j 
3 . 
. 1 / ff 
y } id ” 
36 p 65,4 FPTINYY 
-. : x : \. 
; j WAN 
: þ 
7 
. 3 p 
i "x 
3 3 * 
; , 4 , 
: — 
* j i | 
3 : 


%* The deſeriztion. =. þ 


I Pleenewoortbeing that kinde of Ferne called _afpienium or Ceterach , and rhe true Stolo- 
pendriahath leaues a ſpanlong,iagged or cur vpon borh ſides , even hard to the middlerib; 
— euerycutorinciſure being as it were cut halfe rounde ( whereby jt is knowne from the 
rough Spleenewoort) norone cut right againſt another, burone beſides the other, ſer in ſeue all 
order,being ſlippery and greene on the vpperſide, foft and downie vnderneath z which when they 
be wiholeT are folded vp togither like a {crole, andhairie without, much like to the rough Beare- 
worme wherewith men baite their hookes to catch fiſh : the roote is ſinall,blacke,and rough, much 
platred or interlaced, hauing neither ſtalke, flowermnor ſeedes. Ties 
2 Rough Splecnewoortis partly like the other Fernes in ſhewe , and bearethneither ſtalke nor 
| ſeede, hauing narrow leaues a foote long, andſomewhat longer, flaſhed on the edges cuen ro.the 
' middle rib,{mooth on the ypperſide,and of a fivart green colour; ynderneath rough,as is the leaues 
of Polypodie: the roote is blacke,and fer with a number of lender ſtrings, ; 
3 Thiskinde of Spleenewoort is not onely barren of ſtalkes and ſeeds,bur alſo of thoſe ſpots and 
markes wherewiththe others are ſpotted: the leaues are fewe in number, growing pyramicis or 
ſtceplewiſe,greatand broad belowe,' and ſharper towarde the top by degrees : the roote 15 thicke 


blacke,and buſhie,asit were 4 Crowes neſt, | Id 
| + F} x + | 3 Lonehits 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 9s 
1 Lonthitis Maranthe. | I | 
Baſtard Splcenewoort. | The pla SY 


Ceterach groweth vpon old ſtone wals & rocks, 
in darke and ſhadowie places throughout the 
weſt part of Englandez eſpecially vpon the ſtone 

als | y Briſtowe, as you goto Sajnt Vincents 

. .. tocke, and likewiſe about Bathe , Vels, and$a- 

© L«buric, whereThaue ſcene grearplenty thereof. 

© "Therough Splecnewdort growerh vpon bar- 

ren heathes, dry ſandie banks & ſhadowieplaccs 

in moſt parts of Englaride , buy efpecially on a 

heath by London” Eme#" Hatpficede heath, 
whereitgroweth in-greatabundance. 


AY \ \ x 
i 

Z 
W 7 


fs * 
#. pF \- 

[ " 1"; 
l ” © 


| 
[3 
4 
_ i 
N — 
F . 
Fa 
ih 
"” - 
, 
/ _— 


. 
o 

OI 

F 


Wo 
4 


1 
Fl 


E 
If 
- # 


KS 


_ 
b + The names. 


Spleenewoort,or Miltwaſte, is called in Greek 
a7) :1n Latinelikewiſe Aſpleniumn, and alſo 
Scolopenaria;of Gaza Mula herba : in ſhops Cete. 
rach :ip high Dutch Steynfarn: in lowe Durch 

 Steeftvaren,& Xilteruyt tin Engliſh Spleen- 
woort, Miltwaſte, Scale Ferne,/and Stone Ferne, 


Itis called cn, bicavſe it 1s ſpeciall good * 
againſt the infirmities of the Spleene or Milt,and 


Scolopenaria of the likenes thar it hath with the = 
Bearc worme. before remembred. 
Rough Miltwaſte,is called of divers of the later 

_ writers Aſþlenium ſylueſtye,or wilde Spleenwoort: 
| of ſome Aſpleniny magnum, or great Spleene- 
woott: Valeriz Cordus Calleth it Strutiopterrs, and Dioſcorides Lomehitis aſpera , or rough Splecne- , 
woort: in Latine according to the ſame author, Zozgma,and Ca/abrina:m Engliſh rough Splecne- 
woort, or Miltwaſte, | 


| *% The temperature. | 
Theſe plants are of thinne parts as Ga/enteſtificth, yet are they not hot,but ina meane. 


| *% The vertues. FS 

Dioſeoridesteacheth,that the leaues boiled in wine and drunke by the ſpace of fortie daies, doth A 
take away infirmities of the Spleene ; helpeth the ſtrangurie ,and yellow iaundiſe, cauſerh the ſtone 
in the bladder to moulder and paſſe away ; all which are performed by ſuch things as be of 
thinne andſubtill parts: he addeth likewife that rhey ſtaie the Hicket , or yeoxing, & alſo Hinde- 
reth conception, cirher inwardly taken, or hanged about the partie; and therefore faith P/;n/c 
Spleenewoort is not to be giuen to women, bicaule it bringerh batrennes, 

There be Empericks or blinde practitioners of this age,who teach,that with this herbe not one- B 
ly the hardneſſe and fwelling of the Spleene, bur all infirmities of rhe liver alio may be cffec- 
tuallie, and in yeric ſhort time remooued/, infomuch that the ſodden liuer of a beaſt 1s reſto- 
= at his conſtitution againe, that is, made liketo a rawe liuer, if it be boiled againe with this 

DC, ; | | 

Bur this is-to bereckoned amongthe old wiues fables, and thatalſo which Djoſcoriaes telleth C 
of, touching the gathering of Spleenewoort in the night, and other moſt vaine things , which 
are founde heere and there ſcattered in the old writers books: from which moſt ofthe later writers 
donotabſtaine, who many times fill vp their pages with lies and friuolous toies,and by ſo doing do 
notalule deceuic yoong ſtudents. 


Qqq2 


980 THE- SECOND BOOKE |OF/THE 


Of divers ſmall ; US F, Chap.4.56 . 


6: fr 8 The kindes. 


"Here be diucis ſotes of $virife Fernes Aiftiing in theieplace of protin? | 
Time led frees a+:0 = fem nt el blre 


x Filicals fontenamas. | 3. Fil | form 


* The deſeription. 
x *T" His (mal or dwarfe Ferne,which is ſeldome found except in the banks of ſtonie fountaines, 
| wels,and rocks bordering vpon rivers, is very like vnto the common Brakes in leaucs, but 
_  alrogitherleſller: the roote is compoſed of abundle of blackethreddy ſtrings. 
2 Thefemale whichis found likewiſe by running ſtreamesvels, and fountaines, vpon rocks and 
Roadngioes z is like the precedent, but is a great deale ſmaller , blacker of colour , fewer roots 
ter, | b- 2-4 4 | 
3 The male dwarſfe Ferne thatgroweth ,vpon the ſtonje mountaines of thenorth and weſt 
parts of Englande , eſpecially toward the ſca, add alſo in the joints of ſtone wals among the mor- 
ter , hath ſmall leaues deepely cut on borh ſides, like vnto Ceterachor Spleenewoort, barren both 
of ſeedes and ſtalkes,as allo of thoſe ſpots or marks that are tobe ſecne vpon the backe part of the 
other Fernes: the rootecreeperhalong , ſer with ſome fewe hairie ſtrings, reſembling hoſe of the 
Oke Ferne, called Dryopters. | 4 12V | 
4 Theſemale ſtone Ferne hath divers long leaves riſing from a threddieroote, contrarie to that 
of the male, compoſed of many ſmall leaues finely minced or cutte like the teeth of a ſawe, of 
a whitiſh greene colour,withoutany ſpors or marks ar all, ſeedes or ſtalkes, which groweth yndcr 
ſhadowie rocks, and craggic mountaines in moſt places,” — - 


3 Filicu/a 


ff 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. 981 


ſ 


liculs petr es mas.” 4 Filiculs petre« famina, fize Chamefiix marint 
;_ dwarfeftone Ferne, The fer aledwarte- ſtone Ferne. feAnglicas 


- a. 
* 


1/2 


©. x 
1, IQ 


a1, IS | 
PA AN 
— y, "uy Lis 
ANI 


CMV 


> \NYY 


_ *Theplace.. 
Theplace istouchedin the deſcription, 
E *% The time. | 

They flouriſh both winter and ſommer, for when the leaves withet by reaſonof age, there ariſe 
yoong to lupplic the place,ſothat they are not tobe ſcene without greene and withered leaues both 


at once, 


3a %* The nones. | £4:H 
It ſufficerh what hath beene ſaide of the names in their ſeuerall titles: notwithſtanding the laſt 


deſcribed we haue called Chamefilix marina Anglice, which groweth vpon the rockic chtte neere 
Hawich,as alſo at Douer among the Sampire thatthere groweth, | 


t% The temperature and vertues. $45 3% | 
Their temperature and faculties in working arereferred to the kindes of blacke Oke Fernes, cal 
led Dryopteris and Onopteric. 


Of true «IL aiden haire. Chap.457- 


NY The kindes. 


"T Feophraitwand Plinie haue ſet downe two Maiden haires;the blacke and the white; whereunto 
may be added another called Ruta mareria, or wallRue, equall vnto the others in faculric, 


whereof we will intreat, 
Qqq 2 1 Capillu 


98: THE SECOND" BOOKE OF THE 


I Capilius V eneris Vern. = | - < om VenrrSyriaca. 
True Maiden haire. | | : Allyrian Maiden haire, 


p 
z 
$ 
be 
*: 
, 
{- 
x: 


| %The defeription. 


I Ho ſo will followe the variable opinions of writers, concerning the Ferne called 
VV Adjanthumwverum;ct Capillus venerts verus,muſt of neceſlitic be brought intoalaby+ 
rinth of doubrs,confidering the divers opinions thereof : but rhis knowe, that Venus 

haire,or Maiden haire,is a lowe herbe growing an hand high, ſmooth , ofa darke crimſon colour, 
and glittering withall: the leaues be ſmall,cur in ſider ang nicked in the edges ſomthing like thoſe 
of Cotiander,contuſedly or withour order placed; the middlerib whercofis ofa blacke Fining C0- 


lour: the roote conſiſterhof many ſmall threddie ſtrings. | 
2 This Aﬀſyrian Maiden haire is likewiſe a baſe or lowe herbe, having leaues, flat, ſmooth, and 
Pplaine,fer vpon a blackiſh middle rib, like vntothar of the other Maiden haire , cutor notched in 
the edges,nature keeping nocertaine forme;bue making oneleafe of this faſhion, and another far 
different from it : the roote is rough andthreddie. ; 4 Tic 


q 
4 


*'3 Thisplantwhich we have inſerted among the Adianthes as a kinde thereof. may without cr- | 
'rourſopaſle, which is in great requeſt in Flanders and Gerwanie, where the practitioners in Phi- 
ficke do vſethe ſame in ſteede of Capillus Yeneris, and with better ſucceſle then any of the Capil- 
lareherbes,alchough Marhiolwand Dioſcorides himſelfe hath made this wall Ruc to be akinde of 
Paronychia,or Nailewoort ; notwithſtanding the Gerwaines will not leave the vſc thereof, butre- 
ceiue itas the true Adianth, cſteeming it equall,/if not farre berter, then either Ceterach, Capilims | 
Veneris verm,8 Tricomanes,called alſo Foltrichon: it bringeth foorth very many leaues,round and 
| flender,cutinto two or three parts, very hardein handling ſmooth and greene on the ourſide,of an 
 euill favoured dead colour vnderneath, ſerwith little fine ſpots, which cuidently ſhewerh it tobe . 


kinde of Ferne:the roore is blacke and full of ſtrings. NPs 


\ {1 \BISTOR4E © 


, " £ , - ASY .;: 4 > elaaxeery 
+4. 15 29914354 BU Yu IUIQUOT -: | 
3 Rute mwraria,fiue ſaluia vite. — 
4 þ- þ4 | . # ® 
i WallRye,or Rue Maiden bajze, -{.;1 (1; 


| ON a _ 
l : 


7" 8 Th. WY. 
# <$* = : 


_—_ v. 8 
+ # a ? 
4... ' 2 
- ” 
- # #, x * £V f 
? 9% 


Stone Rue groweth, ypan old walsneere vn- 
. towaters,wels,and founraines:;T foundle ic ypon 
the wallpf thechurchyardof Dartfqrd in Kent, 
hard by.ch&riuer {ide where people ridethrogh, | 

. and alfo vpon.the wals of the churchyarde of 
Sittingburne in theſaipe Countie,inthe middle 
ot rhe towne bard by agrearlake of water, and 
alſo ypon.the. Churghtwals of Railey in Efſex, 

and diuers other places.” |. S771 12% | 

; - + The ram. Ic 
Thefe plants are greeneborh winter and fom- 
mer,and yet haue neither flowers not ſeed, 
. ; Maidenhairciscalled in Greek addrnv., Theo- 
phrafits ard Pliny name it Adiantum nigrum, 
or blacke Maiden haire: for they fer downe two 
Maiden haires,the blacke and the white, making 
| thistheblack,and the Rue of thewall che white : itis called in Latine Polytrichums,Calhtrichwn, Cin- 
cinalis, Terr « Capills,ſupercilium terre; of Apulcius,Carpilite Venerts, Capillaris, Crinita, and of di- 
vers Coriandrum puter : the Italians keepe the name Capihes Yeneris: in Engliſhblack Maiden haire, 
and Venus haire,and may be called our Ladies hairc. _ \ NA 


Icis called Atiantonbicaule the leafe, as Theophraſias Nath , is never wet, for it caſteth off 
water that fallerh thereon, or being drowned andcouered in water , itremainerh till as ifir were 
_ dry, as Pliniebkewile writeth; and is termed Calitrichon and Polytrichon, of the effeft irhath in 

dying haire,and making it grow thicke, | | | 

Wall Rue is commonly called in Latine Xutas muraria,ot Rutamuralis, of ſome Seluja vite, but 
wheretoxe I knowe nor, neither themſclues, if they were liuing : of the Apothecaries of the lowe 
countries Capri Y+meris,or Maiden haire, and haue vicd it along time for the right Maiden baire ; 
itisthat kind of Ad/antum which Theophr aſtus ecrmeth Adjantun Candidum,or white Maiden baite, 
| forhemakethtwo,one blacke,and the other white,as we hane faide. Plxjedothlikewife ſerdowne 
two kinds,one he calleth Pchtrihonghe other Trichomanes, or Engliſh Maiden haire, whereof we 
will intreat in the Chapter following, which he hath falſely ſer downe for a kinde of Adiantum, for 
Trich:manes doth differ from Adiantwn. : | 
. Some there be thatthinke, Wall Rue is Paronychis Diofeoridi,or Dioſcorides his Whitlow woort, 
wherein they haue beene greatly deceiued: itiscalledin high Dutch Waurranicn: inlow Dutch 

Steencruyt: in Freach Xze de Adureille c in Engliſh Wall Rue,and white Maiden haires” * 
mckine 1.» 1 1:4 The temperature and vertues. | Fl nk 

The true Maiden haire, as Galen teſtifieth,doth drie, make thin,waſte away,and is in xmeane be- A 
rveericheate and coldnies : Meſues ſheweth that it conſiſteth of vnlike or diſagreeing pattes, and 
that ſome are waterie and carthic, andthe ſame binding, and another ſuperficially he and: thin, 
Andtharby this ircakech away obſtructions or ſtoppings, makerh things thin that are thicke,160- 
ſeneth the belly ,cſpecially when it is freſhand greene : 7 as this partis thin, {6 is ir quickly w__ 

3 BOY \ 4 34 4 veg, 


\ : 


**” 


B4 THE" SEGOND: 2 Sd@ToviThH; 


ved,and that by reaſon of his binding and carthic parees: it ſtoppeth rhe belly, and ſtaierh: the lacke 
and other fluxes, WT... ns: ber ITY 


B Bein deanke it breakechthe\ſtone, andex leh not Ns L893 pow 
choſewh Pickelnrtheldhnles)" 2051 bp. =, buralſo 
C® vp gtofte and flimic tadohveitor ae cheſt and lungs, ape 
R Mev ws vinkond by nl ons pre Tens wn 
D- Moreouer;jr conſurneth and ſeth ay the Kings euily; 1g Or 
— HI and itmaketh th ne" jaite6f the head orbea 10 growe 
ioſeorides reckoneth vp many ett Sandopecrations ff this Maic 
» iffer arealſo contrarie one to/an6ther. Among others he ſaich;x 
anda lice before,chat ie drawgth #way the ſecondines;8&brir 
words do. confound one another ith Conntraticties; | tor whazſocuer.t 
wo —_ pare 6 bo f TN as © 
FT:  Hea inthe 2 ar ſheepe! aide forthe 1 
what that benefit ſhould be he ſhewerhnot FOO £0 "ot 
G Belahiaviniccannorhe Gwed;UPtealon iris wichourk ; Air evid r. nei 
remooued.” Therefore irchisplace ieſeemerh that manythings are | places, 
and falflyaddedtothise apter : andperaduenture ſume things are. brough che ou of the 
courſe ofCytiſav;ot Milke Tel hereof to write wereto ſmallpurpole. . ry 
H WallRveisnormiich wlike tg blacke Maiden haire;in temperature andffaculie. _ 
1 WallRucis good forthenithathaue the cough , that are en winded fo andthar betnibled 
with ſtitches and painc intheir ſides. 
'K. Being boiled, ircauſeth concoftion of eawehbnours which ſticke in chelungs ; ic taketh away 
the paine of the kidneics and bladdergr gently procuceth vrine,and driueth foorth ſtones, 
L Iris commended againſt ruptures in yoong children,and ſome affirme —__ excellent good, if 
the powder mg 5 tank Peers for ord daics rogi ther, | | 


Of Engliſh or common Maiden haire. Chap. 458. 


* The kindes. 


| Therebe two ottes of our common Maiden ES greater and the leſſer, 


. * The opti 


Neliſh Maiden Tha hath long leaues of adarke ancdlone, conſiſting of very many 
ſmall round leaues ſet vpon a middle ribyof a ſhining blacke colour, daſhed on the nearher 
f fides with: ſmall rough warkes or ſporips, of an ouerworne colour: the rootes arc {mall 
- and threddie. 
2, Thefemale Engliſh Maiden haire is like vahuahepeecedicy; ſaving thatiei is leſſer, and wat - 
tech thole {pots or markes that __— other rhercincoufltech the difference. 


-— - yo _ 


3 Tr ichomanes 


PLANTS. F7 
2 Trithamanes | 


The Female En 


j 


| HISTORIE OF 


glith Maiden 


: 
f 


haife, 


DN --. i 


- 
<t:t > # 
9 go 


: > 
#;, 


ETEVY 
, . %# as # 


F 
. 


w. * 2 
. Qs 0 SS | 
Ne ATG i VARIG et EIN 
wy , 1.7 p A © "of / 
Aa ' "T7 3% : 
» 


C "2\s oy 4 Is "> ©" Of © 
\Y-/ BD 7 I» >» 4 
F 4\ = » 7 7 s M*. & >. 
< WAN f/m '».4 Þ ; "WR 


- 


bh. ” 5 "* 4 
DSL CEILAG D-A 
f Y ae \ « WAGES 


y A RE lay - 8. } 
a # ® #\M þ 
k &t Os ENG: NN BAY 
7% 3787 . "NG "1 , 
—_ ; 
: CLEAN 


| % The place, | RES 
It groweth for the moſt part neere ynto den brookes, and other moiſtplaces, vpon olde 
ſtone wals and rockes : I founde it growing in aſhadowie ſandic lane in Berſome, inthe pariſh of 
Southficere in Kent,vpon the ground whereas there wasno ſtones orſtonie groundeneere vnto ir, 
which before that time I did youer ſee ; it groweth likewiſe vpon the ſtone wals of hir Maicſtics 
pallace of Richinond,andin moſt ſtone wals of the welt and north parts of England. ' 


| * Thetime. | | 
It continueth a long time,the coldnes of winter doth it no harme;iris barrenas the other Fernes 
are, whereof it is a kinde, % The names. 


It is called ih Grecke r2:;4uww%: in Latine Friienla, as though we ſhould fay Paras Filix, or little | 
Ferne alſo Capillerts : Apuleirs in his 51.chapter, makethir all one with Callity/chon: of ſome it is 
called Polytrichum :in Engliſh common Maiden haire. - | | | [at 

| HA . w The temperature and vertnes. | ps} 
o Gai Dioſcorides and Galem do write, hauc all the faculties belonging to Adiantum, or blacke A 
iden haite., 

The decotion made in wine and drunke, helpethchem thar are ſhort winded, it helpeth the B 
couph,ripeneth rongh gray auoidceth it byſperting, L147, oþ 

thelie wherein it hath beene ſodden, or laid toinfuſe, is good to waſh the head, cauſing the C 
ſcurffe and ſcales to fall off,and haire to growe in places that are pild and bare. : ts 


Of Thiles. Chap.4.59- eh 28 


| *» 7 he kindes. | RE 
| T| He marrer of the Thiſtles is divers,fome Thiltlesſerue for nouriſhmene,asthe Artichoke with 
L oeprickkes , and the Artichoke with prickles 3 orher los medicines , as B10 10ots of Carkie 


g86 THE SECOND|BOOKE OF: THE 


which is goodfor pm gs ; the bleſſed Thiſtle alſo , otherwiſe called Carduw beneditIms: Ser 
Huluer , and divers others :' ſome are poiſonſome , as Chameſcen niger zone ſmooth, plaine, any 


without prickles,as the Thiſtle called Beares Breech, or Acanthus ſatrums, whereof there is another 
. with prickles,which we make the wilde,ofthe which two we intende to write in this Chapter, 


Garden Beares breech, | | ' %* Thedeſeription. 


"” boththeedges, and ſer with many cuts and 
fine nicks:betweene which riſeth vp in & middeſt 
a bigge ſtalke brauely deckt with flowers, ſer in or- 
derfoin the middle vpwarde, of colourwhite, of 
forme lohg, which arearmwed as it were with two 
catkins, one higher , another lower : after them 
gow foorth the huskes, in which is founde broad 
{cede : therootes be black without and white with- 
10, and full of clammie iuice, and are divided into 
many ofsprings, which as they creepe farre, ſodo 
theynow and then bud foorth and growe afreſh: 
theſe rootes are ſo full of life,that how little ſoeuer 
of rhem'remaineth, it oftentimes alſo bringeth 
foorth the whole plant, 01 

' | Wilde Beaxes breech called Acanthu /ylueſtri, 
Fena\(erteth forth for Chamelconta Monſpellienſum. 
and reporteth that he found it growing amoneſt 
the grauellic and moiſt places neexe to the wals of 
Montpellier,and at the gate of AEgidia,berweene 
the fountaine and the brooke neere tothe wall: 
this Thiſtle is inſtalke, lowers, colour of leaves 
and ſecede like the firſt kinde,bur ſhorter and lower, 
hauing large leaues, dented or iagged with manic 
cuts and incifions,not onely in ſome feweparts of 
| 4 | he leaues,as ſome other Thiſtles, bur very thicklic 
| dentedorclouen and having many ſharpe and hatdepricklesabour the ſides of the diuiſtons and 

Cuts,not very cafic to be handled or touched without danger to the hand and fingers. 


n p 


to % The place. 4] | 
Dioſcorides writerh, that garden Branke Vrſine groweth in moiſt and ſtcnie places, and alſo in 
gardens: 1t were vnaduiſedly ode to ſecke itineirher of the Germanies any where , but in gardens 


[2 1 ;N ” 


onely; in my garden ir doth growe very plenrifully, | 
T The wild was found incertaine places of Italienicerto the fea,by that norable learned man CAM 
LE: fonſus Pencixs,Philition to the Duke of Ferrara,and profeſſor of fimples and Phiſicke,and is aftran- 
. gerin England, B74: & | Ft 


y {OP BY *% Thetmme. 

Both the Branke Vrſines do flower in ſommer ſeaſon, the ſeede is ripe in Autumme: the roote 
remaineth freſh; yer nowe and then it periſheth.in winter in both the Germanics , if the weather 
be too cold : but in England it ſeldome or neuer dieth. | | 

| [4-4 *% The names. 


Iris cylled in Grecke 44z»%; : the Latines keepe the ſame name Acanthus, yer doth Acanthus\1g- 
nific generally all kinde of Thiſtles ,and this is called Acanrhaby the figure _Antowomaſia: the En- 
gliſh name is Branke Vrſine,and Beares Breech, | HE 

' * Thetameorgarden Branke Vriine is named in Latine Satiuwe, or Hortenſis Acenthusin Greek® 
nico: and of Galen, Oribaſius and Plinie vadupurnes: Plinie allo calleththis Acanthus lent , of 
ſmooth Branke Vrline , and reporteth it tobe a'citic herbe androſerue for arbors: ſome name 


Braw6a 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. =” 


Branes- rſs; (\others vie to call Cowparſnep by the name of Branca Vr/ims )the Italians call is 
Acantho;and Branca Or ſara : the Spaniards Terus Giguante: the ingravers of old time were woone 
tocarue the leaues of this Branke Vrimein pillers, and other workes, and al{o vpon the eates of 
pots, AS among others Yirgul reſtfierh in the third Eclog of his Bucolickes., | 


Et nobizidems Alcimedon dus pocula fecit, 
Et molh eirewn eſt an {as amplexus Acantho, 


Theother Branke Vrſine is named in Greeke «yu 2:gr%c, and in Latine Sylueſtris _Aecanthas or 
wilde branke Vrſine, and they may be called properly ag, or Spina aprickle; by which name it is 
found called of moſt Herbariſts Acanrhus : yer chere is alſo an other Heanthagsa thornie ſhrub: the 
liquor which iſſuerth foorth of it as Herodotus and T heophra#us aftirme, isa guramce : Fortifference 
whereof peradyenture this kinde of Aca»thus is named Heybacanths. There is likewiſe founde 

the baſtard names of Acenthus the worde TM amolaria, and allo Crepala, bur itis not expref- 
ſed to which of them, wherher to the wilde or tame,it oughtto be referred. 
% The temper ature. | | 

The leaues of the garden Branke Vrſine conſiſt as'it were in a rneane betweene hot and colde, 
being ſomewhat moiſt, witha ne_—_ and _ digeſting faculrie, as are thoſe of the Mallow, 
and therefore they are profitably boyled in cliſters, as wel as be Mallow leaues. Theroote,as Ga/zn 
reacherh,is of a more drying qualitie. | |. 1 


: 
f 


FP | | *% The vertues, | | | 
' Dio{corides ſaith, that the rootes are aremedie for lims that are burnt with fire, and that be out 
of ioint,it they be laide thereunto ; thar being drunke they proucke vrine, and (top the belly: that 
they helpethole that be broken,and thar be troubled with the crampe, and be ina conſumprion of 
the lun $, | 
They are good for ſuch as haue the priſike and (per bloud withall,for thoſe that have fallen from B 
ſome high place, that arc bruſed and dry beaten, and that haue ouerſtrained thertſelues, and 
are a5 good as the raores of the greater Comfrey, whereunto they are very like in ſubſtance, roug 
juice,and qualitie. | | - EF Sel OS 
Of the {ame roote is made an excellent plaiſter againſt the ache and numnefſe of the hands and C 
 feete, | | | i 
tis put intocliſters with good ſucceſle againſt ſundry maladies. 


_— 


i 


Of the cotton Thifle. Chap.4.60. | 


% 7 he deſcription. 


1 "T'Hecomrmon Thiſtle, whereof the greateſt quantitie of downe is gathered for divers pur. 
poſes,as well by the poore to ſtop pillowes, cuſhions, and beds for want of feathers, as alſo 
© bovghrof the rich Vpholſters to mixe with the feathers and downe they do fell, which 
deceit would be looked vnto: this Thiſtle hath great leaues,long and broade, gaſhed about the ed- 
ges, and fer with ſharpe and ſtiffe prickles all alongſt the edges, couered all over with a foft corron 
or downe: out from the middeſt whereof riſeth vp a long ſtalke aboue twocubires high, cornered, 
and fer with fil-yes, and alto full of prickles: the heads arc likewiſe corncted with prickles, and * 
bring foorth lowers conſiſting of many whitiſh threds: the ſeede which ſucceedeth them is wrap- 
ped yp in downezit is long,of a light crimſon colour, and lefſer thenthe ſeede of baſtard Sattron: the 
roote groweth deepein * grounde, being white, harde, woodie,and not withour ſtrings. 
2 Thelllyrian cotton Thiſtle hath a long naked roore, beſet about the top with a fringe of manie 
{mall threds or iagges:from which ariſeth a very large andrall ſtalke, higher then any man, rather 
likeatree then an annuall herbe or plant: this (talke is garniſhed with fcroles of thin leaues , from 
the borrome tothe top, ſer full of moſt hortible ſharpeprickes, and ſo is the ſtalke and every partof 
theplantzſo that itis impoſſible for man or beaſt to touch the ſame without great hurt! or danger ; 
his leaucs are very great,farre broader and longer then any other thiſtle whatfocuer, couered with 
| _ | i an 


988 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE Db 
an horie cotton or downe like the former : the flowers do growatthe topofthe ſtalkes, which ic ac. 
uided into lundric branches andarc of a purple colour, ſeror armed vas." wy with the ox * 
rathec tharper thornes then the aforelaid, © © | | | mnt {op | of 
1 Acanthium albwn. | | | 
| The white corron Thiſtle, | 


2 Atcanthium 1!lyr icuon purpurenm, © 


The purple cotton 1 hiſtle, 


T1115 %* Thep/ace, | 
Theſc Thiſtles grow by high waies ſides,and in ditches almoſt cuery where, 
LR DI weThritinw, {| = 
They flower from Tune vntill Auguſt, the ſecond yeere after they be ſowen: and in the mean time 
the ſecede waxeth , which being thorowe ripe the herbe petiſheth, as doc likewiſe molt of the 
o:licr Thiltles which live nolonger then cill the ſeed be fully come to maturitic, 
LWi1-1-#7 *% The names. | | 
This Thiffle istaken for thar/which is called in Greeke av%or, which Dieſcorrdes deſcriberh to 
hauc leaues ſer with prickles round about the £095, and tt be coucred with a thinne downe like a 
copweb , that may be gatheredand ſpun to make garments of, like thoſe of filke t in high Dutch 
iris called UTI wege Dilttil $w low Dutch UTlitte UW diftel t in French Chardon argentin : 
in Engliſh ote Thiſtle,or cotton Thiſtle, white cotton Thiſtle, wilde white Thiſtle, Argentine or ſil 
uer Thiltle. Ws *%T he temper ature and vertues. : 
Dieſcorides faith,that the leaues and rootes heeteof are a remedy forthoſe that hauerheir bodies | 
 Crawne backwards ; thereby Ga/en ſuppolcth that theſe are of temperature hor, 


Of our Ladies biitle. Chap.4.6 [, 


Dy ; 


| k | | 
| ES | *% The d#ſeription. | 
FT Heleaues of our Ladies Thiſtle are as biggt as thoſe of white cotton Thiſtle : for the leaves 


thereof be grear,broade,latge gaſhed in the edges,armg#with.a multitude of ſtiffe and ſharp 
prickles,as are thoſe of Ore: I hiftley but theyjare withour dowhe,altogither ſlippery, ofa light 
WHEEL | | | dis 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 989 

eene and ſpeckled with white and milkie ſpors and lines drawne diuers waies : the ſtalke is high 
and as bigge as a mans finger : the flowers growe foorth of heads fullof prickles, being threds. of a 
purple colour : the ſeedeis wrappedin downe like that of cotton Thiſtle: the rooteis lone, thicke, 
and white. 


Cardans Marie. LY | | | 
Ladies Thiſtle, $0 6-0. ag % The place. 
- | ati analy It groweth ypon waſte and common places by 
[INE 1, , . high waies,andby dunghils, almoſtenery where, *' 
Wiz - +, *Thetime. | | 
It Aowreth and ſeedeth when cotton Thiſtle 
1. .: doth = [Nees "0 


wt The names. - 
Itis calledin Latine Carduus Latters, and Car- 
 duus Marie : in high Dutch Onſcr Urouwen 
 Diſtellt in French Chardon de notre Dame : in 
Engliſh our Ladies Thiſtle : it mayproperly be 
called Leacogya of the white ſpots 'and lines 
' thatare onthe leaves: Pljzy in his 27. booke 11, 
chapter makerh mention of an herbe called Zey- 
cographis, but what maner of one itis hehath nor 
expreſſed; therefore it would be harde to affirme 
_ this tobe the ſame that Carduws Lencographas is, 
. and this is thought to be Spina albe, called in 
Greeks aww, or white Thiſtle, milke Thiſtle, 
and Carduns Rempt ariues;of the Arabians Bedoard, 
or Bedeguar as Mattheus Syluaticus teſtitieth, 
* The temper ature and vertues. 
The tenderleaues of Carduxe Leucographw, the A 
 prickles taken off are ſometimes viedto be eaten = 
_ withotherherbes, | | : 
Galen writeth, that the rootes of Spins albs, B 
| doth dric and moderately binde; that therefore ir 
| is. good for thoſe that be troubled with thelaske 
and the bloudic Alixe,thatit ſtaieth bleedings,fvaſteth away colde {wellings;caſeth the paine of the 
teeth if they be waſhed with the decoftionthereof, | | 
The {eede thereofis of a thin eſſence and hot facultie, rherfore he ſaith thar it is good for thoſe C 
thatbe troubled with cramps. MY | 
Dioftorides affirmerh that the ſeeds being drunk are a remedie for infants that hauetheir ſinewes D 
drawne togither,and for thoſe that be bitten of ſerpents : and that it is thought to driue awaie ſcr- 
penrs, if itbe but hanged about the necke, | | 


Of the globe Thiftle. Chap.4.62. 


| * T he kindes. 
There are diuers kindes of Globe Thiſtles. 


| * The deſcription, — | R | 
Lobe Thiſtle hath a very long ſtalke,and leaues iagged ;Sreat;long, & broad deepely gaſhed, 
[trong of ſmell ſormwhar green on the fide,and on the neather fide whiter and þ co 2 
the flowers growe forth of a rgunde head like a globe, which ſtandeth on the tops of the 
ſtalkes ; they are white and ſmall , with blew rhreds in the midlt : the ſeede is long , with haires of a 
meane length; the roote is thicke and branched. ks 
ar 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


4 4 


Carduws Globoſue: I TIEHESY | vi 
The Globe Thiſtle, | \ P  _ * Thedtſcription, 


' [There is another Globe Thiſtle that harh leſſer 
| leaues,bur tyore full of prickles, wich round heds 
alſo; butthere growethour of them beſides the 
| flowers, certaine long and ſtiffe prickles, 
| | Thereis likewiſe anotherkind reſembling the 
| firſtin forme and bgurey but muchleſler, &the 
' flowers thereof rende more to a blew. 
| | Theteisalſoanother Globe Thiſtle, which is 
| | the leaſt,and hath the ſharpeſt prickles of all the 
| reſt; the head is ſmall; the flowers whereofare 


| 4 white,liketo choſe of the firſt. x 


| | | There ig a certaine other kindeheeregf, yer 
4 | theheadis hot ſoroundthat is to ſay,Batter and 
| broaderabquezout of whichfpring blue flowers: 
' | the ſtalke heereofisflender, and couered with 2 
\ - white thinnedownezthe leaues arelong, gaſhed 
| lkewiſcon hoth fides., andarmed in every cor- 
| ner withſharpeprickles. | 
| * There is another called the downe Thiſtle, 
| whichriſech vp with thickeandlong ſtalkes: the 
| leaves thergofare iagged;ſet withprickles white 
| onthene ther ſide:the heads berounde and ma- 
| nic innumber,& arecouered witha ſoftdowne, 
| &ſharpeprickles ſtandingfoorth oneuery ſide, 
| | being on the vpper part fraughted with pur- 
| | ple flowersallof ſtringes: the ſeede is long and 
| ſhineth, as doth the ſecede of many of the Thi- 
7 tes. | F 
14-# 1 | |: % Thepthce. | 
They are ſowen in gardens and donot growe in theſe countries that we can finde. 
{| w% Therime. |» 
They flower and flouriſh when the other Thiftles do, 
| br d 73:1 % The names. | 
Fuchſau did at the firſt take jt tobe Chameleon piger but afterwards being better aduiſed namedir 
Spina peregrins,& Cardum globoſms : V al Coram dorh hily call it Spherocephalan:the fame name doth 
. alſo agree with the reſt, for they haue a rounde head like a balſ'or globe ; moſt woulde haue the firſt 
to be rhatwhich Aarhiolres ſerterh downe for Spins a/ba: this Thiſtle is called in Engliſh Globe 
Thiſtle,and Ball Thiſtle,, | | | | | [1 hi 


The downe Thiſtle is called in Latin being deſtitute of another name Eyjocephalus,of the woolly 
head: inEngliſh downe Thiſtle , or cotton Thiſtlez itis thoughtof diuversto bethat which Bartho- 
lomens Frbenenetanus and Angelus Palea, Francilcane friers, report to be called Corona fratram, of 
Friers Crowne: but this Thiltle doth farre difter from Eriophorws,as it is euident by thoſe things 
which they haue written concerning Corenafratywhn, and that is thus: In the borders of the king- 

. dome of Aragon towards the kingdome of Caſtile we finde/ another kinde of Thiſtle, which gro- 


weth plentifully chere by common waies andiin wheate fieldes, 
*% The tempers thre and VErFMES. | , 


Concerning the temperature and vertuespf theſe Thiſtles we canalledge nothing at all, 


> $ i} 
3 py : by h ; 
: : s HR þ 
: * » bY = - 
* q IJ KA [3] 
P Co o 4 S . 
EF ; q . $ 
bd i Pl : 
” A 4 
- p | 
= S | _ 
G ; "= 
s n Þ 
S > 
| E F < T 
FA % : 
5 
5 
; 
. E 
i 
; 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 991 
Of the eArtichoke. Chap.4.6z. 


% The kindes. 


4 © Here be three ſorts of Artichokes, two tame or of the garden;zand he wilde,which the Italian 
. 4 eſteemeth greatly of,as the beſt to be eaten rawe , which he calleth Cardune. | | 


1 Cinars maxima Anelica. | 2 Cinara maxima albs. 
The great red Artichoke. The great whire Artichoke. 
| >SJ " YI) Wha | | 


-— = 
—- _ - 
= —- 
_— _— 


” 4 F 
ag ' - 
- ENUERYE 
— # WV N 4 - 
; WV 4 
\ASIY L735. 
| IC} p »f, 
_— 4 
” WAS < 
, as «<>; | 
ANN 
4 JA N wW/. 
AW > 
, \ \ ov 
2N p 
wack 4 
\ 4 
A 


C52 
A 


ZNO 


mm 
5 a. 
1T# 
4 , 


, 
= Ls 
P 
- M_ » 4, 
Fl 4 _ - 
” - - —_ _ > — 
L= - > 
db j « 
DO % 
o Þ ” 
—— 


| | * The deſeription. | 

" Heleaves ofthe greate Artichoke called in Latine C/xera, are broade, great, long, ſerwith 
| deepegaſhesin theedges, witha deepe chanel] or gutter alongſt the middle , hauingno 
| pricklesat all or verie few, and they be of a greene ath colour: the ſtalke is aboue a cubite 
high, and _— foorth on the top a fruite like a globe , reſembling at'the firſt a coneor Pine 
apple;tharis toſfay, made vp of many ſcales ; which is when the fruit is ren orlooſed, ofa greeniſh 
redcolour within, and inthe lower parte full of ſubſtance and white z but when it openeth it ſelte 
there Pn allo vpon the cone a flower al of threds, of a gallant purpletending to a blewe co- 
lour: the ſeede is long, greater and thickerthen that of our Ladies Thiltle,lying vnder foft and dow- 
nic haires whicharecontained within the fthite: the roote is thicke and of a meane length, 

2 Theſecond great Artichoke differeth fromthe former in the colour of the fruite , otherwiſe 
there is little difference , except the fruite heereof dilateth ir {elfe further abdroade , andis notſo | 
cloſelycampa& togither, which maketh the difference, [ : 

3 Theprickely Artichoke called in Latine Carduws of Spinoſa Cinara, diftereth not from the for- 
mer, faue that all the corners ofthe leaues hereof, and the ſtalkes of the cone or fruite are armed 


with ſtiffe and ſharpe prickles whereupon it beareth well the name of Cardyw or Thiſtle, 


3 Cinara 


THE SECOND||BOOKE OF THE 


3 Cinara fylaeFiris. | | \ NY 
| | || * The þlace. 
aut, © |. The Artichoke istgbeplantedin a far & f;1;; 

on WV NW | | fullfoile:; they doloue wo and = a 
Sy 'Y WEARS | Thecomimit greaterrour who cut away the fide 
\ JL d= | | or ſuperflyous leaucs that growe by the ſides. 
R> | | thinking thereby to increaſe the greatnes of the 
| | fruitez whenas intruth they depriued the roote 
| | from much water by that meanes which ſhoulg 
| | nouriſhthe roote to the feeding of the trite: for 
| | If you make the trough or hollow channel thatis 
| incueryleatfe, it (hal appeere verie emdently thar 
|; the Creatar in hisſectet wiledome did ordaine 
|  tholefurrowes, etenfrom the extreme point of 
| ; theleafeto thegrounde whereitis faſtned to the 
| | roote,, fornoother parpeſe but to guide andlead 
| | thatwaterwhich falleth farreoff vntothe rote: 
| knowing that without ſuch ſtore of water the 
| | whole plantwoulde wither, andthe fruice pine 
| / awayandcometonothing. 
| | | ___ *%Thetme. 
| They ateplanted forthe moſt part about the 
| | Kalendsof Nouember,or ſomewhat ſooner, The 
| | plant muſtbe ſerand dunged with good ſtore of - 
: | aſhes; for that kinde of dung is thought beſt for 
| theplantingthercof, Eueric yeere the lips muſt 
| | betormeor lippedoff from the body of theroot: 
.- andtheſe aretobe ſerin Aprill which willbeare 
E-1-1 ' | fruiteabout Avguſtfollowing, as Columells,Þulls 
A zs,and common eXpericnce teacherh. F | | . 

1-1 *% The nones. | | | 

The Artichoke is called in Latine Cinars of C5n#, aſhes wherewith itloueth to be dunged.Galen 
calleth it in Greeke K:r@-27, but with z and in the firſt ſyllable, of ſome Cinara caos: itisnamedin 
lralian Carcioffs Archweehi :in Spaniſh Alcarrhofa : in Engliſh Artichoke: in French Artichaus: 
in low Dutch Artichoken, whereppon diucrs call it in Latine Articoca/ms, and Articoes: inhigh 
Dutch Strobildom. ' | | |: | | 2... 

The other is named in Latine commonly notonely Spins Cinars, Ote prickly Artichoke, bur 
alſo of Falladims , Cardaws: of the Italians Cardo, and Caraimo: of the Spaniards Cardes : of the 
French men <Chardons: Leonhartis Fuchſiues, and moſt wtiters take it to be Scolymms Diofeoridis; 
but Scolymus Droſcoridis hath the leafe of Chameleon or Spine «lbs, with a ſtalke full of leaues, anda 
prickly head: burneitheris Ci#are the Artichoke which is without prickles, nor the Artichoke 
with prickles any ſuch kinde of herbe;; for though the head hath 991 es,yettac ſtalke is not full of 
leaues, but is many times withour Jeaues, or e){c hath norpaſta leafe or two, Cinare doth better 
agree with that which 7 heophraftus and Plinie call KART, Calf rw . and yet it dothnot bring foorth 
ſtalkes from the coote creeping alongſt the ground : it hath broad leaues ſer with prickles, the mid- 
dleribs ofthe leaues, the skin pilled off, are good to be eaten;and likewiſe the fruite , the lecde and 
downe taken away;and that which is vnder is as tender as the braine of the Date tree; which things 
Theophraſtus and Plinie report of Cactus: that which they write of the ſtalkes ſent foorth immedt- 
ately from the roote vpon the grounde, which are goodto be caten, is peraduenture the ribs of 
leaues:euery fide raken away (as they be ſerued yp atthe table) may be like a ſtalke, except even in 
Sicilia,where they grew onely in Theophraſtudtime: it bringeth foorth both certaine ſtalkes thatlic 
on the ground,andanother alfo ſtanding ſtraight vp; but 4 Wa being remooued and brought 
into Italy or England it bringeth foorth no more bur one ypright: for the ſoile and clime do much 
pceuaile inaltering of plants,as not onely Theophraſtus reacheth , but allo euen experience 4 (clic 

| i | declareth, 


- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, ' yg 
dectarethz and of CatFus T heophraſtzes writeth thus : 17: , Cactxs, growerh one!y in Sicilia: it 
bringech foorth preſently from the roore falks, lying along vpon thegrounde, \vith abroade and 
prickly leate;the taſkes being pilled, are fit to be eaten, being ſomewharbitter , which may be pre- 
ſerued in brine:ir bringerh toorth alſo another ſtalke,rhe ſame likewiſeis good tobe car:n; 

no 1 = u Thetemper ature and vertwes. | | 
The nailes, thats the white & thickparts which are in che bottom of the ontward ſcales or flakes A 
of the fruit of the Artichoke, & alſo rhe middle pulpe wheron the downy ſeed doth ſtand, arecaten 
horh rawe with Pepper and falr,and commonlybyiled with the broth of fat fleſh, withpepper ad- 
ded;and are accounted a dainty diſh; being pleaſant tothe talte,and good to procure bodily luſt: ſo 
likewiſe the middle ribs of the feaues being made white & tender by good cherſhing and looki; 1g 
to,are brought to the table as a gear ſeruice togither with other unkets: they are eaten with pepper 
and (alt, abe the raw-Artichokes; yer both of them are of ill inice: for the Artichoke containeth 
lentie of cholericke mice and hath an hard ſubſtancezinſomuch as of this is ingendred melancho- 
like iujce, and of tharathinne and cholericke bloud, as Gefen reacheth in his booke of the Faculties 
of nouriſhmenrs : bur itis beſt to eate the Arcichoke boiled; the ribs of the leaues are a!rogither of 
an hard ſubſtance : they ycelde tothe body a rawe and melancholike iuice , and containe mn them 
great ſtore-of winde, . [+ | £2 
© Irffaiech the inuoluntary courſe of the natural ſrede in manor woman. | | B 
Some wrire thar if the yoong buds 0! Artichokes be firſt {teepedin wine and eaten, it proucketh C 
vrine,and ſtirreth vp the luſt of the bodie, | RE. | | 
Ifinde moreouer,gthat the roote is good 4gainſt the rank ſinel of the arme holes,ifwhen the pith D 
is raken away,the ſame roote be boiled in wine and drunke : for irfendeth foorth plentie of ſtinking 
vine, whereby the ranke and rammiſh tauour of the whole body is much amended. | 


Of the Golden Thiſtles, (Chap. 4.64. 
1 Carduus Chyyſanthemus, | 2 Carduus Chryſanthemum Peruanu, 
The golden Thiſtle. | The Golden Thiffle of Peru. 


* 
A v yants . 4 
——IX4.\ ICT "on 
cs  . IN - 


- 


| 
j 


594 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


454.4 4 4/8 Thedyines, | vo? 
I ' He ſtalkes of golden Thiſtle riſe vp foorthwith from the roote,being many,rounde and 
branched:the leaues arclong,of a beauritull greene,) with deepe gaſhes on the ed ges., and 
ſer with moſt ſharpeprickles:the flowers come fron the bolome of the leaues, ſerin afca. 
liechaffic knap,very like to Svccgric flowe rs,but pf a colour as yellow as golde:in-their places come 
vp broad, flar,and thinne ſecdes mot great,nor wrapped indgwne:the roote is long, a finger thitke 


” 


Thiſtle in what part focuer itis cut orbroken,a ivice as whiteasmilke, | | 

2 Thegolden Thiſtle of Peruzcalledin the welſtIndies Fique del inferno,a friend of mine broughe it 
vnto me from an[land there, called Saint Iohns;Iland, among{other ſeedes: what reaſon the jnha- 
bitants there haue to call it ſo; itis vato me vaknown,vnleſle itbe bicaule of his fruite, which doth 
much reſemble afigge in ſhape and higneſle, bur fo full of ſharpe and venemous prickles,that who- 
ſocucr had one of them in his throte , doubtlefle ic woulde fende him: packing either ro hea- 
uen. or to hell. This plant hath aſipgle woodle roote, as bigge as a mansthombe, but ſomewhat 
long : from which ariſcth a brittle ſtalke tull of iyints or knees, diuiding ir fſelfe into ſundrie other 
ſmall branches ,ſer full of leaueslike ynto the milke Thiſtle, brutimuch ſmaller,and ſtraked with ma- 
nie white lines or ſtreakes: and atthe top of the {talks come forth faire and goodly yellow flowers, 
very like vnto the fea Poppie,burmore elegant and of greater beautie, hauinginthe middle thereof 
a {inall knop or bol], fuch as is inithe middle of qur wilde Poppie,bur full of tharpe thornes, andat 
che tip or endthereof a ſtaine or ſpot pf'a deepe purple : afterthe yellow flowers be tallen, this fore- 
faideknop growerh by degrees greater and greater, vntill it come to full maturitie, which openethir 
ſelfe at the vpper end,ſhewing his ſeed,which is yery blacke and round likethe ſeedes of Multarde. 
The whole plant,and each part thereof,doth yeeld great abyndafice of milkic iuice, which is of a 
golden colour , cnt and iſſuing from any partthereof,if x11 Fhh or bruiſed: the wholeplantpe- 
riſheth at the approch of winter, The vertucs heercofare yer vnknowne vnto me, wherefore I pur: 
poſe not to ſet downe any thingrtherof,by way of coniecture,but ſhal, God willing,be ready to de- 
clare that which certaine knowledge and experience cither of mine owner others, ſhal make ma- 
nifeſt vato mc. = OE: 21 | | | | 


ſweer,ſoft,and good to be eaten,yherewith ſwine/are much delighted: there iſluerh foorth of this- 


| *8 *% The place. | 
* Thegolden Thiſtle is ſowen in gatdens of the low countries, Petyms Bellonzus writeth that it gro- 
werh plentifully in Candie, andalfo jn molt places of Italy i Clu/mes reporteth that he founde it in 
the fieldes of Spaine,and ofthe kingdome of Caſtile , and about Montpelier with fewer branches, 
and of an higher growth, [1 i. LET | 
[The Indian Thiſtle groweth ih Saint Iohns Iland in the weſt Indies, andprofpercth very well in 
my garden. | ? | w% Thetime, | | | 
They flower from Tune to the! end of Augult:' rhe ſeedes of the Indian golden Thiſtle muſt be 
ſowen when the ſeede is tipe,but it doth nor grow vp\ntill Maie next after, 
: | = ** 1 ht names. \ | | 
This Thiſtle is called jn Latine Cardumus Chryſanthenus , in Grecke of T heophraſtus Trout for 
thoſe things which he writeth of Sc:hmmzs in his 6. and 7, bopkes do wholy agree with this Thultle 
Chryſanthemus. Scolymus faith he, doth flower ih the ſommerſted: it lowreth brauely and a long 
time togither zit hath a roote that maybe caten both ſod and rawe, and when iris hard it yeeldeth 
a milkie iuice.Gaza nameth it Cxrduus. Ofthis Pliny alſo maketh mention in his 21, booke 16.chap- 
ter, Scolymus ſaith he,coth differ from thoſe kindes of Thiſtles,thatis toſay, Acarneand Atradtilt, 
bicauſe the roote thereof mey be cater boiled, Againe,in his 22. booke,22. chapter :the caſt coun- 
tries vie itas a meate,and heccalleth it by another name «ur; VVhich thing alſo Theophr/?us [ce- 
meth to affirmein his 6. book., for when he reckoneth vp herbes whoſe leaues are ſer with prickles, 
he addeth Scolymus, or Limon. | | = | | 
Notwithſtanding, P/y maketh mention likewiſe of another Scolymws, which he affirmethto 
hring foorth apurple flower,and betweene the rpiddle of the prickes to waxe whire quickly , and to 
fall off with the winde.in his 20;book 23.chapter./Which Thiſtle vndoubtedly doth not agree with 
Cardum Chryſanthemus,that is with Theophraſtua Scolymus, and with that which we mentioned | be- 
| fore,ſorthatthere bein P/inyriys Scohmp: : onewith a roote [that may be eaten ; and another with 
a purple flower.curning into:doywne,and that ſpeedily waxeth white, Scolymus likewiſc is ny 


! 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 995 
Div{eorides, but this differeth from Scolymws Theophraſti, and it is one of thoſe which Þ/;ay rec- 
konerh vp,a5 WC will more at large declare heereafter, Bur let vs come againeto Chryſanthemas, - 
this the inhabitanrs of Candie keeping the matrkes of the old name, do callirt Afco/ymb:4s : (the Itali- 
ans name it CAnconitent Remet : the Romaines Sprxa boyda : the Spaniards Cardon lechay : and of di- 
uers it is alſo named Glyeyrrhizon,thar is toſay Dalcuradrx, or ſweere roote : itis called in Engliſh 
olden Thiſtle; ſome would haue it to be that which Yegerems in Arte Vetermeris calleth Eryngms 
ba they aredecciued,for that Eryngium whereof Yegetzus writeth, is Erywgium Mareniin, of tea 
Huluer: of which wewill intreate, 


The golden Thiſtle of India,may be called Carduws Chryſanthemws, of his golden colour, adding 
thereto his natiue countrey /xd:anus,0r Pernanus,orthe golden Indian Thiſtle , or the golden Thi- 
le of Peru: the ſeede came to my handes by the name Frque del Inferno: in Larine Fic«s infernali, 
the infernall Figge,or Figge of hell, | 

| *% The temperatnre and vertues. | 

The roote and tender leaues of this Sro/y-as, which are ſometimes eaten; are good for the ſto. a 
macke, but they containe very little nouriſhment , and the fame thinge and watery , as Galers 
teacheth. | | 

Pliny faith that the roote heerof was commended by EratoFhenes, ir. the poore mans ſupper, 
and thart it is reported allo to prouoke vrine eſpecially, to heale tetters and dry icurtte being taken 
with vinegerzand with wine to ſtirre vp fleſhly luſt,as Heſodus and Aces reftificzand to rake away 
the ſtenchof the arme holes, if an ounccof the roote,the pith picked our,be boiled in three parts of 
winegtill one part be waſted, and a good draught taken faſting atiera bath,and likewiſe after meat ; 
which later words Dzoſcor;des likewile hath conceraing his Scoymms: out of whom Play is thought 
to haue borrowed thele things. | | 


Of white Carline T hiſtle of Dioſcorides. Chap. 4-65. 


Carlinay (eu Chameleon albus Dioſcoridia. 
The white Catline Thiſtle of Doc. with the red flower, % T: edeſeri;t1on. 


Helcaues of Carline are very full ofprickles, 
cut on both edges with a multitude of deepe 
oaſhes, and ſeralongſt the corners with ſtiffe 

and very fharpe prickles zthe middle ribs whereof 

are ſometime ted : the ſtalke is a ſpanne high or 

higher , bringiag foorth for the moſt partonely 

one hed or knap being full of prickles, on the our. 

ward circumference ot compaſle like the Vrehin s 

| huske of a cheſnut: and| when this openeth at the 

444 ny top,there groweth foorth a broad flower,made vp 

Wy | PE Me in the middle like a flatball, of a great number of 

Jt WI Sri threds, which is compaſlied about with little long 
leaues, oftentimes ſomewhat white, very ſeldome 
red: the ſecede vndernearh is {lender ne narrowe, 
the roote long, a hngerthicke, ſomething blacke, — 
ſochinked as though it were ſplit in ſunder,ſweere 
ofſivell;and in taſte fomwhact bitter, | 

There is alſo anothet heerof without a ftalke, 
with leaues alſo very full of prickles, like almoſt to 
thoſe of the other, lying flaton the ground on cuc- 

_ riefide: among which there groweth torth in che 
middle a rounde heador knay , fer with prickles 
without after the ſame manner , bur greater : the 
flower whereof in the middlgs of ſtrings, and pa- 

Jed rounde about with red leaues , and forctimes 
Rrr 2 wah 


on on ne 
Kd 
By 


995 _ THE SECOND |BOOKE| OF THE 

with white, in faire and calme weather the flower both of this and alſo of the otherlaiech them. 
ſclues wide open,and when the weather is fowle and miſty , arg drawne cloſe togither : the roote 
heereof is long,and ſweete of ſmell, whire,ſoundznot chinked or ſplirted as the other. 
'S YO | 4&Thepace.| | | | 


They both grow vpon hig mountaines in delart places,and oftentimes by highway ſides; buy 
that which bringeth foorth a ſtalk growerh cuery where in Germany, and is a ſtranger in England 
| | j| we Tharomne. | | | "Hy 
They ower and ſecede in Iuly and Auguſt,and many times later. 
ij | | ve Thewaner. | *[-'| 


ww, and of divers Caroline, of Char le 
maine the firſt Romain Emperorot that name,whoſe armie(as it is reported)was in times paſt cho- 
row the benefit of this roote delivered and preſerued from the/plague: iris called in high Durch 
Eberiwurtz: in low Dutch, French,& other languages, as likewiſe in Engliſh Carſize, and Carline 
Thiſtle: iris D#oſcoredes his Leucacanthe; the ſtrong & bitter rootes ſhew the ſame ; the faculties al(s 
are anſwerable,as foorthwith we wil geclare:Lexracantha hath alſo other names, but they are coun- 
terfeit, as among the Romaines Gni46erdwus, & among the Thuſcans Spe albe,or white Thiſtle,yer 
doth it differ from that Thiſtle which Droſcoridescalleth Spins «tbs,our Ladies Thiſtlez of which he 
alſo writing apart,doth likewiſe attribute to both of them their pwne proper faculties and operati- 
ons,and the ſame differing. | | | | ba a7 | | 

The later writers do alſo call the other Carlins alters, and Carlina humilis,or minoy lowe or little 
Carline : but they are muth deccjued who go abqut to refer them both to the Chamzleons; for in 
Icalic,Gerinanicor Fraunce,Chemelcones, the Chamzleons,doineuer growe,as there is one withes 
for many, Petrus Bellonius inliis booke of Singularities, wha ſufficiently declareth whar difference 
there is berweene the Carlines, andthe Chamzleons, which thing ſhall be made manifeſt by the 
deſcription of the Chaneleons.; | [7 E | | 
th The temperature and vertues.. FLY! | 

The roote of Carline which ischiefely vicd,is hot in the later end of the ſecond degree, and drie 
in therhirdevith a thinnes of parts and ſubſtancezcit procureth ſwear, it driueth foorth all kinde of 
wormes of the belly,itis an enimie toall maner of poiſons, it:dgth not onely driue away infeRigns 
of the plague, buraiſo curerh the lame if it be drunke in time.” | | 


The former is called in Latine Carling prior,and Car dopati 


B Being chewcd it helpeth the toorhach; it openeth the ſtoppings of the liuer and ſpleene, 

Ir prouoketh vrine,bringeth dqwne the menſes,and cureth the droplie. | 

D Anditis giuen to thoſe that haue beene dry bearen,andfalleyfrom ſome high place. 

E Thelike operations D1oorides hathconcerning Leucacantha: Leacacantha faith he, hath aroote 
like Ga/zng, bitter and ſtrong, which heing chewed caſcth the paine of the teeth, the decoftion 
thereof with a draught of wine is aremedic againſt paines of the ſides , and is good for thoſe that 
haue the Sciatica,or ach in the huckle bones,and for them that be troubled with the crampe, = 

F Theiviccalſo being drunke is of like vertues. || | [| | 


 Thewilde Carline T hiftle. Chap.4.6 6. 


| + The deſeriptiow. | 


t FT He great wilde Carline Thiſtle riſcth vp with a ſtalkeofa cubire high oc higher, dividedin- 
£0 certaine branches:the leaues are long,and very full of, prickles inthe edges , like thole of 
Carline : the flowers growe alſo vpon a; prickly head, being ſet with threds inthewidlt, 


& 


andpaled round about with little yellowiſh leaucs: the roote is {lender,and hath a rwinging ralte, 

2 CanluCluſms, deſcribeth 2 certaine other alſo of this kinde , with one onely ſtalke ,flender, 

ſhorr,andnor aboue a handfull high, with prickly leaues like thoſe of the other, bur leſſer, both of 

them couered with a certaine hgarie downe : the heads or knaps are for themolt part two , they 

hauea paledowne inthe midſt,and leaues ſtanding round abour being ſomwhar ſtiff and yellowe: 

the roote is{lender and of a reddiſh yellow, {| | F-7 | 7 tug 
| Fil | | £ Car 


by. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1 Carlina ſylueſtriemator. © 2 Carlin ftris minor. 
The wo Carline Thiſtle, The little Carline Thiſtle. 
[F WEI PZ 


Ab © SThepluc. 
Thegreat Carline is found in vntoiled and Fun laces,and oftentimes vpon hils, 
The leſſer Carline Carolas Clue writeth that he found growing in dry ſtony, and deſart places 


about Salmantica a citie of Spaine, % The time, 
They flower and flouriſh in Tune and Iuly, 
* The names. 


It is commonly called in Latine and that not vnfitly Carlins Sylueſtris: for itis like to Carline in 
flowers,andisnot very vnlike in leaties. "And that this is 427 it is ſo much the harder toaffirme, 
byhow much the briefer Theophra#tme hath written heerof: for he ſaith that this is like baſtard Saf. 
fron,ofa yellow colour and fat juice : and dcorna differeth from Acarna , for Acarna as Heſychins 

faith,is the Bay tree; but Acormaisa prickly plan, L VA 1244] | | 
% The temper ature and vertues. | (7 
It is hoteſpecially in the roote,therwinging taſte thereof doth declareybur ſeeing itis of no vie, 
the other faculties be vaſearched out, | HELI} £42421 | 


Of Chameleon T hiftle. (hap. 4.67. 
| + The kindes. EAN 4 
T Here be two Chameleons and both blacke the vertnes of theirroots do differ; and the roots 
) themnſclues do differ in kinde,as Theophraſtus declarerh. ALS morn rene! 


$2 a on apr oranqut ent 
r and flenderer then.thoſe of theprickly Arti- 


1 *T* Heleaues of blacke Chamzleon atelefl d flenderer the | of thepric} 
* "|, cholejand princkled with reg ſpots: theltalke is cubite high,a finger thicke , and ſome: 
© | whatred,jtbeareth a ufred rundle, iti 1 ie lender picty mers pt ablve colour 


like the Hyacinth : the Y6ote is thick, blacke wichobe ofa cloſe ſubſtance, ſometumes caten awaie, 
which being curls of aycHowiſh colour within, art being cheeTitbirech the roong, . he. 
b- — — 8 1 


99 THE SECOND BOOKE' OF THE 
' 2 This blacke Chamzleon hath many leaucs, long andnarrowe, very full ofrickles, of a lis} 
greene,in a maner white :the ſtalkeis chamfereg, 2 foote high, anddiuided into branches : on * 
tops whereof ſtande purple flowers,growing fo6rth of prickly heads: the roote is blacke , ang 
ſweete in taſte. This is delcribed by C/a/zws in his Spaniſh Obſeruations by the name of Chane. 
leon Salmanticenſis ofthe place wherein he found itsfor he ſaith ,that this groweth plentifully in the 
. Territorie of Salmantica.a citie in Spaine : but it is very manifeſt that Fs is not blacke Chame. 


7 


lcon,neither doth Cluſius affirme it, 


FE 
4 


I Chameleon y,, 4 il | | | | 2 Chameleon niger Saimanticenſis. | 
Theblacke Chameleon Thiſtle, | | | The SpaniſhblackeChamzlcon, 


\W/ > 


oy * 
# 
F - y 
_ To 
\» 
\ 
= 
WIKEZS7 
k /..t 
> 4- 
nd _- 
q N 1 
" ON 
" 
$3, q | 
%, d. : 
.* 
C , - F 
JJ 
F © 7 
: 


It is very common (faith Bellonims) in Lemnos , where it beareth a flower of ſo gallant a blew, as 
thar it {eemeth to contend with the skie in beautie, and thatthe flower of blewe Bottle bein of 
this colour, ſcemech in compatiſon of itto be but palc : it groweth alſo in the fieldesneere Aby- 
dum, and hard by the riuers of Helle{pont,andin Heracleain Thraciaz: $157 hh 

Chameleon Salmanticenſis groweth plentifully in the Territorie of Salmanticaa citic in Spaine. 

| rg, | «FA. iv 
They flower and flouriſh when the other Thiſtles do, 
| | * The Hanes, "oY 
ine-Chamalcos nicer, of the 
Engliſhche Chamzleon Thiſtle, or | 


I xil»s+ x ALT progeel 1 
qualitieziris alſonumbredamong the 
| A 1259 his 6booke and by Paulus 
AEgineta : and therefore it is vied onely outw as for ſcabs, morphewes , terters , and ro be 
breefe forall ſuch things as ſtande in neede of clenſing;moreouer, it is mixed with ſuch chings 35 
do diflolue and mollifie, according to Galew, || 8 FR of 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | | 999 


D loſcorides rmaketh mention onely of oneſea Hollie: P/iny in his 22. booke 7. Chaptergſeemerh 
to acknowledge two,one growing in rough places, another bythe ſea fide: the Phiſicions after 


the TE I> 


tem have obſerued moe,one of the ſea,and another of the maine land,and likewiſe certaingother 
baſtard kinds. | | | : 
: Eryngium marinun. : 2 Eryngiun medterranewn. 
Sea Hollie, $6." of | Leuant ſea Hollie, 


| - 2h . 
* P 


. 
F, 


" & 


Urns 


'> 


— Td ' ; - , Cnadt : x 4 - 
NEFA Nona - 
5! HASTA URS & - rE 
vw /x SABER E- 
(| 7 - Aa W Jh "2 
VV Sz | & 44 "IJ 
”/ M NN IQ WAS. A 


MAUI 


: 


—— «%% £ >] 
PIN FeDS 8 
4 l Fn 

— f 4 IC 

4 

[ 

Ly 
®” 


| % The deſcription. as 
IC Ea Hollic hath broad leaues, like almoſt ro Mallow leaues,, but comered in theedges.and 
'Y ſer round about with hard prickles,fat,of a blewiſh white,& of an aromatical orſpicie raſte :_ 
the ſtake is thicke , aboue a cubite high, nowe and then ſomewhatred below 7 irtbreaketh 
foorth on the tops into prickley and round heads or knops,of the bignes almoſt of a Walnut, helce 
in for the moſt part with ſixe prickly leaues, compaſling the top of the ſtalke round abour; which 
leaues as well as the heads, are of a glittering blew : the towers foorth of the heads are likewiſe 
blew, with white threds in the middeſt :)the roote is of the bignes of 2 mans finger, verie long, 
and ſo long,as that it can not be all plucked vp, vales very ſeldomey ſet heere and there with knots, 
andof taſte fiveere and pleaſan:. | | | | 
2 Theleaucs of the ſecond fea Hallie, are diuerſly cur into funery parce!s, being all full of pric- 
Kles alongſt the edges : the ſtalke is diuided into many branches,and bringeth foorth prickly heads, 
but lefſer thenthole of the other : fromwhich there alſo grow foorth bley flowers,ſeldome yellow; 
there ſtand likewiſe vnder euery one of theſe fixe rough and prickly leaves, like thoſe of the other, 
butthinner and fmaller: the root he. rof is alſo long,blacke without whire withina finger thicke, 
of taſte and ſmell like that of the other,as be ak ated wich arc likewiſe of an aromaticall or 
ſpicic taſte, which being new ſprung vp and as yertender;beallo goodto be eaten; © 


Rrr 4 * The 


Io — THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


Eryngium merinum groweth by the ſeaſide vpon the baich and ſtonie ground; I found it growi 
—__ hirtable in Ke ;/at Ric and VVinchellcy in Suſſex, Arp Eſſex at Ls 
fading, te arwich, and vpon Langtree point, onthe other ſide of the water, from whence I haue 
brought plants for my garden, © | | WE? © 10 
Ls ac campeſtre,groweth ypon the ſhores of the Mediterranean ſea, andin my garden like- 
WIC, | | - 
= BY % Thetime. 

Both of them do flower after the ſommer ſolſtice: and in ITuly. 

| , Wat 97 __ *+The names.  ERRE t 

This Thiſtle is calledin Grecke irv>%0:: and likewiſe in Latine Eryngiam,and of Pliny allo Erynge: 
in ſhops Eringw: in Engliſh ſca Hollie, ſea Holme,or fea Huluer. 

The firſt is called in Latine Erpngium mar;num © in low Dutch cuery where Cryys diftel, Einde- - 
loos, Peerwoztele : in Engliſhſea Holly. | | | x 


' >» 


The ſecond is named of Plinyin his 22.booke B.chapter, Centwmn capits, or hundred headed Thi- 

file: in high Durch UManGtrew , Bzanchendiftcll, Radendiftell 7 in| Spaniſh Cards correder : 

in Italian Eringio,and /rmge: this is ſurnamed Campeſtre, or Champion fea Holly, that it may differ 

from the other, = | E | | | 

; | ' ' *% Thetemperature. | 

The rootes of them both are hot,and char in a meaneznot a little dry allo,vih a thinneſle of ſub- 

ſtance,as Galen teſtifierh, | | | 9 fl RR. | 

E F310 | | %*Thewertues. HE NN 
The rootes of ſea Holly boiled in wine and drunken , are g9od for them that are troubled with 

the collicke,jit breakgth the ſtone,expellerh,grauell,and helpeth alſo the infirmities of the kidneics, + 


»* 


prouocketh vrine,greatly Fpegingrhc paſſages being drunke x 5,daies togither. 


B Therootes themſclues have the ſame propertie1f they be eaten, and are good for thoſe thar be 


* 
. 


liver ſicke,and for ſuch as are birtenwith any venemous beaſts caſeth cramps, conuulſions, and 
the falling ſicknes ; and bringerh downe the menſes. 


giuen vnto old and aged 1 that are conſumed and withered with age, & which want naturall 

moiſture: it is alſo good for orher ſorts of people that haue ng delight or appetite to venery, nouti- | 

ſhing and reſtoring the aged,and amending rhe defefts ofnature in the yoonger, | 
| | | % The manerto tondtte Ermgos. | 


C Therootes condited or preſerued with ſugar ,as heerafter followeth, are exceeding good to be 


D Refine ſugar fic for the|purpoſe,and take a pound of it,the white of one epge,and a pint of cleere 


E 


water,boile them togither and ſcum ir, then ler it boile vntill it be come oa good (trong ſyrrupe,8 
when itis boiled, as it coolerh adde thereto a ſawcer full of Roſe water, a ſpoonfull of Cinnamam 
water,anda graine of Muske, which haye beene infuſed togitherthe night before , and now ſtrai- 
ned ; into which ſyrrupe being more then halfe colde , put in your rootes to ſoke and infuſe vntill 
the nextday : your rootes being ordered jn maner heerafter following. 

Theſe your rootes being waſhed and picked, muſt be boyled in faire water by the ſpace of fower 
howers,vntill they be ſoft, then muſt they be pilled cleane, as yepill Parſneps, and the pichmuſt be 
drawne out at the end of the roote z andif there be any, whoſe pith cannot be drawen out at the 
end, then you muſt ſlit ther, and fo rake out thepith : theſe you muſt alſo keepe from much hand- 
ling,that they may be cleane, let them remaine in the firupe till the next day, and then ferthem on 
the fire in a faire broad pan ynrill they be very hot, butler them nor boile ar all: letthem there re- 
maine ouer the fire an hower or more,remoouing them caſily in the pan from one place to another 
with a wooden flice. This done, hauein a wor Kc great cap or royall papers,” whereupon you 
muſt ſtrow ſome Sugar, vpon which lay your footes after that you haue raken themour of the pan, 
Theſe papers you muſtput into a Stoue, or hot houſe to harden; bur if you haue not ſuch a place, 
lay them before a good fire, In this nannerif you condite your rootes, there is not any that can 
preſcribeyou a better way, And thus may you condite any other roote whatſocuer , which will 


 notonely be exceeding delicate, but very wholeſome, and ctfeRtuall againſt che diſcaſes aboue 


P 


wards voided any ſtone,when as beforche was very often tormented with that diſcaſc, 


named. | 


A certaine man affirmeth,ſaith Arias , tharbyhecontinuall vſeof Sea Holly, heneuer after- 
It 


— 


HISTORIE OF” PLANTS. | Yo! 
It is drunke, ſaith Dioſcorides, with Carror ſecede againſt very many infirmities inthe weight of a G 


dram, © | | = | 
The iuice of the leaues prefled foorth withwine is a remedie for thoſe,thar are troubled with the H 
running of the reines. fr Py 
They report that the herbe Sea Holly, if one goate rake itinto hir mouth, it cauſerh Hirfirſt to I 
{tand ſtill, and afterwards the whole flocke, vntill ſuch time as the ſhepheard rake it foorth of hir 
mouth,as Plutarch writeth. | 


Of baſtard Sea Hollies. Chap.469. 


| ; | : *% The kindes. | | | 

F- Tr Rr $ Thiſtles reckoned for wilde or baſtard kindes of Sea Holly ,as ſhall be preſently 
eclared. | | | | | 
1 Eryngium ceruleum. 4 2 Ermeiun tur iwn primum Dedone, 


Blew Sea Holly. | Baſtard Sca Holly, 


_ 7 
"I 


— 


"His Eryngium, which Dodoneus in his laſt edition calleth Eryng wm plonmm, and Pene more 
| fitly andrruly Erymgium Alpinumcerulewm, hath ſtalkes a cyubireand a halfe high, hauing 
. "7 ſpacesberweenecuery joint. T he lower leaues are greater and broader,and notched abour 
theedges, butthoſe aboue are leſſer, compaſſing or enuironing each ioinr ſtar faſhion, beſer with 

prickles,which are ſoft and render,not much hurtfull tothe hands of { uch as rouch themzthe knobs 
| Otheads are alſo prickley, and incolour blew. Theroote is bunchie or knortie, like that of Helens- 


_—_ is Elecampane, blacke without and white within, and like the Eringes in ſvecteneſle and 
talte, | | | _ 
'2 The 


7002 THE SECOND|BOOKE|OF THE 

2 Theſeccondbaſtard Sea Holly, whoſe picture is ſer foorth in Dodenecs his laſt edition very gal- 
Jantly, being alſo a kinde of Thiltle, hath leauesJike vnto the former Erynges, but broader next the 
rootes thanthoſe which growenex:t the ſtalkes, ſomewhat long, greenithJoft, and nor prickly, bur 
lightly creuiſed ornorched about rhe edges, greater than Quince leaues, The ſtalkes growe more 
chan a cubite high; onthe tops whereot rhere hang downwards five or ſixeknobs or heads, in co. 
lour and flowers like the others ; hauing three orfower whitiſh cootes,of a foote long, | 


( 


2 Eryngium pumilun Claty. If | HE | 4 Eryngiun Montanum, 


Dwarte Sea Holly. | BYE _ + | MountaineSea Holly, 


0 
\ 
{ \L 
\ 
] . z4 
©: z * 
SOAK | 
x: > +4 
ALS 
1 £ 
| 4 
L fo I ' 
þ f 
4 
x; 
o 


| * The defer iption. 


3  Thethirdkinde of baſtard Erymginer bath his rſt leaves (which growe next the ground) great, 
broad and ſoft,growing as ityverc in a rundle abc4.jr che roote, | The ftalke is ſtall and flender, ditt- 
dedinito ſome branches, which beare wany|littl-!4aucs, turning or ſtanding many waies; which be 
alſo flender,pricklic,and ſet abour the ſtalkes ſtar }aihion. The kyops or heags growing at the tops 
of the branches, are round and pricklic bearing |:rr!c blew flowers and leaues, which compaſle 
them abour:The roote is flender,and laſterh but þnc yeere, | | | 
4 Thefourth kinde of baſtard Sea Hally,whicli pens callerh|Eryngium mentamm recentiorwn,and 
' 15 the fourth according to Dedone:s his account, is like vnto the Krynges, not in ſhape but in taſte, 
This bearetha very ſmall and flencer ſtalke;of a meane heightzwhereupondo growe three or fower 
leaues,and feldome fiue, made of diners leaues ſet vpon a middlerib, narrow, long, hard, andot 2 
darke greene colour, dented on both edges of the leafe like a ſawe. The ſtalke is a cubite bigh,toin- 
'redorkntede, and diniding; it felfe into many branches; on thetops whereof are round ruftes or 
knops,wherein are contained the flowets,and(after rhey be vaged)rhe ſeedes,which are ſmall,ſome- 
what long.,well ſmelling andſharpe in tafte;The rooce is white anflong,nor a finger thicke, in taſte 
iweete,bur afterwards ſomewhat ſharpe, and in fent and ſauour not vapleaſant ; when this roote 1s 
dried, it inay be crunbled in peece S,andhcretore quickly braied, | | 6 oe 


” 


2 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1003 
| | + Theplace, | | 5 

Theſe kindes of Sea Holly are ſtrangets in England :wehaue the firſt and fecond inour London 
gardens. | 
_ ons ett nb There. 

They flower and flouriſh when the Thiſtles do, 

| | | | w The names. | | | 

Theſe plants be Eryngia ſiuria, orbaſtard Sea Hollies, and are lately obſerued : and therefore 
theyhaue no old names. | | | 126602 003-4 
The firſt may be called in Latine Eryngium Boruſicum;, or Ne ſ52ſam, Sea Holly withour 
rickles. | | E- 4 
4 The ſecond is called by Mathiolms Eryneium planion, or flat Sea Holly : others had rather name 
it Apinum Eryngium,or Sea.Holly of the/Alpes, Sy | | 
The third is rightly called Eryngywn pumilum little Sea Huluer. | 
Mathiolus maketh the fourth a7, 6 Crithmi genus,or akinde of Sampiere,and others Eryngy ge- 
»«,07 akinde of Sea Huluer, | ET : 
| | | * The temperature and vertues. | | 

. Touching the faculties hereof we haue nothing toler down,(eeing they haue as yetng vie inme+ 
dicine,and are neither vied to be caten.But yerthat they be hot onely, the very taſte doth declare, 


Of Star Thiſtle. Chep.q4.70. 


__—__ 


1 C:rduus ftellatns. | | | 2 Carduns Solfitialin 
The Scar Thiſtle, | | | _ _ S,Barnabees Thiſtle, 


EE) | 
W Jew £2 _WL/ 
«> i s - *Þ ' z 
S=< » A \ —* _ q\ HA 

| 20 a 


"TT 
} 
"o | 
£% ma 
% 7 
.4 
Ti 
* 
"I 
; +: 
WW . 
*. | \ 
is 4 « 
TOFTH 10 197 Y 
S |& * , wo 
# 
| . 
- bu b 
% i» £ \.- 
S 
{ , © 3 : 19 S 
i . F F L a a F 


wiibe alobaiean 1 ::5:3 tab! * The deſeription. 26188 bo brig ob nodgwo: of, G 
[8 Tur Star Thiſtle,called arduns ftelletas, hath many ſoft frized leaues, deepdly cur or raſh” 

alcogither withour prickles : among which riſeth vp a ſtalke , dividing it ielfe into many 

other branches, growing two foote high; on the tops whetcot are {iuallknops or heads 

CEE like 


x004 THE SECOND BOOKE'OF THE 
like the other Thiſtles,armed round about with many ſharpeprickles, faſhioned like a blaſin; ſtar, 


which at the beginning are of apurple colour, but afterwardes of apale bleake or whitiſh ©. =, 
The ſecede is ſmall,flat,and round: the roote is long,and browne withour. 
2 S.Barnabces Thiſtle another kinde of Star Thiſtle; notwithſtanding it hath prickles no where 
ſauc in the head only, and the prickles of irſtand foorth in manner of aſtar: the ſtalks arerwo cubirs 
high,parted into diuers branches ſoftcr than are thoſe of ſtar Thiſtle, which ſalkes haue velmes or 
thin skinscleauing vnto them all in length,by which they ſeeme to be fower ſquare. The leaues are 


ſomewhat long,ſet with deepe gaſhes on the edges: the lowers are yellow, and conſiſt of threds ; 
the ſecede is little: the roote long and flender. = || 


3 Solſtitialis lutea peregrina. 


The ſtrange S.Barnabees Thiſtle. ; | ** Thedeſeription. © 
Aly, ' | YJ| This Thiſflehathleaues fer withdeepe gaſhes, 
digh "4. <= hauing yellow flowers, with heads or knaps full of 
«& I \ | 7M prickles, bur greater than the former, and with a 
WS WP | ſtalke without! skins cleauing to it, Cluſqws writeth, 


that he found| this in 'the territorie of Salmantica 
hard by the vineyards in a drie ſoile. 

| ' | w* Theplace. : 

 Thetwo firſt do growe vpon barren places neere 
vnto cities and townes, almoſt euery where, 
| | | * Thetime. 
They flower and flouriſh eſpecially in Iuly and 
Auguſt, |- 

The firſt is calledin Latine Szellaria: Cordusna- 
meth it Poarartha, and Gazacalleth it Henleoſe, 
Bur they are deceived, whotake it to be Eryngium, 
or Sea Holly,orany kinde thereof. | Mathiolus faith, 
| tharitiscalledinlcalian Celcatrippe : in high Dutch 

_ Uallendifteſl; in lowe Duech Sterre diſtell[; in 
French Chanſf trappe : in Engliſh Star Thiſtle, 
 S.Barnabees Thiſtle is calle 
ls ſprria;bicauſe it lowreth inthe ſommer Solſtice, 
as Geſzer ſaith , orrather bicauſe after the Solſtice 
the prickles therof be ſharpeſt of Guillandinus Eryn- 
£ixm, but notproperly , & Stellaria Horaty _ 
who with good ſucceſle doth giue it againſt the 
' | ſtone, droplies, greene ſickneſle,and coridian fea 
: |} "\* The temperature, | 
The Starre Thiſtle is of a hot nature. l 1 | 
F | 3 +->}] *% Thevertnes. | 1. Wa 
A "Theſeedeis commended againſt the ſtrangurie: iris reportedtodriue foorth the ſtone if it be 
drunke with wine, | 4 | Fee | 


f 


B Beptiita Sardus affirmeth,thatthe diſtilled water of this Thiſtle is a remedie for thoſe that are in- 
 fefted with the French Poxe,and thatthe vic of this is good forthe liuer , thar it taketh away the 
ſtoppings thereof, - | [i L 
- C Thatitclenſcth the bloud fromcorrupr and purrified humjours. Wy 
D Thatit is giuen with good ſucceſſe againſt intermitting feauers ;whether they be quotidian of 
tertian, | b- 451 RD | | | 
E Astouching the faculties of SaintBarnabees/Fhiſtlephich are as yer notfound out, we haue 


- 5 3 : . - þ « 
* 6 is ” 
: : 
- 
j "Y : 
. 
b.4 * Y 
” [ : 
: 
5 ». 
s 
£ 
> 


edin Latine Sol/Fitis- 


HISTORIE| OF PLANTS. _— 


Of Teaſels. Chap.4-71. 


* The kindes. 
Vr age hath ſer downe two kindes of Teaſels : the rame, and the wilde. Theſe differ not ſaue 
O onely inthe husbanding; for all things that are planted and manured do more floutiſh and be- 
comefor the moſt part fitrer for mans vic.. | | 


1 Divſacus ſatiuns. 2 Dipſacus ſylueFiris. 
Garden Teaſell. 2 ag Wilde Teaſcll. 


|  - **&The pens A 
I FN Arden Teaſell is alſo of the numberof the Ihiſtles ;it bringeth foorth a ſtalke that is 
A oy ſtraight,very long, iointed,and full ofprickles. The leaues growe foorth of the iointes by 
| Couples,nor onely oppoſite or ſer one right againſt another but alſo comp aſſing the ſtalke 
abour,and faſtened togither; and fo faſtened, that they hold deaw and raine water in n:anner ot a 
liclebafon: theſe be long, of a light greenecolour; and like torhoſe of Lectice, bur full of prick les 
inthe edges, and haue on the outſide all along{t the ridge ſtiffer prickles : on the tops of the ſtalkes 
ſandheads wwh ſharpe prickleslikerhoſe of the Hedgehog, and crooking backware ar the point 
like hookes,,, out of wluch heades,growe little flowers.: The ſeede is like Fennell ſeeds, andin 
taltebitzer ; the heads waxe white, when they growe old,and there arc found in the middeſt of them 
when they are cut, certaine httle magots. Ihe roote is white, and ofameanelengrnh. 
2 Thefccondkinde of icafell which is alſo a kinde of Thiſtle, is very like vnto the former; but his 
leaues are {maller and narrower; his, flowers of a purple colour, and the hookes of the Tealellno- 
"og ſohard norſharpeas the other,nor goqd for any vic in drefling of cloth, © 
- Theres another kinde of Tealclibeing a wilde kinde thereof, and accounted among thecatalog 
of Th ies, growing highet chan the reſt of his kindes, buthis knobbed keads are no biggerthan 
2 Nutneg, nallother things elle they arc like co che other wilde kindes, a6 
| | I; 


THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 

* [1.1 | w Theplace. | : 
The firſtcalled the tame Teaſell,is ſowen in this countrey in gardens, to ſerue the vſes of Fullers 
and Clothworkers. jj | | | |. 

The {econd kinde groweth in moiſt places,by brookes,riuers,and ſuch like places. 

The third I found growing in mailt places in the high way leading from Braintree to Heoping. 
ham caſtle in Eſſex, and not in any other place except heere and there a plant vpon the highwaic 
from Much-Dunmow to London, | | [| = 

| E231 * Thetime. 

Theſe flower for the moſt part in Tune and Iulie, 

[ij | *1'7.  |4þ Thqnaves. | | 

Teaſcllis called in Greeke 9/1: and likewiſe in Latine Dip aces, Labrum Veners, and Carduu 
V cner#;1tis termed Labrin Verer and Liver Lavacrum, of the forme of the leaues made Vpin fa. 
ſhionof a baſon, which is nuer without water: they commogly callit Virga Paſtoris, and Carduw 
fullcam : in high DutchRarden Diftell : in low Dutch C aftdent in Spaniſh Cardencha: and cur. 
do Penteador: 1 Italian Diſſaco and Caro : in French Charaan de foullon, Perge abergier: in Engliſh 
Teaſell,Carde Teaſell, and Venus Baſon. tf YEE | 


. L006 


. 


Thethirdeis thoughe to be truly called G:/edragon Pliny, cf which he hath written in his TH 
booke 10.chapter,hecalleth thatherbe Galedragon, ſaith Yewocrates,which is like Leucacanthum « 
marriſh andprickly herbe, | | | [| | | 

1! | | * Thetemperature. | | 
The rootes of theſe plants are dry in the ſecond degree : and haue acertaine clenſing facultie, 
16-5 {i W% Thepertacs. | | 
A Thereis ſmall vic of Tealell in medicines: the heads (as we haue ſaid) are vied to drefſle woollen 
dot wt  . 1} | y- 1 | | |. | 
B  Drofcorides writerh, Mat the rootes being boiled in wine and ſtamped till it is comerto the ſub. 
 Ranceof a ſalue,healeth chaps, and fiſtulaes of the fundamentif itbe applied thereunto, andthac 
this medigine mult be relcrued in a boxe of cppper , and thar allo ir is reported tobe good for all 
kindes of warts. INTE 4-4 1 + 1:7 | | | | 

It is ncedleſſc heere to alledge thoſe things that are added touching the little wormes or magors 
. foundintl:cheads of the Teaſcll, and which are to be hanged abour the necke, or to mention the 
like thing that Plinjereporterh of Galedragon :for they are nothing elſe but moſt vaine and rrifling 
toies, as my ſelfe haue prooued a little before the impreſſian heereof, hauing a moſt greeuous 
ague and of long continuance: notwithſtanding phiſicke charmes , theſe wormes hanged about 
my necke, ſpiders put into a walnut ſhell , and divers ſuch fooliſh toics thatI was conſtrainedto 
rake by fantaſticke peoples procurement ; nowithſtanding I ſay, my health came from God him- 
ſclfe,for medicines and all othet ſuch things did me no good at all. ah 


7 baſtard Saffron. Chap.472. 


| || *Thedeſeription. | EE | 

N rews, called alſo baſtard Saffron, which tay very well be reckoned among the Thiltles, ti- 

ſeth vp with a ſtalke of a eubite anda halfe high, ſtraight,round,hard,and woodie, and bran- 

ched at thetop ; it is defended with long leaues, ſomething broad, ſharpe pointed and with 

prickles in theedges: from the tops of the ſtalkes ſtande our little heads or kriops, bf the bignes of 

an Oliuc or bigger, ſerwith many ſhatpe pointed and prickly ſcales :'out of which come foorth flo- 

wers like threds,cloſely compa, of adeepe yellow ſhining colour, drawing neere to rhe colour of 

Saffron;vnderthem arelong ſeedes,finooth,white, ſomewhat cornered, bigger then a Barly corne, 

the huske whereof'is ſomthing hard,the innerpulpe or ſubſtance is far, white , ſweere in taſte :the 
roore {lender and vnprofirable. | + | 3 py 6 199k F- 

There is alſo another kinde of baſtard Saffron, that may very well be numbredamone the kindes 

:- of Thiſtles andis verylike ynto the former,ſauing that his flockie or threddie Aowers,arc of ablew 


x 


colour: the roote is rlucker,and the whole plantis alrogither more ſharpe in prickles. 


Cartamm, 


} 2s 


HISTORIE |OF' PLANTS. 1009 


Canthammn, ſine Cngcus. | ; 
Baſtard Saffron, * The place. 


It is ſowenin divers placesot Iraly-,'Spajte, 
and Fraunce,borh in gardens and in fields, >/.ne 
in his 25. booke: 15. chapreriaith, that in the 
raigne of Yeſþa/ian this was not knowne in Italic, 
-being in Egypt onely of goo#zccount, and that 
they viedro makeGlle of it and nor meate, 

© e- * The time, [ 

The flowers are perfited in Tuly and Auguſt:the 
ſcede after the ſame yeere itis ſowen, withereth 
away. FEOF | 
&* The names. £ 

Ir is called in Greek iz-5:in Latinalſo Cxzeav,or 

Cneem:in ſhops Chartamns,of diuers Crorgs hort7 
ſts, Crocus Saracenicns : in htalia Zaffarans Sar a- 
cineſco,and Zaffarans ſaluatico : 11 Sparuſh Alzfer, 
and Semente de papagaios:in high Dutch Udltiden 
- Zaffranz in French Saf#an ſaunege * in Engliſh 
baſtard Saffron, of ſome mocke Saffran,, and 
Saffron Dorte, as though you ſhould faic Saf- 
fron de horto,or of the garden. Theophraſtus and 
Pliny call it Cnecus wrbana,and /atzua,or tame and 
garden baſtard Saffron, rhar it may differ from 
Atra&:lis , which they makerto be a kindeot Cni- 
cus ſylueſtris, or wilde baſtard Saffron, bur rather 
a /þecies of the Holie Thiſtle, | Hog 
| * Thetemperature. [ 
The | We vſe ſaith Galen, the ſeede onely forpurga- 
tions: itis hot andrthat inthe firſt degree, as| AZeſes writerh. | 
[56] *% The vertues. 4:4 

The iuice of the {eede of baſtard Saffron bruſed and trained into honied water, or the broth ofa A 
chicken & drunke,pronoketh tothe ſtoole,and purgeth by ſiege flimy flegme , and ſharpe humors. 
Moreouer it is good againſt the colicke,and|difficultic of taking breath, the cough and ſtopping of 
the breſt,and is fingular againſt the dropſie. ; | 

The ſeede vied as atorefaid,and ſtrained jnto milke, cauſerh it to curdle and ycelde much cruds, B 
andmaketh ir of great force to looſe and open the belly. | 2 6g | 

The flowers drunke with honied water openeth theliuer , 
the os rs are goof to colour meate in ſtead of Saffron. | 

The ſeede is very hurtfull ro the ſtomacke,cauſing defireto vomite, and is of harde and flow di- D 

geſtion,remaining long in the ſtomacke and entrailes. 
\  Purtothe ſame ſecde things comfortableto the ſtomacke, as Anniſe ſeede, Galingale, or Ma- E 
icke, Ginger, Sal gemme,and it ſhall not hurt the ſtomacke arall, and rhe operation thereof ſhall 
de the more quicke and ſpeedie. | | ) 

Of the inwarde pulpe or ſubſtance heereofis made a moſt famous and excellent compoſition to F 
purge water with, commonly called Diachartamon, a moſt ſingular and effectuall purgation for 
thoſe that haue the dropſic. - | | 

The perfe& deſcriptionis extant in Guj4othe Surgeon :in his firſt do@rine,and ſixt Traftate, G& 

We haue notread of,or had in vic that baſtard Saffron with the blew flower, and therefore can H 
| laynothing of his vertues. | 


[ace Oo 


andis good againſt the 1aundiſe :and C ' | 


— 


1068; THE SECOND| BOOKE OF THE 
7 e baſtard Saffron. \Chap.4-73. 


* 7 he kindes. 


cellently ſeenein the knowledge of Simples, make ir a\kinde of Cards Be 


. 


Wilde baſtard Saffron, | | | 


leſled Thiſtle, 


> \% 
ORATEE) 


k 
% WM 2 
> ** 
= 
* CI 


 __ 


N Trayes, otherwiſe called wilde baſtard Saffron ringeth foortha ſtraight and firme 
ſtalke , very fragile or brittle, dinided at the top into certalte branches: it hathlong 


. 


=_ The defer; tion, 


tagecdleaucs ſet with prickles zthe heads on the ropsof the branch are very full of ſhazpe 
prickleszout of which grow flowers al of threds,like thole ot baſtard Saffron,but they are of alight 
ycliow colour,and fomrimes purple: the ſeede is ſorawhat great,browne, and bitter, otherwiſe like 
that of baſtard Safiron : the rgore is af a meane bjghnes, | | 


2 Theſtalkes of Carduws Brnedrtus or Bleſſed Thiſtle, are round, rough, and pliable, andbeing 
parted into divers branchcs,do lit flat on the ground: the leates are jagged rounde about, and full 
of harmleſle prickles in the edges: the heads on the tops of the ſtalks are ter with prickles, and inui- 

roned with ſharpe pricking leaues,out of which ftandetha yellow flower: the ſeede is long, and fet © 
with hawres at the top like a beard : the roote is white, and parted into ſtrings: the whole herbe 

lcaues and ſtalkes,and allo rhe heads, are couered with a ſoft and thinne downe. | 
18 - | |} 8 The fps. PE 

. Aracyliegroweth in Candi, and in divers prouinces and Ilands of Greece, and alſo in Lan- 
guecocke :and is an herbe growing in our Engliſh gardens. | | | 

Carduus Bered:u5is found every where in Lemnos, an land of the midland ſea,, in champion 

grounds,as Petrmus Belloniis teſtifieth tir is diligentlycheriſhedin gardens in theſe northren __ 
T1411 [| [| * 7 


£ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1009 
| *% The time, _ | 

Arattyls is very late before it flowreth and ſeedeth, _ _ | 

Cardums benedittus Rowieth in July and Auguſt, at which timeit is eſpecially to be gathered for 
phiſtcke matters. - | | 
* The names. 

Atrafyli#is called in Greek Aregrn24s 4-4: the Latins likewiſe Atradtflts,ang Cajces fypeſtris,and 
bicauſe womenin the old time were woont to viethe itiffe ſtalkerhereof pro fuſo 4ut 6olo, tor aſpin- 
Ae or a diſtaffe,it is named Fucus agreſtis ,and Colus ruſtica , which thing Petrive Bellowines reporteth 
the women in Greece do alſocuen at this day , who call Arra&yts by a corruprname THrd:@yle. 
divers of the later Herbariſts name it Sy/veſ{ris Carthamas, that is to fay inlowe Dutch, UWitiden 
Carthamus : and in Engliſh wilde baſtard Saffron. 

" Bleſſed Thiſtle is called in Latine euery where Carduws bened;iFus: andin ſhops by a compound 
worde, Cardobened:tie : itis moſt plaine as we haueſaid,that iris Specjes <AtradHy 4, or akinde of 
wilde baſtard Saffron :itis called 4rradFyits hirſutior, hairie wilde baſtarde Saffron, Falerizs Cordus 
nawcth it Cnecas ſupinus: it is called in high Durch Beſeegnete viſtell,Kards benedict: the lacer 
name whereof is knowne to the low countrey men : in Spaniſh it is called Cards Sar#o: in French 
Charaen benoiſt, or benerit, in the Ile Lemnos Garderacantha :in Engliſh Bleſſed Thiſtle, but more 
commonly bythe Latine name Carduus Benediius. | os 

| EZ * The temperature. 

Wilde baſtard Saffron doth dry and moderately digeſt,as Gales teacherh. 

As Cardums benediitus is bitter,fo itis alſo hot and dry in the ſecond degree,and withall clenfing 
and opening. | | 


| | % The vertues. 

The crop,ſeede,and leaues of _MratFyits, faith Dioſcorides being beaten and drunke with pepper 4 
and wine,are a remeglie for thoſe that are ſtung of the ſcorpion. | 

Bleſſed Thiſtle raken in mearte or drinke,is good for the ſwimming and giddines of the heady it 
ſtrengthneth memorie,and is a ſingular remedie againſtdeafenes, 

The ſame boikedin wine and drunke hot,healeth the griping paines of the belly , killeth and ex- © 
pelleth wormes, cauſeth ſweate, prouoketh'vrine, and driueth ont grauell;clenſerh the ſtoinacke, 
andis very goodagainſt the feuer quartaine, 

Theiuice of the ſaide Carduus,is fingular good againſt all poiſon, as Hierome Bock witneſleth, in D 
what fort ſocucr the medicine be taken z and helperh the inflammation of the liuer, asreporteth * 

luchmus Camerarinusof Noremberge, 
| Thepowder6fthe leaues miniſtredin the quanritie ofhalfe a dram,is very good againſt thepe- E 
ſilence;if itbe received within 24.howers afterthe taking of the ficknes, and the party ſweat vpon 
theſame:the like vertue hath the wine, wherein the herbe hath been ſodden. 

The greene herbe pouned, andlaide to, is good againſt all hot ſwellings, as Eryſpelss, plague Þ 
ſores, and botches,elpecially thoſe that proceede of the peſtilence,and is alſo good tobe laide vpon 
the bitings of mad dogs, ſerpents,ſpiders,or any venemous beaſt whatſocuer; and ſoit is kkewiſe if 
itde inwardly taken, : | 

The diſtilled water thereof is of leſſe vertue. 

Itis reported that it likewiſe cureth ſtubburne andrebellious vicers,ifthe decoftionbe taken for H 
cerraine daics togyther ; and like wife THrnolans 4: Villa nous, reporteth thar, if it beftamped with 
Barrowes greafero the forme of an vnguent, adding therto a little Wheat flower,it doth the ſame, 
being applied twiſe a day. : | | 

The herbe allois/good being ſtamped and applied,and ſois the inice theteof, 

Theextra&tion of the leaues drawne according to Arr, is excellent good againſt the French dif- K 
eale,and quartaine agues; as reporteth rhe foreſaid Camerarims. þ 

The fame author reportethcthatthe diſtilled water taken with the water of Louage , and Dod- L, 
der helpech the ſauceflegme face,ifir be drunke for certaine daies rogither, 


Eh Of 


1010 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
Of Thiſtle upon Thiſtle,and divers other wilde 
| Thiftles. (ſhap.474- 


I Onoporaon. 2 Carduns ferox. 
Thiſtle vpon Thiſtle, Thecruell Thiſtle, 


« 
[ 


I \ Mongall the Thornes and Thiſtles, this ismoſt full of prickles ; the alles thereof are ve- 

ric long,and ſeeme to be cornered by reaſon of certaine thinne skins growing vntothiem, 
being lent downe foorth of the leaves :the leaues are ſer rounde 2bout with manic dcepe 
Laſhes, being very full of prickles as well as the ſtalkes; rhe heads are very thicke ſet in cuery place 
with ſtitfe prickles, & confiſt of a multitude of ſcales zour of which grow purple flowers, as they do 
out of other Thiſtles,feldome white: the roote is almoſt ſtraight,bur it groweth not deepe. 

2 Tothis alſo may be referred that which Z' Obeltas writeth to be named of theralians Leo, and 
Cardums ferox ; for it is {5 called of the wondertull ſharpe and ſtiffe prickles, wherewith the whole 
plant aboundeth ; the (talke rhereof is ſhorr,ſcarce a handful! mes the flower groweth forth of a 
prickly head,and 1s of a vale yellow colour,like that of wilde baſtard Saffron , and it is alſo ijquiro- 
ned and ſetround about on euery {1Jewith long hard thornes and prickles, | 

3 . The thirde groweth feidome aboue al cobile or two foote gh : it bringeth foorth manic 
round ſtalks,parted into diuers branches ; the leaues are like thoſe of white cotton Thiſtle, burlet- 
fer,and blacker, and not cquered with downe or cotton: vpon the tops of the ſtalkes growe little 
heads like Hedgzhogs ; our of which ſpring gallant purple flowers , thar at length are turned into 
downe,leauing icedes bchinde them like thoſe of other Thiſtles:the roote conſifterh of many ſipall 
ſtringes, | | | [7 fy. Es, 
4 The fourth riſeth vp with an higher ſtalke, now and then a yarde long, rounde, &not(o full of 
branches nor leaues, which are (harpe & full of prickles, but lefſer and narrower: the heads be alſo 
leſſer, longer, and not fo full of ſtiffe prickles: the flowers ace of a white colour , and vanith into 
_ downe : the roote 1s biacke,and afoote long. = / | 


* The deſeriztion | 


3 Cardum 


a 


A "Yr 
ESE , 


. 
- 
Ti 
<.. » - S 4 
= Tl —_— = 
" A Fe 
« Ne \ 
A. * "as 
- - F 


o 
; 
; 
. 
7 YT "4 
> 
- «A 
4 \ 4 
p _ F? 
' | %. —” 
” = ” 
AN 3 
Fw, a, Mn A; yF 
4 c 
p 
s 


” 
- 


F #44 

UII TY oils Þ 

SS LA LCA” 
4 


ly 
"4 6c" 
I's 
Li 
/4 HED . FS! .% 
=> on 
/ I oy 


— 


5 Cardum mſcat ms. 
The musked Thiſtle, 


| 4 & 


87> & 
— A 4 A wo 


PLAN? 


4 Carduns viarum flore a1bo. 
: Thewlute way thiſtle. 


I 
KU 


. RE 4 pn li 1 g AM 
6 Cardutms lanceative. 


e ſpeare Thiltle, 


T0 


OF 


> 


p ——o—_— ——_ oy — — _ P | | | | | 
IO01z THE ;:SECOND 'BOOKE' OF'THE 
5 This wilde Thiſtle which growethin the fieldes about Cambridge,hathanyprightighk who. 
on do growe broad tugr/ 0 pr + the lowers growe onthe rops of the vere eh >y, te 
flockie downe,of a white colout tending to e;ofa moſt pleaſant fiyeere [inc] otrining with the 

ſauour of muske : the roote is Gralifab periſheth at the opined of winter. £467 

'6 The ſpeare Thiltle hath an vpright ſtalke , garniſhed with a skinniemembrane; full of mot 
ſharpeprickles : whereon do | dip very 'ong leaues, diuided into divers parts, with ſharpe prickles; 

j | 


the point ofthe leaues are as point of a ſpeare, whereof ir tooke his name :the flowers erowe on 
| thetopsof the branches, ſcrin a ſcaly pricklic head, like vnto the heads of Knapweedin forme,con- 
/ liſting of many threds of a purple colour: the roote confiſterh of many tough ſtrings, i 


7 Acarna Ter EET i-+| | 8 AbarnaWalerani Donres. 
Theephreftw bis fiſh Thiſtle.  &' © Dowreshisfiſh Thiſtle, 


\ / 
N Sy} > 
\ % By 
” & os. 3 | FE >" p 
\ $541 ; . 
| ” 
\ o 


i — OY | ER is of j] S\. "Ws, 
7 Theophrsſtws his fiſh Thiſtle called _{carme,which was brought from Ulyriato Venice , by the 
learned YValerandius Donrez deſcribed by Theophraſtms;hath horrible ſharpe yeilow prickes,ſet vpon 
his greene indented leaues, which are coucred on the backefſide with an hoarie downe ( as all the 
reſt of theplant) hauing aſtalke of acubitc and a halte high; and atthe top certaine ſcalic knops, 
containing yellowe thrunimie fowers, armedor fenced with horrible ſharpe prickes : the roote is 
long and threddie. |. | | * F | 
$ Theotherkind of fiſh Thiſtle being alſo another Acarnaof Yalerandus deſcription hath long & 

: large leaues,ſer full of ſharpe prickes, as though it were ſer full of pins : all the whole plant is coue- 
red with a certaine hoarines,like the former;there riſeth vp a ftalke g.inches long,yea in ſome ferrill 
grounds a cubite high,bearing the flower of Carduws beneditiwe, ſtanding thicke togither butleſler. 

| FE 13 |} þ | Theplece: | HS 6 
> The two firſt grow on divers dry banks,not fave from mount Apennine,and ſomrimes in I talic, 
_  butyerſeldome. FET-71-1 | | [| | | 
The way Thiſtles grow cucry where by high way ſides and common paths, in great plenty. 
Theplaces ofthe reſt haue beene ſufficiently ſpoken of in their deſcriptions. 
| | | w%&Thetime. | 
Thele kinds of Thiſtles do flower from the beginning of Iune vnill the end of September. " 
j t” | [| WE * Tye 


4 : 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1013 


- 2 % The B&Ptes. ; | 
Theſe Thiſtles comprehended inthis preſent Chapter are by one generall name called in Latine 
Cardui [ylueſtres,or wilde Thiſtles,and that which is the ſecond in otder is named Scolymus; bur not 
that Scolymme,which Theophreſtus declareth to yeelde a milkie ivice , of which we haue written be- 
fore, but one of theſe which Planyin his 29.booke 23. chapter deſcribeth: of ſome they are taken 
for kindes of Chameleon : their ſeuerall titles do fer foorth their ſeuerall Latine names, and alſo 


wy 9.3. þ % The temperature and vertues. 

Theſe wilde Thiſtles according to Ga/er;arc hot and dry in the ſecond degree, and that thorowe A 
the propertic of rheir ellence they drive footth ſtinking vrine if the roores be boiled in wine and 
drunke;and that they rake away thetanke ſmell of the body and arme holes. 

Dioſcorides ſaith, thatthe roote ofthe common Thiſtle appliedplaiſterwiſe,correReth the filthy B 
ſmell of the armeholes and whole bodie, + 

And that it workeththefame effe&t'if it be boiled in wine and drunke, and that it expelleth plen- C 
ty of ſtinking vrine. 2640 | | 

The ſame author affirmeth alſo,that the herbe being as yet greene and tender,is vicd ro be eaten D 
among other herbes after the marier of ſparags. <4 Ghi_s , 

This being ſtamped before the flower appeereth,faith P/jny,and the iuice preſſed foorth,cauſeth E 
haire to growe where itis pilled off f the place be bathed with the juice. 

The toote of any ofthe wilde Thiſtles being boiled with warer and drunke , is reported to make F 
them dry that drinke it. | wo | PHP | | 
Itſtrengchneth the ſtomacke,and it is reported (if we belecucit) tharthe fame is alſo good for G 
the matrix,that boies may be ingendred ;for ſo Chereas of Athens hath written,and Glaucias, who 

is thought to write moſt diligently of Thitles. Yard Y.. x0 

This Thiſtle being chewed, is good againſt ſtinking breath : thus farre P/zxje in his 20. booke H 
23.chapter. bs | 


' 


Of the Melon,or Hedgehogge Thiſtle. Chap. 4.75. 


Melocar durss Echinatus Pena & L Obely, 
The Hedgehogge Thiſtle. *% Thedteſeription. 
| | Hocan bur maruell at the rare and ſingu- 
\/ lar workemanſhip which the Lord God 
almightic hath ſhewed in this Thiſtle, 
called bythe name Echino-Melocattes, or Melo-car- 
duws Echinatus ? This knobbie or bunchic maſſe or = 
lumpe, is ſtrangely compact andcontext togither, 
containing init ſundry ſhapes and formes, partici- 
pating of a Pepon or Melon,and a Thiſtle,both be- 
ing incorporate within one bodiez which is made - 
afrer the forme of a cocke of haie, broade and flat 
belowe,burt ſharpe toward the top,as big as a mans 
bodic from the belly ypward; on the outſide heere- 
of are fourteene harde ribs, deſcending from the 
crowne tothe lowelt part,like the bunchie or out- 
ſwelling rib of a Melon ſtanding out, andchanne- 
led betweene : at the top or crowne of the plant 
 iflueth foorth a fine ilken cotton, wherewith it is 
full fraught ; within which cotton or flockes lie 
| hid certaine ſmall ſhearhes or cods , ſharpe art the 
point, and of a deepe ſanguine colour , anfivering the cods of Capſicum or Indian Pepper, notin 
ſhew only, bur in colour; bur the cods are fomwhat ſmaller : the furrowed or channeled ribs on the 
outlide are garniſhed or rather armed with many prickly ſtarres ,ſtanding in a compaſle like ſharp 
crooked hornes or hookes, ech ſtarre conſiſting of ten or twelue prickes, wherewith the outwarde 


SiC 3 | barke 


Wir 


LY 
= 
No 
= 4 
<8. 
» 


- 
>. _- 
W- 
£ 
_ 
nd 


LPS 
ZN 


{\x\ 
KR 
—_ 


1014 THE SECOND |'BOOKE OF THE 
> \barkeor peeling is garded, fo thatwithout hurt to the fingers it cannotbetouched: this rinde; 
harde,thicke,andlike vnto Aloes,of the colqur of the Cucumber; the fleſh or inner pulpe is Whir 2 
far,wateriſh, oftaſte ſower,ynſauoric, andcovling , much like vntothe meate of arawe Melon te, 
Pompion: this plant groweth without leafe or ſtalke,as our northren, Thiſtle doth , called an 
fermeand is bigger then the largeſt Pompion: the rootes are ſmall, ſpreading farre abroade inthe 
ground,8& confitting of black and tgugh twigs fc cannot indurethe jnjuricofour cold climate. 
| | % The place. | | 
This admirable Thiſtle groweth yponthe dr! nos gravelly.grounds neere vnto the ſea fide, in 
the Ilands of the weſt Indies,called 5 nk 3d Iic,8S.lohys necr ynto. Puerteriro or Porjorice & 
other places in thoſe countries , by the relation of diuerstrapeilersthaghaueiourncied into thoſe 
parts, who haue brought metheplanr it ſelfe withhis ſeede 3 the which weulde noc Srow.in ion 
den by reaſon of the coldnes of the climate. | 1 oſs” 51068 oo 7-wrinw 


d : | I - i Thi time. Ld. FR] | 
& It groweth,flowreth,and flouriſheth all the yeere long, as:domanytherplants of thoſe com. 
ties. | » | | j | other 
Go The Hames. ' 8 


It is called Cardums Echinatus , Melocar dures echinatue , and Echino- Meclocattes : in Engliſh the 
Hedgehogge Thiſtle,or prickly Melon Thiſtle: |j un | 4 4 

\ *% Thetemperatwreand vertues. >; + 

A Thereisnotany thing extant ſet toorth of the ancient , nor of the later writers , neither by any 

* 'thathath trauciled from the Indies themſclues : therefore we leauc it toa further conſideration. 


& 


' $3 $45 z ” 


Of the gummie T hiftle called Euphorbium. Chap. 4.76. 
rs Euphorbium. [-il-- | |.iþ Anteaphlgbins. | | 
# Thepoifonous gum Thiſtle, .. | | The Mithridate again 


#1 
wt l 4 y \ k £ 4 4 
Fe ILY | | 


{rhe poiſonous Thiſtle, 


LO . 
__— — 
: 


WM 
F 
- 
SS 
Aa- 
= 


OT.” 
MAE _ 
4 % LS as 


- ” = 


yu 
/&/ # 
hw ————_— 


— w- 
4 \ 
"> 


AM LE 
1 
JAE. 


\z- WH # 
CMS VAE* 2 
Se © © 9 
SLAMS S: 
_ k 
_ , 2 
—_ a_ D «/ os F 
o 
OY 


ELL 


- 
4a 
oo  ——— 


TLI44 
2h AASA - 


AS Add 
CLAM 


T AAAS 
- 


I's i 
— - | - 
2” - 
: -» - 
-£C5EPF7, 
f 
\ x #2 
k = 
-_ 
* 
WP dy "© _ 
© 
6 * 
< —— TFT, Y 
- £ 3 


_ 


- 
LA 
_— —_ 
L 


4 


# _ 
LL 
as 
. 


. . — _ 
o * 4\ 
Ry # 
C4, 4 
— v- 
>. x wo 
I _ 4 Y, 


Tru 3 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. '''” org 


| % The deſcription. | 
1 IT” Vphorbium (whereour rhat liquor or gum, called in ſhops Ewphorbizm, is extracted) hath 
þ very great, thicke, grofie, and ſpreading rootes, diſperſed far abroad in the grounde: from 
which arite long and round leaves,almoſt like the fruite of a great C:cumber, a foote and 
ahalfclong, ribbed,walled, and jurrowed like vnto the Melon : theſe bunched ribs are ſer or armed 
for the molt part with certaine prickles ſtanding by couples, the point or ſharpe end of one garding 
one way,and che point of another Jooking directly acleane contrarie way; theſe pricks are often 
found in the gum ir ſelec, which is broughc vnro vs from Libya and other parts: the leaues heereof 
being planted inthe ground,w1ill rake roote wel,and bring foorth greatincreaſe,which thingI haue 
prooued true in my gardenzit hath periſhed _ at the firſt approch of winter:the {appe or liquor 
that is extracted our of this plant,is of the colour'and ſubſtance ofthe creame of milkez it burnech 
the mouth extremely,andthe duſt or powder doth veric much anoie the head and the parts therc- 
abour, cauſing great and vehement ſneezing, and ſtuſhng of all the pores. 
2 Thisrareplantcalled _Anteuphorbirn , hath a very thicke, grofle, and farre ſpreading roote, 
very like vato Euphorbium:from which riſech yp many round, greene,and fleſhic ſtalkes, whereup- 
on do grow thicke leaues like Purflane,but longer,thicker,and tatrer: the whole plant is full of cold 
and "Hime moiſture , which reprefleth the ſcorching force of Euphorbium : and ut wholic 
feemeth at the firſt viewe ro be a branchof greene corall, WEE 


3 Cerens Perunianus ſinofus L'Obely. E 4 Calamus Perua ns Pinofuu LU 0bely. 
 Thetorch,or thornic Euphorbium, ThethornicReede of Peru, 


_ - 
. p P - 
_ ” = 
” PEA _X \ , , " —— " —” ? FR 
* FEAST "FRE. 7 ——— >" - 4-4 48 
: F P g - _ » 


- TS 6 


a hy - _— 


- $9 4 2 


V , 


. o The deſcription. : 
3 There js not amongſt the ſtrange and admirable plants of the worlde any one, that giueth 
more cauſe of maruell,or more mooucth the minde to honor and laud the Creator,then this plant, 
which is called of the Indians in their mother toong Yragar , which is as much to ſay, atorch, ta- 
per,or waxe candle,whereupon it hath been called in Latine of thoſe that vnderſtoode the Indian 
toong, Cerews, of a torch, This admirableplant rileth vp to the height of aſpeare of 20, foore long, 
alchough the figure expreſſenor the ſame; the m_—_ _ plane when the figure was drawne 
| 4 | | came 


A 


_ very ſingular againit all aches 


B 
» 
'D 
E 
F 


indured the cold of our cxtreme winter, | 


zo16 THE SECOND BOOKE OF 'THE 1 
came to our viewe broken zit hath diuers bunches and valleies, euen as is to be ſcene in the ſides of 
the Cucumber, thatis furrowed,gurcered, or chamfered alongſt the ſame, & as it were laid by adi- 
rect line, with a welt from + end vnto the other : ypon which welt orline doſtande ſmall ſtarlike 
Thiſtles,ſharpe as needles, of the colour of thoſe of the Melon Thiſtle, that is to lay, of abrowne 
colour :the trunke or bodies of the bignes of a mans arme,or acablerope; fromthe middle wher 
ot, thruſt toorth diuers knobbic elbowes of the ſame ſubſtance, & armed with the like prickles that 
the body or truncke is ſet withall : the whole plant is thicke, far, & full of a fleſhic ſubſtance, hauin 
much juice like tharof Aloes, when itjs hardned, and of a bitter taſte: the flowers or fruit we haue 
no ccttaine knowledge of,onely faith my author , the lowers oro: at the top or extreme point of 
the plant,after which followerth fruite in ſhape like a figge,full of a reddiſh inice, which being tou- 
ched,ſtaineth the hands of the colour of red lead: the taſte is not vnpleaſant. | 
4 Theic hath beene broughtfrom the Indies a prickley Recde, of the bignes of a good big ſtaffe 
of the length of {1xe or cight faot,chamfered and furrowed, having vpon twolides, growing vntoir 
an vneuen membrane or skinnic ſubſtance,as it werea jagge or welt {et vponthe wing of agarmen 
and vpon the point of cuery cut or iagge armed with moſt ſharpe prickles : the whole truncke is 
filled full of a ſpungtous ſubſtance, ſuch as is in the hollownes ofthe brier or bramble. amongſt the 
which is to be ſeenc as it were the pillings of Onions, whereinare often found living things , thar 
arthefir{t ſeemeto be dead, The plant js ſtrange,ane brought drie from the Indies,therfore we can 
not write ſo abſolutely heereof as we defite, referring what more might be ſaid to a further conſid. 
ration,or a ſecond Edition, Gag OT by -.: 
| | * Theplace. | | | 

Theſe plants do grow vpon the mpunt Atlas in Lybia,in moſt of the Ilands in the Mediterranean 
ſea, inallthecoaſt of Barbarie eſpecially in Saint Cruxneete vnto the ſea ſide in a barren place 
there,cailed bythe Engliſh men Halfe Hanneken; which place js appointed for Marchantsto con. 
ferre of their bufines,cuen as the Exchange in Londonis: from which place my friend maſter /#;4z. 
am Martin, atight expest Chiturgion', did procure me the plants of them for my garden by his 
ſervant thathe ſent thirher, as Chirurgion of a ſhip: ſince which time I have receiued plants of di- 
uers others that hauc trauailed into other of thoſe/parts & coaſts: notwith{tanding they hauc nor 


| 


| | ! | Therone. | | 
They pur foorth their leaues inthe ſpring rime,and wither away at the approch of winter, 
| |} +1 1% Thenames. | 
It is called both in Greeke and Latine iveip& , Euphoy Liam : Plinie in one place putteth the 
herbe in the Feminine gender,naming it Euphorbia: the iniceis calledalſo Exphorbion , and ſoit is 
likewiſe in (hops, we are faine in Engliſhto vſe t]:c Latine worde, and to call both the hetbe and 
juice by the name of Euphorbium; for othcrname we haue none zit may be called in Engliſh the 
gum Thiſtle. EI £1 141 [ 
| &v Thetemperature. [ 
Euvhor bium thatis to ſay,the congealed iuice which we vſe, is of a very hot, and, as Gales ſaith, 
cauſticke of burning facultie,and of thinne parts: it is alſo hot and dry in the fourth degree. 
\ | | {%Theverthts. | | 
hegum Euphorbium,and 1 2.times ſo much oile, and alictle wax, is 
ofhe ioints, lameneſle, palfies, cramps,and ſhrinking of ſinewes as 
Ga/enin his fourth booke de Medrcamenth Secundun genera, declareth more atlarge, which to tc- 
cite atthis preſent,w. uld but rrouble you overmuch.. [| 


b - : 


Euphorbium mingled with oile of Bay and Beares greaſe,cureth the ſcurfe,8 ſcales of the head, 


An iwplaiſter made with t 


and pildnes,caufing the haire to grow agenc,and other Bare places being annoinred therewith. 
The ſame mingled with oile, and applied tothe terples offuch as are very fleepic,and troubled. 
with the lethargie,doth awaken andquicken their ſpirits againe. | | 
Ifit be applied tothenuque or nape of the necke, it bringeth their ſpeech againe that haue loſt 
it by reaſon of the avoplexie. | | | 4.4: F | 
Euphorbium mingled with vineger and applicd.taketh away all foule and euill fauoured ſpots , 
in what partof the bodic foever they bc, | | | Hh ] 


Being mixed with oile of Wal fAowers,as Meſues faith , and with any other oile or ointments, ic 
1 | Ic 


quickly hicatcrh fuch parts as arcouer colde. - 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |.” ' wor 

Itis likewiſe a remedie againſt old paines inthe Huckle bones called the Sciatica, | ow 

Acting, Fau!ms, Attuarim and Meſues do teport,thar if it be inwardly taken, it purgeth by ſiege 14 
water and legme, bur withall it fetrerh on fire, ſcorcheth and trerteth, not onely the throte and 
mouth bur alſo the ſtomacke,liuer,and the reſt ofthe entrailes,and inflamerh the whole bodice. 

For that cauſeit muſtnor be beaten ſmall, and itis to be rempered with fuch things as alay the I 
heare and ſharpneſle thereof, and that make glib and {lipperic, of which things there muſt be ſuch 
a quantitic as thar it may be ſuſhcient to couer all over the ſuperficiall or outward part thereof, 

Bur it is a hard thing foto coucrand fold ir'vp, or to mixe it, as thatit will not burnenorfcorch, K 
For thoughit be tempered with neuer ſo much oyle, if itbe outwardly applied ir raiſeth bliſters in 
them eſpecially that haue ſoft and render fleſh,and therefore ir is betternot to take it inwardly. 

It is troubleſome to beate it, vnleſle the noſtrels of him that beareth it be carefully ſtopped and L 
defendcd , for if it happerithat the hot ſharpenes thereof do enter into the noſezir preſently cauſerh 
icching,and mooticrh neezing ,and after that by reaſon of the extremitic of the hear, it draweth our 
abundance of fieFme and filch,and laſt ofall bloud, not without greatquanririe of teares, 

Butagainſt che hot ſharpnes of Euphorbzww it is reported, that the mhabirantsare remedied by M 
acertaine herbe which of the effe and contrary faculties is named-_Antewphor bium : this plant 
lkewiſe'is full of juice, which is nothing at all hoc and ſharpe,but coole and ſhimie,al aying the hear 
and ſharpnes of Exphorb/wn; we haue not yer learned that the old writers haue ſer downe anie 
thingtouching this herbez notwith{tanding it ſeemerh tobe a kinde of Orpine z which is the anti- 
dote or counterpoiſon againſt the poiſon and venome of Euphorbium, 


Of T hree leafed graſſe,or Medow Trefoile. (hap.4.77. 


*% 7 he kindes. 
T Here be diuers fortes of Three leafed grafles, ſome greater, others leſſer; ſome bring foorth 
flowers of one colour, tomeof another ; ſome of the water, and others ot the land; ſouc of a 
pleaſant ſmell,others ſtinking: and firſt of the common Medow Tretoiles, which are called in lcuh 
Shamrockes. HAR ng 
1 Trifolum pratenſe. a 2 Trifolum pratenſe flore atbo, 
Medow i retoile. Medow Trefoile with white flowers, + 


Eq 


2 


> \8& 
3 LANE OS 


1918 ' THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| | he deſeription. 


I Edow Trefoile bringth foorth ſtalkes] a; cubite long, rounde and ſomething liaicie: the 
| greater part of which ereeperh vpon theground , wheteon dogrowe leaues confiſtin 
of rhree joyned rogither,one _— a little from another; ofwhichthole thar are next 


1 
: 


the ground and rootes, are rounder, and they that growe on the vpper part longer; hauing for the 


. molt part in the middeſt a white ſpot like a halfe moone, The flowers come foorth on the tops of 


the ſtalkes.in a tuft or ſhort foxeraile care,of a purple colour, and ſweerte of taſte. The ſecede frow- 
cth in little huskes,round and blackiſh, The roote is long,woodie,and growerh deepe. | 
2 Thereis another of the field Trefoiles, diftcring from the precedenr cſpeciallyin rhe colour of 
the lowers : for as thoſe are of a brightpurple 3 contrariwile theſe are very white,which maketh the 
difference, EY 44A "RPE | . 44.5 
Thereis al{oa Trefoile ofthiskinde, which is ſowenin fieldes of the lowe Countries, in Italie 
| d} 


 andAiyers other places beyond the'ſeas, that commerh vp ranker and higher than thatwhich 


_ others loue the like ſoile. 


groweth in medoives , and is art excellent foodefor cattell both to fatten then?, and cauſe them 
to gine great ſtore of milke. |, | ! || - ; 1 | 

Likewiſe we haue inour fieldes a ſmaller Trefoile that bringeth foorth yellow flowers, agreater 
and a lefler, and divers others alfo, differing from theſe in divers notable pointes, the which to 
diſtinguith apart would greatly enlarge our volume, and yetto ſinall purpoſe z therefore we leaue 
them to be diſtinguiſhed by the curious, who may at the firſt view caſily perceiuc the difference,and 
alſothat they be of one ſtocke or kinred, | 


Common Medow-Trefoile gtowerh in medowes, fertill paſtures, and wateriſh grounds, The 


| They flower from May to the end of ſommer. | | 
|  # |} 7 1 wu 7hehames. (| Fes 
Medow Trefoile is called in Latine Trefolrwrn pratenſe :in high Dutch Uiſenklee tin low Dutch 
Ciaueren: in French Trefle and Trainiere, and YViſwnarus, as Marcellus an olde writer teſtifieth: 
in Engliſh Common Tretoile,Three leated graſſe; of fome Suckles, and Honiſuckles, Cockheads, 
and in Iriſh Shamrockes, | [| | 


WL * The temperatare. | 
Thelcaucs and flowers of Medowe'Trefoiles are coldeanddrie. 


| * Thewertues. i: =] 


A The decotion of Three leafed graſſe made with honie, and vſcdina cliſter, is good againſt the 


frettings and paines of the guts, anddriuech foorth tough and flimie humors that cleauc to the 
guts. | | | 


B Theleaues boiled with a little barrowes greaſe, and vied asa pultis', taketh away hot fwellings 


z 
” 


and inflamimarions., 


p 


C Oxenandothercatrell do feede of the herbe,and alſo calues and yoong lambes. The flowers arc 


acceptableto bees. 


D Plmiewriteth, and ſerteth it downe for certaine , that the leaues hereof do tremble, and ſtande 


right vp againſt the comming of a ſtorme or tempeſt. 


E TheMedow Trefoile (eſpecially that with the blacke halfe moone vpon the leafe) ſtampedwith 


it it be ſtrained and dropped therein. | 


Of flinking Trefoile,or Treacle ( laner. Chap.4.78 q 


alittle honie,raketh away the pin and web in the cies, ceaſerhthepaine and inflammarion thereof, 


| | | Thedeſeription. | . 
Reacle Clauer groweth vpright like a ſhrubby planr,with ſtalkes of a cubire and a halfe high; 
whereupon do growe nextthe ground broad leaues three joined togither, thoſe vpon the 
| ſtalkesare longer 'and harrower, The ſtalkes are coucred ouer with a rough euill coloured 
hairynes. The leaues are ofa darke blacke greene colour, and ofa lothſome ſmell, like che Pirch cal- 


Iced Bitumen in4aicimm, whereof ittooke his natne, The flowers growe at the rop of the ſtalkes ;n a 
| 4 E441 Pl | C 


. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. r019 
carkepurpliſh colour rending to blewnefle, in ſhape like thoſe of Scabious. The ſeede is broad, 
rovgh,long,and ſharpe pointed. The roote is ſmall and tender, and cannot'endurethe coldnefle of 
our winter,butperiſherhatrhe firſt approchithereof, «6 


- Trifolium birwninoſun. | : 
; Treacle Clauer.. RR? he PETEED 


| % Theplate. 
It growetlvnatorally,ſaith Fippiatros,not Fip- 
Pocrates Cor, inrough places, as Ruellizes trantla- 
tethic. In Germanie, Fraunce and England, it 
neuer commeth vp ofir ſelfe;zbut muſt be ſowen - 
in gardens, as my ſelfe haue prooued diucrs 
tines, and was conſtrainey to ſowe it yeerely, or 
eiſe it would not come Vp, neither of his owne 
ſowing orotherwife. | 
% The time. 
It lowreth not in my garden vntill the end of 
Auguſt, ' | 


*%* The names. 

Nietnder calleth/ this Trefoile m:7#72 + in 
Latine T r:foljum acutwn, or ſharpe pointed Tre- 
foile : of Plinie Trifolium odoratum, bur nor pro- 
perly,of others Trifo/jum Aſphalt ewn, ſine Bitu- 
minoſum,or StonePutchTrefoile, + 

Avnreen calleth it Tar for, and not Handaco- 
cha, as ſome have thought, for ynter the name 
of Hanaacochs CAureendoth comprehend Drof- 
corides his Loti,that is to ſay, Lotm 7 bana,f5lue- 
firis, and AEgypſia, which Disſeor:des contoun- 
deth onewith another in one chapter: in Eng- 
liſh it is called Clauer gentle, Pitch Trefoile, 
ſtinking Trefoile,and Treacle Clauer, 

% The temperature. 

This Trefoile called {ſþhaltewn, as Galen 
faith,is hot and dry,as B/tumenis,and thatin the 
 thirddegree. 
| | % The vertwes. [* 

Being drunke, it taketh away the paineof the ſides, which commerh by obſtructions orſtop- Aa 
pings,prouokerh vrine,and bringerh downe the deſired ſickneſle. 4 ; 

Mapooaget writeth, thatir doth not onely brifig them downe, but likewiſe the birth, not onely B 
inwardly taken,but alſo outwardly applied. If a woman,faith he,be not well clenſed after hir childe 
beating,giue hir this Trefoile to drinke in white wines =] 

yo Arg faith, that the ſcedes and leaues being drunke in water, area temedie for the pleuri- 
ie difhcultie of making water, the falling{ficknes, Be dropfic when it firſt beginneth,and for thoſe 
that are troubled with the mother. The quantitie to be taken at once is three drams of the ſecdes, 
and tower of the leaues. | | | | 

The leaues drunke in Oxymel,or a firupe of vineget made with honie, is good for thoſe that are T 
ditten with ſerpents. 

Some affirine rhat the decoQion of the whole plant, roore andleanes, taketh away paine from E - 
thoſe whom ſerpents have bitten, ifthey be waſhed therewith ; burif any other man a eng. pat vl- 
cer. be wathed with that water wherewith he was bathed that was bitren of the ſerpent, they ſay 
tiiat he ſhall be troubled in the fame maner that the ſtinged partie was. | | 


Some allo gine with wine three leaues, or a ſmall quantiric of the ſcedes intertlan agues, and in F . 
quartaine fewer,as a fure remedie againſt the firs. | 

The rootealfo is pur into antidotes or Counterpoiſons, faith Dioftorides, but otherancientPhiſt- G 
tiohs donor onely mixc the roote with them, butalſo the ſecede, as we may lee in Galen, by a grear 

| | | many 


The herbe ſtamped * applied vpon any enuenamed wound,or made with poiſoned weapon,it 


 &r | ly | wound 
 isno venemous matter to worke vpon, it doth no lefſe infe& thatpart, than if it hag ann 


performe in reſpect of 


I Trifoluwn Americum, 
Trefoile of America, 


= 
< 
a 


10 | | $$Thedyſeription. 
I ' Hree leafed grafle of Armeticahath diuers crooked, ya Ree ng this way and that | 


pp 
4 
b1 


way, and diuided into diuers branches: whereon do growe leaues like thoſe of the medow 

Trefoile, of a black green colqur,& of the ſmell of Pitch Trefoile, or Treacle Claver. The 
flowers growe at the top of the branches, made vpn a long ſpiked chaffic care of a white colour 3 
afterwhich commeth the ſecede, ſfomewhar flat, almoſt like toithoſe of Tares. The roote is long 
ſtrings of a woodie ſubſtance. | C [| | 


. 
. 


2 This Three leafed grafle, which Dodonexs in hislaſt edition calleth Trifolium cochleatum pri- 


wn, and L' Obelius vader the title of Fenum Bur eundiac wm, hath divers round fpcight ſtalkes, of a 

woodie tough ſubſtance, yer not able of ir ſelfe roſtand without a prop or ſtay: which ſtalkes arc 

< diuided into diuers ſmall branches whereupon do growe leaues/ioined three togither like _—_— 
ET | | th refoiles, 


' HISTOR1E) OF PLANTS. 1921 
Trefoiles-but ofa darkeſwartgreenecolour. The flowers growe atthe top of the ſtaſkes conſiſting * 
7 chafftie matter, of a darke purple colour. The ſeede followeth| contained in ſmall wrinkled 

huskes turned round, after the manner of a water ſnaile, The roote is thicke, compoſed of diuers 
rough threddie ſtrings, and laftethlong in my garden with grearincreale. 
| Y þ Rp”. | | 


,” 


Portingale Trefoile, | i Hart Trefaile, 


\ 


a 


tf 


" 


| FA \J 
7 | A \8 


* The deſcription. 


This Three leafed grafle of Salmanca,a citic as I rake it of Portingale, differeth not much from 
our field Trefoile: it hath many branches weake and render, trailing vpon the ground, of two cubirs 
anda halfe high : whereupon do growe leaues ſer togither by three V 599 aſtem; from the boſome 
whereofthruſt foorth render foateſtalkes , whereon do ſtand moſt fine flowers of a bright redde | 
tending to purple; after which come the {cede wrapped in ſmall skins,of a red colour. 

4 The Hart Trefoile hath very many flexible branches, ſer vpona ſlender ſtalke, of the length of 
wo ot three foore, trailing hither and thither, whereupon do growe letues joined rogirther by 
three on little ſlender footeſtalkes , cuery little leafe of the faſhion of a Hart, whereot ir tooke 
_ _ ; among which come foorth ſcalic, orchaffic yellow flowers, The roote is thickeand 
Radic 2 [1 | | yo Ig 
5 Thiskinde of Three leafed graffe is alowe herbe, creeping vpot the ground, The leaues arelike 
thoſe of the common Trefoile bur lefler, and of a grayith greene colour, The flowers are faire and 
yellow,faſhioned like thoſe of Broome; bur leſſer, after come three or fower round cods, wherein is 
containedround fecde. The roote is long and reddiſh. | 
| This codded Trefoile is like vnto the laſt deſcribed in euery reſpe,fauing thatthis plant is alto. 
gither lefſer which ſerrerh foorth the differencg. | 


5 Trifolmn 


1022 THE SECOND BOOKE 


5 Trifolium/ſiquoſum, 
S=Y © "Y 


7 Lotti incana,/mt Oxytriphyllun Seribony Largi. 
Hoarie Clauer, FY 


Wy 
\\/w”- — 
OY In, : 


6 


Ir, 


w— 
DINES 


| 


a 


*% Thedeſeription. 


7 There is a kinde of Clauer growing about 
Narbone in Fraunce, that hath many twiggic 
tough branches comming from a woodie roote, 
whereon are ſet leaues three togither, after the 
manner of the other Trefoiles, | non long, 
hairie, and ofa hoarie or ouerworne greene co- 
lour, The flowers are yellow , and groweatthe 
rops of the branches lice thoſe of Broome. 


| * Theplice. | 
| Theſcuerall ticles of moſt of theſe plants (et 
foorth their naturall place of growing: the reſt 


. growein moſt fertill fields of England, 


They flower and flourifh moſt of the ſommer 
monerhes, | | 
| | * The names. | 
There is not much to be ſaid as rouching their 


names,more than hath beene ſer downe. 


te Thetemperature and vertues. | 

The temperature and faculties of theſe Tre- 
foiles are referred vnto the common Medowe 
Trefoile, | | 


'Þ 


': HISTORIE OF PLAN 


. | 1023 
Of the great Trefoiles,or winged Clauers. Chap.480. 


There be divers of theſe great Trefoiles which do likewiſe differ in their kinde very notably. 


» 
© 


amm,Pes leports. 
Hares foore Trefoile, 


"o | maximus. | 
great Hares foote Trefoile, , 


2 Le 
The 7, 


Lictle 


N 


% The defer iption. 


1 T* He great Hares foote being a kind of Trefoile,hath a hard and woodie roote, full of blacke 
| threddie ſtrings: from whence ariſe diuers tough and feeble branches,whereupon do grow 
' longleaues,ſet vpon a middle rib by couples one againſt another, & one in the very poinr, 
making the whole leafe to reſemble thoſe of the Gregke Valerian : the flowers grow atthe top of 
( the tales , compoled of a bunch of graic haires: among the which ſoft matter commerh foorth 
{wall flowers of a moſt bright purple colour , ſomewhar retembling the lowers of the common 
medowe Trefoile , burfarre greater, | p 
2 Theſmall Hares foote hath a rounde,rough,and hairie ſtalke dividing it ſelfe into divers other 
branches; whereupon do grow ſmall leaucs;three joined togither , like thoſe of rhe ſmall yellowe 
Trefoile: the owers growe at the very pointof the ſtalkes, conſiſting of a rough knap or buſh of > 
hairesar downe, like that of Aopeeures , or Foxetaile, of a whitiſh colour tending to alight bluſh: 


the rote js ſmall and hard, | | 

There be*diuers other ſorts the face and ſhewe whereof will or may diſtinguiſh chemſelues , bi- 
cauſe they do all andeuery of thembeare the face of theformer , differing ſome in grearneſle, 
others in colour of the flowers, therefore itſhall ſuffice whar hath beene ſaide inrhe defcrprion. 


* The 


— 


to2 4 THE | SECOND BOOKE or. THE 


| eplace, || 
The firſt "HE 4 in the hicldes of Fraunce while; Spaine, and iS2 ſtranger i in Englandsyeri it grow. 
eth in wy garden. | 
The {mall Harefoote groweth among corne,  tſpeciall among Barly, and likewiſc in barren Pa- | 
ſtures almoſt cuery where, | | 


They flower and douiſh in lune  Iuly,and Auſt | 
| mw» Thet Barnes. [ 
The great Harefoote Trefoile is called of 7 regu Cytiſas, of Cordus Tri magnum, of I Obe. 
lis Legopurs maximum,and Logupotits: in Greeke xa9wmvg, ;In Engliſh _ one Haves fe _ 
The laſt, being the ſmalleſt of theft kindes of Trefoiles, isc and Pes Leports : in 
+ Dutch Laſen pootkens ; in pag Dutch Þaſrn: fuls : in French Pied d bY : OS ful Bl 


:foote. 


-: | W| The remeper ature and vertaes? 
A The temperature and faculties ate referred vrito the other Trefoiles, whereof theſe are kindes 
notwithſtanding Dieſeorides faith, that the {mall Hares foote/doth binde and drie. It Seppd\ nk 
'.. he,thelaske,ifit bedrunke with red wine. Bur ic muſt be giuen in agues,with water. 


Of. W, ater 'Trefoile, or Bucky Beaner Chap.481. 


1 Trifolium paludoſum maine, | | | -. ©: IU Trjlinn pp wine, 
' Great Marſh Trefyile. [1 *1|| || Little Marſh Trefoile. 


& 


| EY PE tom. | | 
He great Marſh Trefoile hath thicke far ſtaikes, weake and Bae Si full of a ſpungious evith, 
very ſiroothe, ahdof a cubire long: whereon do growe leaues like to thoſe of the garcen 
Beane, ſet vpon the ſtalkes three joined togither likethe other T Ttefoiles, ſmoothe,ſhining, 


and of adcepe greene calogt: Ro which coward the hs of the ſtalks ſtandeth a buſh of ſeat 


3, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1025 
like flowers of a white colour,daſhr ouer {lightlywith awaſh of light carnation,afrer which the ſeed 
followerh , contained in ſmallburtons, or knobby huskes, of a browne yellowifh colour like vnto 
Millet .and of a bitter raſte : the rootes creeþe divers waies in the muddie mariſhgrounde,being ful 
of ioints, white within,and full of pores,ang {pungie,bringing toorth divers by-ſhootes,ftalks,and 
leaues,by which meanesit is caſly increaſed,and largely multiplied, | | 
> Theſeconddifferethnor fromehe precedent,lamng ic isaltogither leſſer, wherin conſiſteth the 
difference, if there be any: for doubtlelle I; chinke it is the ſelte lame wn eachreſpec, and is made 
greater and lefler, according to his place of growing,clymare,and cquntrey. 

F--364 | Þ The place. | - 
Theſe grow inmariſh and Fennie places;and vpon boggie grounds almolt cuery where. 
| || -  % Thetime. "I 
They flower and flouriſh from Iune to the endof Auguſt, 
| | |  _ %e The names. | Ny 
Mariſh Trefoile is called in high Durch Biberktecgthatis to ſay ,Caſtoris T refolizm,ot Trifolium 
rigwn : in low Dutch of the likenes that the leaues have with the garden Beanes,Boceboomen, 
that is toſay, Faſelus Hircmus,or Boyle Hircina : rhe later Hecbaritts Call it Tr:folium piuſtre, and 
Paludoſum,ot lome 1ſopyrum ; in Enghih marth Clauer,marth Itefoile,and Buckes Beancs. 
| | v Thetemper ature and Vertues. | + 
The ſeede of 1/epyram, or Trifolium paluſtye, fairh Droſcorides, it it be taken with meade or honied A 
water,is good againitthe cough and paine inthe cheſt. 2s = 
Itis allo a remedie for thoſe that haue weake livers and {pet blond , for 2s Galen ſaith it clenſerh B 
and cuttech rough humours,hauing alſo ivined with it an altringent or binding qualitie, 


Of fwecte Trefoile,or garden Claner. Chap.4.82. 


T rifolium odoratum. | B22 \ 


Sweere Tictoile, | % The deſcription. 
W Wale 


Weete Tretoile hath an yprightſtalke, hol. 
lew,andof the height of two cubirs, diuid ing 
$\ 5d it ſelfe into diuers braunches : whercon doe 
-: { UH growe leaues by three and three, like to rhe other 

> A  Trefoiles, ſlightly and ſuperficially nicked in the 
edges: fromthe boſome wherof come the flowers, 
eucry one ſtancing ypon his owne ſingle foore- 
ſtalke,conſiſting of littlechaffie huskes, of a lighr 
or pale blewiſh colour afrer which come vp little 
heads or knops, in which lieth the ſeede, of a whi- 
tiſh yellow colour, and lefler thenthatof Fenu- 
grceke : the roote hath divers ſtrings : the whole 
plant is not onely of a whitiſh grvews colour, bur 
alig of a ſweeteſinell, and of a ſtrong aromaticall 
or ſpicie ſent, and more ſweete when it is dried: 
which ſmell inthe gathered and dried plant doth 
likewife continue long; and in moiſt and rainie 
weather, it {melleth more then in hot and cdrie 
weather: and allo when iris yet freſh and greene, 
it looſeth and recouereth againe bis ſmell ſeauen 
rimes a daie, whereupon the 01d wines in Germa- 
nic do call it Stcuengezetften iraut, that is, the 
herbe that chaunceth ſeauenrimes a day, 

*% Theplace. 
It is ſowen in gardens not onely beyond the 
ſcas,butin diuers gardens in England, 
Tre 1 | * The 


1026 


THE SECON 
1-4  -*% Thetime. 


D BOOKE OF THE 


by 277 DEF Maie,it doyreth in Iune and Iuly!, and perfeſterh his ſeede in the ende of Auguſt 
| ; | | | 3 


the ſame yeereit is ſowen. 


| *% The names. 


Itiscommontycalledin Latine T rifolium odoraturms : in mg Durch as we have aide Sleuen 


ge3eiten: inlow Ducch Seucnghethcrutit, char is roſay, ar 
Spaniſh Trebs! Real: in French Treffle ogoriferant : in Engliſh Gvecte Trefoile,and garden Clayer: - 


herbe of ſeauen times :1tis calledin 


irſcemeth to be Lotus vrbans, Or ſatma, of which Diofeordes\writerh in his fourth booke: neuer- 
thelefle divers authors ſet downe Melilor for Zargs vrbena and Trifolium odoratum , but nor pro- 


perly. 


Galen faith , t 


har ſiveete Trefoile do 


' '% Thetemperature. | 
thin a meane conco@t andery, andis ina meane and tem. 


perate facultic berweene hotand colde: the which faculties vhdoubredly are plainly perceiued in 

| | * Thevertues, | | 

A The ivicepreſled foorth ſaith D1zcorzdes, with/honie addet] thereto, clenſeth the vicers of the 
cies,cailed in Latine y we. eu taketh away ſpots in the {ame,called Albugines; and remooueth 


this ſweere Trefo:le, 


{uch things as do hinder the 
B . Theolle wherein the lowers are an 


t ; : 


eſtghr. 


s 


fuſed or ſtieped , doth perfectly cure greene woundes in yery 


Mort ſpace; it appeaſeth the paine of the gout, and all otheraches, andis highly commended 


againſt ruprures,and burſtings in yoong children. 
C Theiuicegiuen in white wine,cuteth th 


ofe that haue fallen|from ſome high place,auoideth con- 


gealed and.clotted bloud,and allo helperh rhoſs thar do pifle hloud,by meanes of ſome great rule, 
as was prooued lately vpon a botein Fanchurchſtreere,whom a cart went ouer, whereupon he Cid 
not onely pifſe bloud but malt woonderfully it guſhed foorth both ar his noſe and mouth, 

D Thedticd herbe laide amgng garments keeperh them fromMorhes and other vermine, 


Fen 


ITCCKE, 


- ww 4-54 th 


Cl 


Of Fenepreeke. C hap 4.83. 


+ The deſeription. 
| Enegrecke hath a long lender trailing ſtalke, 
4 'grecnc,hollow within, and divided into divers 
: * tmall branches: whereon do growe leaues like 


tholc of the medow Trefoile, bur rounder &lefler, 
 greene onthe ypper ſide, on the lowerfiderencing = 
ww an aſhcolpur: among which come ſinall white 
flowers , afterthemlikewiſe long ſlender narrowe 
 cods, in which do lie ſmal vneeuen ſeeds,of a yello- 
wiſh colour; which being dried,haue a ſtrong [me], 


yernot vnpleaſant: the roote is ſmal,and peritheth 
when & hathperfeRed his ſeede. Þ 
|| There is awilde kinde heereof ſeruing to little 


UM 


vſe,that hath ſmall round branches,full of knees or , 


ivints : from each ioint proceedeth aſimall tender 


| footitalke, whereon do row three leaues and no 


more, ſomewhat ſniper abour the edges , like vnto 
thoſe of Burgundie Haie: from the bolomes 
whereof come foorth ſmall lowers, which turnc 
into little cods : the roote is thicke , tough , and 
pliant, | 

| || wTheplace. | 

| Fenegrecke is ſowen in fieldes beyond the ſeas: 
ih Englandwe ſowe a ſinall quantitic therotin our 
gardens. || 


|| wThetime. | 
It hath two ſeaſons of ſowing, according t0 
741 Colupela, 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. 1029 


Colamella, of which ane is in September, at whar time it is ſowen that it may ſcrue for fodder 

againſt winter zthe other is in the end of Llanuary, orthe beginning of |Feoruaryz notwithſtanding 

we may notfow it vntill Aprill in England. . | 
| | *% Thenames,,. © | 

Itis called in Greeke ms, or as jtis founde in P4zy his copies Carphes: in Latine Fans Gre. 
cur: Columella (aith that it is called Srliqua: in Pliny we read $1lreia: in Parre Silicnla; in high 
Durch/Bockſhpne ; in Iralian F;emgreco : in Spaniſh CAfornas : in French Feregrec : inEnglith 
Fenegrecke. | | : 

| Ol * The temperature and vertues. | 

Itis thought. according to Galerin his booke of the faculties of nouriſhments , that itis oneof A 
thole Simples which do manifeſtly heate,andrhat men do vic it for toode as they do Luyines 3'for 
itis taken with pickle to keepe the body ſoluble, and for this purpoſe it is more agreeable then Lu- 
pines,ſceing 1t hath nothing in his owne proper fubſtance,that may hinder the working. 

The ivice of boiled Fenegreeke taken with honie,is good to purge by the ſtoole all maner of cor. B 
rupt humours that remaine in the guts, making ſoluble thorow his flimines, and mitigating paine 
thorow his warmnes, | Dy 

And bicauſe'it hath init a clenſing or ſcouring facultie, it raifeth humours cur of the cheſt: but C 
there muſt be added vnito it no great quantitie ofhony lealt the biting qualitie ſhould abound, 

In old diſeaſes of the cheſt withour an agew,Ffart dates are to be boiled with it, but when you haue D 
mixed the ſame/iuice preſſed out with a great quanritie of hony, and haue againe boilzd it on a ſotr 
fire toa meane thicknes,then ruſt you vſe jt long before mearte. | | | 

In his. booke'of the faculties of Sumple niedicines,he ſaith that Fenegreeke is hotin the ſeconde E 
degree, and dry inthe fuft : therefore it dothkindle and make woorſe hor inflammations , bur ſuch 
as are leſſe hot and more hard,are therewith cured by being watted and conſumed away, 

Themeale of Fenegrecke as Djeſcor:des writerh,is of fotce to mollifieand waſte away,being boi- F 
ledwith meade an4 applied it takerh away inflammations,as well inward as outward. 

Thefame being tempered or kneaded with miter and vineger , doth ſoften and waſte awaythe G 
hardnes ofthe wilt, | | ; | 

Itis good for women that haneeicher impoſtume, vJcer,or ſtoppings ofthe matrix,to bathe and H 
fit ia the decoction tlicreof, EE 

The ivice of the decotion preſſed foorth dorh clenſe the haire,taketh away dandraffe , fcovrerh I 
running fores of the head,calledot the Gretians 2»--1: being mingied with gooſe greaſe & pur vp 
, maner of a peſlarie', or mother tuppolitorie, doth open and mollifeall che paits abourtthe mo- 

er. | 

Greene Fenegreeke bruſed and pouned with vineger,is a remedy for weake and feebleparts, and K 
that are without skin,vIcerared and raw. | | 
| ThedecoQtion theicof is good againſt vicers in the low gut, and foule ſtinking excrements of L 
thoſe thathaue the bloudy firxe. | S107 | | | - 

Theoile which is oreſſed out thereof ſcoureth haires and ſcars inthe priute parts,” z M 

The decotion of Fenegrecke fecde,made inwine, and drunke with a little vineger,expelleth all N 
euill huomours in the ſtomacke and guts. | | | | 

Theſeede boyed in;wine with dates and hany,vnto the forme of afyrupe,doth mandifie$eolenſe O 
the breſt,and eaſcrh the paines thereof. | | | ICH Þ+-1 

The meale of Fenegreeke boiled in meade;or honied water , confumerh- and diffolnerh all colie P 
bard impoſtumes and twellings, and being mixed with the roots of marſh Mallowes, and Linſcede 
efeterhthe ſame.- | kicef (SS; RO ot 


[tis very good for women that have any greeſc or fwelling in the marrix;pr other lower parts if Q_ 
they bathe thoſe parcs with the decotion thereof made in wine,or fir ouerir and fieate. * 

[tis good to waſh thehead with the decodtion of the {eede;for it raketh away theſcurife, ſcales; R 
nittes,and all other ſuch like imperfe&ions. |» + 


: 4 
ef? ' 


Tit 2 ; Of 


\ ug 


028. THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


: Of Horned Claner and lathe Clants. (hap. 484. \ 


1 Lotwtrifolia corniculata. [ | 2 Lotws quaarifolia. 
Horned or codded Clauer, | [| Fower leafed grafle,- 


S (FIZ 
\ W 4 gn — 
D Cp TT? 
'F \ q FR — 
D E 


\a4, 
SW 
J/ « 
S/- FL: 
T2 
--” 


__ #4 p 
a” 


%. 


%. a 


Ys 
[AN 


SIEEEZ 
0/-IS 


| | 4 Thedeſoription. 


I Hehorned Clauer, or codded Trefoile, groweth vp with many weake and flender ſtakes 
lying vpon the grdunde: about which areſet white leaues, ſomewhar long, leſſer, and nar- 
rower then any of the other Trefoiles: the lowers grow at the tops,of the faſhion of thoſe 

of Peaſon of aſhining yellow colour, and very little; after which come certaine little crooked cods, 

_ long andflender, in which ate contained little rounde ſeeds: the roote is harde and woodic , and 


| ſendeth foorth yoong ſprings euery yeere, | 4 
2 This kinde of three leafed Grafle,or rather fower leafed Trefoile, hath leaues like vnto the com- 
mon medow Trefoile,ſauing that they belefſer, and of a browne purpliſh colour, knowne by the 
name of Purple Womrbeflurple Graſſe; whoſe flowers are in ſhape like the medow Trefoile,bur 
of a duſtie ouerworne colourtending to whitenes, the which doth oftentimes degenerate , ſome- 
time into three leaucs,ſometimes in fiue, and alſo into ſeauen, and yer the plant of his narure hath 
But fower lcaues and no more. | | | 
$ FF 3} 1 *TW&er. = 
_  Thefirſt growerh wilde in barren ditch bankes paſtures,and dry mountaines. Le 
Theſecond growerhlikewiſe in paſtures and fieldes, bur not 1o common as the other: andis 
plantedingardens. | jÞ j | [| F | 
acy lower in Iuly and Auguſt, | | 
} y and Augaſt rhe 


FI 
#7 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | 1029 
| __ *%*Thenanes. | 

The firſt is called Lotus Trifolia and Trifolium corniculatum: in Engliſh horned Clauer, or cod- 
ded Trefoile. {| | | Fe 

The other is called Lotws quadrifolia,or fowerlcafed Grafle,ot purple Woort,of Pena and Z'Obe- 
line, quadrifolnum faxum fuſcum Hortorwm. 1 JR 
| |. th Thetemperatire and vertues. be 15 þ 

Their faculties in working are referred vntothemedowe Trefoilesz notwithſtanding it is repor- A 
ted thatthe leaues of purple Woort ſtamped,andthe juice giuen to drinke, cureth yoong children 
of the diſcaſe called in Engliſh the purples. 


Of: Ml edick fodder,or Snaile Clauer. Chap.4. $5. 


1 Trifol;um Cochleatum. | 2 Trifolium Corhleatum marinumn. 
Medick fodder. as Medick fodder of the ſea. 


*%T he deſcription. 


1 *T\ His kinde of Trefoile called Medice, hath many ſmall and ramping ſlender branches, 
crawling and creeping along ypon the grounde, ſer full of broadleaues, ſlightly indented 
| abour s ges:the flowers are very ſmall , and of zpale yellowe colour,which turne into 

round wrinckled knobs, like the water ſnaile , or the fiſh called Periwinck., wherein is contained 

flat ſeed, faſhioned like a little kidney,jn colour yellowe, in taſte likea Fetch or Peaſe: the roote is 

{mall,and dierh when the ſecede is ripe: it groweth in my garden,and is good tofcede cattle far. 

2 Thiskinde Alſo ofFrefoile(called Meditamarina,in Engliſh ſea Taporingnesy _— 

the ſea (ide, about Weſtcheſter, & vpon the mediterranean ſea coaſt, $abour Venice Yhath leatics 

vety like vnto the commmon Medow Trefoile, but thicker, and conered ouer with a floekic hoarines 

like Gnafalium after the maner of moſt of theſe herbes : the flowers arcyellow:the ſeeds wrinckied 

like the former,but inquancitie they be leſſer. | TINY 1 ot monp 


Trt 3 The 


um, ww SI 
—_ = a 47 


UN EE ae ce ee ee ae a ne ee EEE eee ee 


10939 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


The firſt is fowen in the fieldes of Germanie, Iraly,and other countries tofecde theircartle AS We 
in England do Bucke whear,we haue a ſmall pe cob "a inour gardens,for pleaſures ſake, 

The ſecond groweth necre ynto the ſea fidein din aces. I | 

- [13-4 {|| ® Thetime, | 

 Medicamuſtbe ſowenin Aprill; itflowrerhin lune and Iuly; the fruiris ripe in the ende of Ay. 
gn; 7: 4-17 + © | oe Themes | 

Megick fodder is calledof ſome Trifolinm Cochleatum,and Medica: in French I herbe 4 Lina/[an: 
in Greeke #5 :in Spanifh TI ; of the Valentians,and Caralons H{fafs, by a wordeetther 
barbarous,or Arabicke: for the chicfe of the Arabian writers © Huicen doth call Medica Cer, Alaſe- 
letiand cAfasfaſa. LY: $-2my 4.4 | 

The other is'called ſea Clauer,and Medick fodder of the ſea. 

2 | we Thetemperatureand vertnes. 

Medick fodder is of temperature collefor which cauſcit is applied greene vnto ſuch inflamma- 
ling. | ih | | | 


. 


tions ,and infirmitics as haue neede ofc 
k / 


Of wood Sorrell,or Stubwoort. | Chap.486. 


I Oxysalba. WHIP 7 230 2 | 2 Oxys lutes. 
White wood Sorrell. [1-4 | Yellow wood Sorrell, 
1 a al | ) 7) 2...» < 


| by te Thedeſeription. | i129 | 
1 Xys Plinians,or T rifolin acetoſum , being a kinde of three leafed graſſc,is a lowe and baſe 
herbe,withourſtalke ; che leaues immediately ariſing from the roote vpon ſhortſtems, at 
:of their firſt comming foorth folden togither,bur afterwarde they do ſpread abroad andare 
of a faire light green colour,in number three, like the reſt of the Trefoiles, burthat cach leate hath a 
deep cleft or rittin the migddle:amongſt theſe laucs.com vp ſmall &weake tender ſtems,fuch » the 
| | | FM | 471 f ? | caucs 


HISTORIE: OF /PEANTS. * - 1032- 
leaues do grow vpon,which beare ſmall ſtarlike lowers,of a white colour with ſome brightneſſe of 
carnation daſhr ouer the ſame: the flower confifteth of five ſmall leaues, after which come lictle 
round knaps,or husks,full of yellowiſh ſeede:rhe roore is verie threddie,and of a reddiſh colourzthe 
whole herbe is in taſte like Sorrell,but much ſharper and quicker, and maketh better greene ſauce, 
then any other herbe or Sorrell whatlocucr.. | | 'Y | | 

2 The ſecond kindof| Oxys or wood Sorrell,is very like the former, ſauing that his lowers arc of 


a yellowe colour , and yeeldeth for his ſcede veſſels ſmall and long horned cods, in other reſpects 
alike. | | Bp. 4 | | 
iS | * The place. | | [ZE 
Theſe plants do growe inwoods, and vnder buſhes , in ſandieandſhadowieplaces in cuerie 
countrey, | | | 
tt | *% The time. | 
They flower from the beginning of Aprill vnto the end of Maic,and midft of Tune. 
in ION CR | *% Thenames, | $6.5 TAN 
Wood Sorrell of cuckow Sorrell, is named in Latine Tr:folrum acetoſum: the Apothecaries and 
Herbariſts call it Ca/eluye, and Panis Cucals, or Cuckowes meate , bicauſe either the Cuckowe 
feederh thereon,or by reaſon when it ſpringeth ſoorth and lowreth, the/Cuckowe fingeth moſt, ar 
which time alſo Ale/xzes was woont to be ſung in churches, Hieronymws Fraca#orins nameth it 
Luyuls. Alexander Renearitus faith , that it is called, Al;monra : mn high Dutch Sauretkiee : 
in low Dutch Coeckcoccrbyzoot 2 in French P z;z de Cocu: in Engliſh woode Sorrell,woode Sower, 
Sower Trefoile, Stubwoorr, Alleluia,and Sorre!l du Bois. Is | | 
Tris thoughtro be that which Phnycalleth Oxys,of which in his 29.booke 12.chapter,hewriteth 
thus, Oxys is three leafedz it is good for afecble ſtomacke,which is alſo eaten of thoſe that are bur- 
ſten: buc Ga/em in his 4. booke of Simples faith ; that Oxys is the ſame, which alſo Oxa/# or Sorrel! 
is; and Oxxysis found in P/zzy to be alſo Jwnci ſpecies,or a kinde of Ruſh, | | 
|  ** Thenature. | 
Thele herbes are colde and drielike Sorrell. | F112 
| % The vertnes. Ub #2: | 
Sorrell du Bois or Wood Sorrell, ſtamped and v{cd for greene ſauce, is good for them that haue A 
ſicke and feeble {tomacks, for it ſtrengthneth the ſtomacke, procureth appetite, and of all Sorrell 
ſauces is the beſt,not onely in vertue,burt alſo jn the pleaſantnes of his taſte. 
. Iris aremedie againſtputrified and tibing vicers of the mouth, irquencheth thirſt, and coolech B 
mightely.an hotpeltilentiall feauer, eſpecially being made in a ficup with ſugar, | : 


Of noble Lyuerwoort, or golden T refoile. Chap. 487. 


* The deſcription. 


4 Oble Liueroort hath many leaues ſpred vpon the grounde, three cornered, reſembling 
the three leafcd graflle,of a perfect graſſe greene colour: among which riſe vp diuers ſipall 
tender footſtalkes,of three inches long, on theends whereof ſtands one {mall ſingle blew 

flower,confiſting of f(ixc little leaues,hauing in the middle a ſewe white chiues : the ſeede 1s inclo- 

ſedin lictle round knaps , ofa whitiſh colout, which being ripe do ſtart foorth of themſelues : the 
roote is flender,compoled of an infinite number of blacke ftrings. | 

2 Theſecond is like vnto the precedent in leaues, rootes, and fcedes :the flowers heereofare of 

aſhining redcolour, wherein conſiſterh the difference, | Ba | 

3 This ſtrange three leafed Liverwoort differeth not from the former , ſawing that this bringeth 

foorrh double bicw flowers tending topurple,and the others not ſo, | * E's 

gow is another in my garden with white lowers, which in ſtalkes and eitery other reſpeRt is like 

others, LES 


- 


Ttt 4 | 1 Hepaticum 


103zz> THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


1 Hepaticum trifoliwn. © | |} '2 Hepaticatrifolia rubra. 
Noble Liuverwoort, | | || | |  '>NobleredLiuerwoorr, 


VP 


| 7 
Av N WW IX S 
EZA((NIN- SS 
j | AN $0) JEOD 
WIN | OY 
3 Hepaticamult:flora L Obely. is az SE 6.7 
Noble Liuerwoort with double flowers. | | 4-4 + Theplace. 
- Y JW | | Theſepretie flowers are foundin moſt places 
RE Nd i; of Germanie in ſhadowie woods among ſh:ubs, 
= # and alfoby high wates fides;in Iralic Iikewiſe,and 
| thatnot onely with the blew flower, buttheſane 
with double flowers alſo, by the report of 
Phonſms Pancizs doGtor of Phiſicke in the Vniver- 
ficic of Ferrara, a man excellently well ſeencin 
the knowledge of Simples. They do all growe 
likewiſe in my garden , except that with double 
fdwers,which as yet is a ſtranger in England. | 
| | | I *: The time. | 
| [They flowerin March and Aprill , andperſe& 
their ſeede in May. | 
| 1. $ Themes. | 
| Noble Luterwoort js called Hepatica trifolie 
Hepattca aurea,Trifoltum aureum,of Batt '#a Sar- 
dus Herba Trinitatis:in high Dutch Evel Leber 
| ktaut * in lowe Durch Evel Leuer crutjt : in 
French Hepatique: in Engliſh Gpldeu Tretoile, 
Three leafed Ljverwoort,noble Liuerwoort, and | 
Hetbe Trinitie, | 
[14 * The temperature. | | 
© |! Theſcherbesarecold and drie, with an aſtrin- | 
get.t or binding qualitie. | 


te NN APE pounars Frags 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1033 

| | | * The vertues. CTY gaJe - 

It is reported to be good againſt the weakneſle of the liuer, which praceedeth of an hot cauſe : A 

forit both cooleth , and ſtrengtheneth irnotalinle. — | x | | 
Baptifta Sardus commendeth it and writerth, that the chiefe verrue is in the roote, ifaſpoonefull B 

of the powder thereof be giuen cerraine daies togither with wine, or with ſome kinde of broth, it 


- 


proficeth much againſt the diſcaſe called Enterocele, th es 
R Of + Melilot,or Plaiſter (lauer. (hap. 488. 
% The khndes. us 


T Here be diuers ſortes of the Clauers,or Three leafed eraſe, wherewith plaiſtersand ſalues arg 
made,commonly called Mclilot, as ſhall be ſhewed, WO TEEN 


{4 


x CMelilotus Syrjaca odors, = 2 Melibtus Italica & Patinine, © 
Aſſyrian Clauer. | - IralianClauer, Fo 


*+ The deſeription. [rb 
1 T Hefirſt kinde of Melilote hath great plentieof ſmall, trough and twiggie branches, and 


ſtalkesfull of ioinrs or knees, in height two cubites, ſerfull of leaues three togither, hke | 

vnto Burgundie haie. The Howers growe at the top of the ſtalkesof a pale yellow colour, 
ſtanding thickly ſet and compa togither, in order of rowes, very like the flowers of Securidaca al- 

tera; which being vaded, there followe certaine crooked cods, bending agtarning vpward, with a 
ſharpepoint, in Phion not much vnlike a Parrets bill , wherein is Col ta Des leede very like Fene- 
rnnpes more flat and flenderer. Thewhole plant is of a reaſonable goo@ngl!, much like vnto 

onie,and very full of iuice : the roote is very tough and plianc. AL bits 


1034 THE SECOND BOOKE' OF. THE 
2 Theſecondkinde of Melilote hath finall anditetader vprighr ſtalkes, acubite high and ſome. 
what more,of a reddiſh colour,ſet fill of round leaues three togither,dented full of nickechere ang 
there confuledly about the edges, as though they! had beene bitren with mice, like the other Tre. 
foiles; and are of a very deepe greene colour ,thicke, fat, and full of ivice. The flowers grow along; 
the top of the ſtalkes, of a yellow colour, which turneinro rough round ſeedes as big as a Tare, and 


ofa pale colour : the whole plant hath alſothe ſauout of honie, and periſheth when ir hath borne 
his ſecede. E $54] | | be 0 
3 Melilotws coronata. | © 4 MelilotwGermanica. 
Kings Clauecr. LT + ot bal Germanic Clauer, 
I; WA | 2-3 
74x 


-- © 
4* Po 


- 


3 The deſeription. 


3 Thetkirdkind of Melilothath round ſtalks and1agged leaues ſet round about,not much vnlike 
the Jeaues of Fenegrecke , alwaies three growing [rogither hke the Trefoiles, and oftentimes 
couered over with an hoatinefſe, as though meale had beene ſtrowed vpon them. Tiiceflow- 
ers be yellow and ſmall, growing thicke rogicher ina tuft, which turne into little cods, wherein the 


ſeede is contained : the roote w 9mm and plianr, [1] 


[2 


4 Thefourth kinde of Melilote groweth to the height of three cubites, ſer full of leaues likethe 
common Melilote,and of the ſame ſauqur. The flowets grow alongſt the top of the ſtalks of a white 
colour, which curne into ſmall ſofthuskes, wherein is contained little blackiſh ſeede : the roote1s 
alſo tough and plianr, $8) F265 th a | + 

. 


TRL} + The ie. [ 
Theſe plants do growe in my garden ; the aol wx Engliſh Mclilote Pens ſetteth foorth for 
Melilotus Germanica (as though it grew not any where elſe) bur for certaintie,no part of the world 


dotlrenioy fo great plenty me IC fas England doth ,andeſpecially Eſſex: for I haue ſeene between 
Sudburie in Suffotke agar LinEſſex, and from Clare ro Henningham, and from thence to 


Ouendon, Bulmarega 
inſomuch that ir dot 
and as a weede thar| 


Celath, verymany acres of carable/paſtuce ouergrowen with the ſame 
xy ſpoile their land, bur the corne alſo, as Cockle or Darnell doth, 


adeth ouer that corner of the ſhire. 


=: 
of 


&The 


\ 


. 


folum Vr ſinum,or Beares Tre 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
| | ; w%Thetime. | 
Theſe herbes do flowerin Iuly and Avguſt. iN 
| Ar | te The names. | 

| Plaiſter Clauer is calledby the generall name Metriotws,of ſome Trifolium odoritums yer there is 
another ſweete Trefoile,as hath beene declared. Some call it Trifo/ium Equinum,and Caballinum, or 
Horſe Trefoile,by reaſon it 1s ; fodder forhorſes, who do grcedily feede thereon; likewiſe 7r1- 
| oile, of F wchſrus Saxifpaga lntea, and Sertula Campana : of Cato Serts 
Campanas, which molt do name Corona Regia: in high Durch Groote Steenclaueren : of the Ro- 
maines and Hetruſcians Trjbolo,as Mathiolns writeth : inEngiiſh Melilor, and Plaiſter Clauer : in 

Yorkſhire Harts Clauer, & | | 


1035. 


» The temperature. | | 
Melilote,faith Galen,hath moreplentie of hot ſubſtancerhan cold (thatis toſay, hot and driein 
the firſt degree) it hathalſo a certaine binding qualitie, beſides a waſting and ripening ficultie. 
Dioſcorides ſhewerh,that Meliloteis of a binding and molli{ying qualitie, burrhe mallifying qua- 
litic is not proper vnto'it: but in as mich asitwaſtech away, and digeſteth humors gathered in hor 
ſwellings,or ogherwiſe : for fo far doth it mollific or ſupple that thing whick is hard, which is not 
properly called mallifying, bur digeſting and waſting away by vapors : which kinde of qualitic the 
Grecians call Hzp:prox3r: | | | 
| | t% Thevertwes. HE] 

Melilote boiled in ſweete wine vntill it be foftif you adde thereto the yolke of a roſted egge,the A 
meale of Fenegreeke and Lineſcede,the rootes of Marſh Mallowes andhogs greace {tamped togi- 
ther, and viedasa pultisor cataplaſina , plaiſterwife, dothaſlwage and ſoften all manner of ſwel- 
lings eſpecially about the marrix,tundament and genitories,being applied vnto thoſe places hor. 

With the iuice hereof,oyle, waxe, rofine and turpentine, is made a moſt ſoueraigne healing and B 
drawing emplaiſter,cal led Mclilote plaiſter, retaining both the colour and ſauour of the hatbe, be- 
ing artificially made by a skiltull Chiturgion, [ESP - 

The herbe bo iled in wine and drunke prouoketh vrine,breaketh the ſtone and ſwageth the pain C 
of the kidneies, bladder,and belly,and ripeneth flegme, and cauſcth it ta be eaſily caſt toorth, 

The juice thereof droppedintothe cies cleereth the ſight, conſumerh, diflolneth, andcleane D 


g Aerh away the web,pearle, and ſpot in the cies. 


Melilote alone with water healeth Zecentes melicerides, a kinde of wens ſo called, and alſo the E 


running vicers of the head,ifit be laid ro with chalke, wine and gals. 


Itlikewiſe mitigateth the painc of the cates, if the juice be dropped therein mixed with alittle F > 


wine, and raketh away the paine of the head, which the Grecians call zeaxza54s, eſpecially if the 
head be bathed therewith, and alirtle vineger and oile of Roſes mixed amongſtir. 


Of Pulſe. Chap.489. 


: | W% 7 he kindes. i 
Here be diuers ſortes of Pulſe,as Beanes,Peafon, Tares, Ciches, and fuch like, comprehended 
vnder this title Pulſe : and firſt of the great Beane,or garden Beane, | 


| | * * The deſcription. | 

I He great Beane riſeth vp with a fower {quared ſtalke, ſmoothe, hollowe, withour iointes, 

long and vpright; which when it is thicke ſowen, hathnoneedeof propping , bur when ic 

is ſowen alone by itſelfe, it ſoone falleth downe to the ground: it bringeth foorth long 
leaues one ſtanding from another, conſiſting of many growing vponone rib or ſtem, every one 
whereof is ſomewhat fat,ſet with vaines,ſlipperie, more long thawround, The flowers are cared,in 
forme long, in colour either white wich-blacke ſpors. or of a blackiſh purple: afterthem come vp 
long cods,thigk,ful of ſubſtance,flenderer below,frized on the inſide with accreaine white wool as 
it were, or ſoft flockes ; which before they be ripeare greene, and fremgrdes being drie, they are 
blacke and ſomewhat bard,as be alſo the cods of Broome, yer beth 
ter: in which are contained three, fawer,or fiue Beanesſeldone rihete 
ta mans naile, great,and oftentimes of the weight of halte a dram3, 


werthan rhoſeand grea- 

broad, tar, like almoſt 

thegolt partwhite, ___ 
4M 


=> Therootes hereof are long,and faſtened with many 


1036 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
and then of a red purpliſheolour, which in their vpper part have a lone blacke n ; 
the colour whereof i5h white greene; the skin of tt Fruir, or Beane is clolaly (rn min ra a 
artbeingdrie is hardand found, and eaſily cleftinſunder, andit hath on the one fide an euidec, 
Cabs of ſprouting, as haue alſo the litcle aus 4) Peaſe, Ciches, and many other Pulſes, 
rings. | 
2 The ſecond kinde of Beane(which Pexeſerteth Gark vaderthe title of Sylr#ris Gr eco 
\Faba, and Dodonews, Bona Phaſeoluy maior, which may be called in Engliſh Greeke Beancs) hath 
ſquare hollow ſtalkes like the garden Beanes, bur ſmaller. The leaues be alſo like the commor 
Beane, fauing that the endes of the rib, whereon thaſe leaues do growe, haue at the very Ky 
ſmall rendrels orclaſpers, ſuch as the Peaſe leaues haue, The flowers arc in faſhion like the for 
mer, but they are of @ bright red colour: which being vaded, there ſucceede long cods tha 
are blacke when they beripe, within which is incloſed blacke ſeede as big as a Peaſe, of an vnplea. 
{ant taſte andyauour, | | | 1 - "BY oy 


I Fabamaior bortenſi.. | | || 54) | 2 Fabaſylueſtric. 
The great garden Beane. | | | | The -—"7 «ng 


- 
PIs. p ] 
—— 
"— 


CN P 


P/ 
JA" 


ay " 
Oe 


\\ A, 
- 4 


aw, 


wy 160268 * The place. f 
The firſt Beane is ſowen in fieldes and gardens every where. | | | 
This blacke Beane is fowen it) a few. mens gardens, who be delightedin varictie and ſtudic of 


& 
bo 
E 
> 


hcrbes; whereot I haue greatplenty in my garden, | 
| © | | % Thetime. [1:34 77) | | 
They flower in Aprill and May, and that by parcels, andthey belong in flowring: the fruite is 
ripc in lune and Iuly. wal if | 4 1 15 | | 
iT. + Thenenes. || 


— Thegarden Beaneis called Latine Febe : in Engliſh the garden Beane : the field Beane isof 


the ſame kinde and hame, althe pg a the fertilitic of the ſoile bath amended and altered the fruite 


into a greater forme, | | 


 HISTORIE OF PLANTS. $037 


The blacke Beane, whoſe figurewe.haue ſet foorth in the ſecond place, i 15 called Faba ſlueſtris, 
of ſome thought robe the true philtcall Beane of the ancients, wherupon they have.namedir Fabs 
waterwn,and alſo Fzba Grecorwn, or Greeke Beane, Some would make our garden Beane to be the 
true Fhfealrs or the kidney Beane, of which number Dedenews is chiefe, who hath fo wrangied 
and rutfled among his relatiues,that all his antecedents mulſtbe caſt out of the doores: tor his lon 

andredious tale of a tub, we haue thought meere ro commit to obliuign, It is called i Greeke 
xe: vheruponthe Achenians feaſt daies dedicated ro Apolp werename)! -+4ca,in which Beanes 
and pulies were lodden; in Latine its alſo called Faba freſa,or fradta, broker or | bruiſed Beane, 


*% The temperature and Verlues. 


The Beane before it be ripe, is colde/and moiſt, being drie it hath powerto binde andreftraine, a 
according to ſome authors : further of the remperature and vertues out of Ga/ey. 

The Beane(as G/en ſaith)in his booke of Faculties of nouriſhments,js winkie neate,although i it B 
beneuer ſo much ſodden,and dreſied any way. 

Beanes haue not a cloſe and heauic ſubſtance, bur a ſpungie and light, and this ſubſtance hath a '#* 
ſcouring or clenſing facultie for it isplainly ſeene, that the meale of Beanes clenieih awaie the 
| fiichofthe skin,by reaſon of which quality i itpaſſerh not ſlowly thorow the belly, 

 Andſecing the meale of the Beanes is windie,the Beanes themſelues bo they be boiledhole and D 
eaten,are yet much morewindie. 

Yetit they be parched they lote their windines , but they are harder o digeſtion, anddo ſlowlic E 
deſcende,and yeelde vnto the body thicke or prolle nouriſhing iuice-: but if they be eaten green be- 
fore they be ripe and dried,the fame thin gl hapnerh tothem, which is incident.co all fruits that are 

caten before they be fully ripe; that isroſaie , they giue vnto the bodie a moiſt kinde of nouriſh- 
ment,and therefore a nourithment more full ofexcrements nor onely inthe inner parts, but alſo in 
the outward, and whole body thorow : therefore thoſe kinds of Beanes do lefle nourih, burthey 
do more (peedily __ thorow the belly, as the ſaid author in his booke of the Faculties of Siuyple 
medicines ſaith,thatthe Beanc is moderately colde and drie. 

The pulpe or meate thereof doth ſomewhart clenſe, the skindotha lietle binde. A. F 

Therefore divers phiſitions haue giuen the whole Beane boiled with | vineger and water tothoſe G 
that were troubled with the bloodic flixe,with laskes,and vomitings; | 

It raiſerh legme out of te chelt and lungs, bein outwardly applied it drieth without hun the H 
wateric humaxrs of the gout. Ve haue oftentimes y fd the ſame veg boiledi in water,ando mixed 
with {wines greaſe. 

We hauelaid the mcale therepf with Oxymel,or ſirupe of vineger boch ypon bruſed and woun- 1 
ded finewes, and pen the wounded partes of ſuch as haue beene mY orſtung , totake mﬀuy the 
heric heate. 

Italſ> maketh a oood plaiſter and pultis for mens tones and womens paps: for theſe partes K 
when they ate inflamed, haue neede of moderare cooling, eſpecially when {ve Paps are Famed 
thorow the cluttered and congealcd milke contained in them, | 

Alſomilke is dried vp with thatpultis,” | | 

The meale thereof(as Dio/corides further addeth)being rempered with a meale of Fenugrecke M 
and Honje,doth take away blacke and blew ſpors which come by dry beatings, and waſteth awaie 
kemels vnderthe cares, | 

ith Roſe leaues, Frankincenſe , and the white of an egpe , ckeeperh backe the watering of N 
the cies;thepin and the web,and hard {wellings | 

Being tempered with wine,it healerh fifFulior tons,and Atripes of the cies. T 
The "os being chewed withoutthe Skin, i is applied tothe forchead againſt rheumes nod fal- Þ 
ling downe of humors. 

Being bciled in wine, it raketh away the inflammation of the ſtones; | © +511 | 7Q_ 

The skinsof Beanes applied rothe place where the haires were 6 packed Pp, wil norſuffer R 
them to growe big,butrather conſumerh their nouriſhment. + |) 

Being applied with: Barly meale parched andolde oyle;, cheywaſte awaythe Kin gs endif; S 

The decoRtion of them teructh to.diewoollenclothwithall: --=: T 

This Beane being dimded into twoparts (the skintaken off) by hich! it wasnaturally ined y 

either 


10338 . THE SECOND BOOKE| OF THE 
gither, andapplicd, ftancheth the blond which dorh roo much/iſlue footth after the biting of the 


horſleach,ifthe one halfe be laid vpon the place. | | »& 
X Theblacke Beane is not via with vs ar all, ſeeing as we haue ſaide,it is rare, and ſowen onelyin 


a few mens gardens,who be delighted in varierie and ſtudic of herbes, 


wY of | \dney Beane. | Chap.4.90- 


: 
| | ii &* The kindts. | 

T He ſtocke or kinred of the Kidney Beane are wognderfull many ; the difference ef) pecially cons 
4 ſiſteth inthe colour of the fruit : there be other differences, whereof to write particularly, 
would greatly ſtuffe our volume with ſuperfuous matter, conſidering that the ſimpleſt is ablety 
eiſtingutſh apart the white Kidney Beane from the blacke, rhered from the purple, and likewiſe 
thoſe of mixt colours from! thoſe that are onely of oe colour ;as alſo great ones from little ones, 
Wherefore itmay pleaſe yout9becontent with the deſcription of ſome few, andthe figures of the 

reſt,with their ſeucrall titles in Latine and Engliſh ,reterring their deſcriptions vnto a further cons 
ideration,which otherwiſe would be an endleflc labour,or ar the leaſt needleſſe. 


1: Phaſeolus albus. | 5 is; | | 2 ÞPhaſeoluniger. 
White Kidney Beane.' | | | Blacke Sidney Beane. 


| | | | *% Thedefereption. T : 
I He firſt kinde of Phaſeotedor garden Smilax, barti long andſinall. branches growing very 
© Þ- bigh, raking held vithhisclalping rendrels/vpon'poles and ſtickes;;and whatſoever ſtan- 
| deth neere ynto him,as doth the Hop'or Vine, which are fo weake and tender.that without 
ſich props or ſupporters; theyare notable roifuſtaine chemſelues, but willcun ramping onthe 
ground fruitlefic : pon the bratches do 'growe broad leanes almoſt like lane; growing togither by 
three, as inthe common Trefoilcor Three leafed gtafie : among which come the flowers, that do 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1039 
varic and differ in their colours, according to the foile where they growe, ſometimes white, fome- 
::nesred;& oftentimes of a pale color : afterwards there come ourlong cods,wherof ſom are crqo- 
ked,and ſome are ſtraighr,and in thoſethe fruit is contained,ſmaller thanthe common Beane,fom- 
what flat,and faſhioned like a Kidney, which are of diuers colours I:ke vnto the fowers : whereof. 

- forthe molt part,theſe arc white, | | Sd 3 5 
> Thereis allo another Dolzchus or Kidney Beane,leſler,ſhorter,8e with ſmaller cods, whoſe low- 
«5 and fruite are like in forme to the former Kidney Beanes, but much lefler, ans of a blacke 
colour, | iP 


3 Smilax hortenſis rubre. 4 Smille hoytenfss flana. 
Red Kidney Bcane. | Pale yellow K:0ney Beane, 


PN yl ® JESS 
OCR 
INS 


K N . ths 
<A! 
7 


* The deſeription. 


3 Thereis likewiſe a certaine other ſtrange Kidney Beane, which doth alſo winde it ſelfe abour 

poles and props neere adioining , that hath likewiſe three leaues hanging vpon one ſtem, as haue 
the other Kidney Beanes, but cuery one is much narrower andallo blacker : the cods beihorter, 
plainer and fatter, and containe fewer ſcedes. tpn | 
4 This Kidney Beane differeth not from the others,butonely in the c6lotr of the fruit which arc 
of a pale yellow colour,vhecein conlilteth the difference, - % | 


: 


5 Pha telus 


Ae" It 


L11 

< > 

| WP 

= 
O 

| bet 
OO 
©- 
AS 
Q 

I 4 
—S 
-O 
—_ 
Ly 

6 


1949 


| 6 Pha 


VIKWN., 


ad 


ſe 


| The Braſile Kidney Beane in his full bignes. 


d 
_; 
1 
. 


dl. 


/alganuns. 


5 Phaſeolus Bra 


& 


Kidney Beaac of Bra 


- 


” 444 4 5 ' -_ W-4 PF - 
1 FF EETTTEFT/ LI Ms PHE 4 ” 
ord AERTNLS bf Lo gd, Loh o Er 24 LIL ; 


 AMAT VV WIG ( 44 


: VP, f # '#{# F a 


% 


Vat / 4 ", 
ee —TYY IIS-Y LE I * 
T7 —— ——— 
= : \- %. va 
NY FT} 
RR uy 


POITNEES 


WY2.Þ 
- 474%, 


ar LEE 


. he # - - ” | X 
- -W- CON oy 
=> , Say w_ © 
SF ee en 


- < 


- 
&<. -” 


” 
jo — 
- " a"; 4 A ” * if 
4 Y ” , Fe HE! a : ' 6 
" . | wo _ any H i 


JOS: ] 
, z Go ls . [4 Y , 3» = , 


3 


- 


8 Phaſe 


tracts. 


1CA, 


ARIES. 
12 of Amer! 


pur 


| Kidney Beal 


Purging 


"1 


s 


4 Kidney Beave of Egype. 


colus AEg 


4 
The party co 


Ph 


loure 


£ 
I 


i 


Mars) » W». " 


gg 4 ts iu 


vu j08 _ 


£ 


\ 


Om) JJ ORl 


\ 


i 
\ 


HISTORIE OF 


1 Phoſtoloram 12. genere. 


2 Phaſeol Braſiliani 1 2.028674. 


12. Sorts of kidney Beanes. 3 | . 12,Sorts ofkidney Beanes of Brafile. 
Wide : 


3 


- 


| * The place. | | 

Kidney Beanes doeafily and ſoone ſpring vp, Larry owe intoa very great length; being ſowen 
heere vnto long poles faſtned hard by them, or hard by atbors and banquerting places, otherwiſe. 
it hieth flat on the grounde, it (lowly commeth vp, it hardly bringeth foorth fruite, irbecommeth 
faultie and ſmitted,as 7 heophraſtus writeth., | K-12 Sv 

| rs % Thetime. | 

Itis ſowen in the ſpring,eſpecially in the midſt of Aprill , butnor before:the fruite is ripe about 

theend of fommer. _ | V | | 


POE] ww Thenames. 

Hippocrates ,Dioctes,Theophraſtus,and moſt of the other old writers docall it #*»2-: diners of the 
dienes of the ſeedes do name itaidu, and xiG tin Latine Siliqua: Dioſcorides callerh it Smilex, bis 
cauſe ir climeth vp as $m/ax doth,and rakerth holde of props,ſtaies,and ſhrubes ſtanding neere vn- 
toit: other name it geob2er, a Diminitiue derined from pd-wes: for pxowey and packoncr,are not ones 
the ſelfe ſame pulſecalled by diners names as ſome ſuppoſe, but ſundry fruites one differing from 
theother,as Galen inhis firſt book of rhe Faculties of nouriſhments doth ſufficiently declare where 
heintreateth ofthem borh.For firſt he diſputeth of Phaſehiand Ochr;Beanes, and Pealezthen after- 


£ 


wards others comming betweene,he writeth of Dolichw,which alſois named Phaſeolwrand thought * *- - 
he may be thought to doubtwhat maner of pulſe that is which Theophraſtwscalleth Dolichms, not- 
withſtanding he gathereth andconcludeth rhar itis a fruire of a garden page Iralie , andin Ca. 
ra,orowing in the fieldes,which is informe longer then the Cichlings, andwas commonly called 
In his time Faſeolms, Ofhis opinion is Pau{ws CAEginets, writing of Praſelns, which henameth Do- 
lichus,m the 79.chaprer of his firſt booke, Moreouer Faſe/us was in times paſt a commonpulle in 
Iraly and RomeaH Bidcbas aſttange pulſe,for Columelis and P alladizs writers of husbandry, have 
mace mention of the ſowing of Fsſe{w; and Yirgill callethit —_ inthe firſt of his ag ar 1 
FE” 4 Vvv 1 ur 


1042 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
bur concerning the ſowing of Dolrchus or Kidney Beane, none of the Larines have written 
fon thatthe ſame was rarein Italic , and ſowen onely in gardens, as Galenhathaffirmed b 


by rea- 
oor” my 4 'm De EO NARS} Dating ic 
oftentimes a garden plant,andiſhewing that theſame ,as we haue ſaide,is ſowenin Cariazandlite. 
wiſe D#oſcoridesnameth it cine t1miz, that is to fay, Smilax hortenſis, or garden Smilax , bicauſe ir 
growerh m garden s,who alſo writin Sie in another ſeuerall ter, ſhewerh plainly th At Sewe- 


 L1x hortenfis,or Dolichas is mother plant diff-ting from Feſelu,which he nameth Fhaſiolus. 

For which cauſes iris not to be dubred3bur that Faſelu with three ſyllables, differeth from F-Y4 
[eolus with fower fyllables,no otherwiſe than C:cer,Cicercula, and Ciceradiffer, which notwithſtan- 
ding be neere one to another in names : and it is not to be doubted bur that they are deceiued, who 
thinke itto be one and theſel{clame Pulſe called by ſundry names. 7 


This plantis named in Englith Kidney Beane,Sperage Beanes,ofſome Faſelles,or long Peaſon 
French Beanes, garden Smulax, and Romane Bgancs : in French Fears de Ronmne : in Dutch, 
Turckgboonen, = {| i [© || | 
| | | # The temperature, | 
Kidney Beanes,aSTippocrates teacheth, do more looſe ons than Peaſon; they are leſſe win. 
dic,and nouriſh well, and no lefle than Peaſon, as Deeles ſaith Shed be alſo withour ingendring 
windinefle at all.The ArabianPhuſitions ſay that they are hot and moiſt ofnature. 

+ o Thevertues. | | s 4 

A Thefruitand cods of Kidney Beanes boyled togither before they be ripe, and buttered, and ſo 

eaten withtheir cods, are exceeding delicate mearte, and do notingender winde as the otherPulles 
B Theydoalſogentlylooſe the belly, prouoke vrine, and ingender good blood reaſonably well; 
butif you eatethem when they be ripe, they are neither toothſome nor wholſome. ,Thereforethey 
are tobe raken whileſt they arc yer greene and tender, whichare firſt boyled vntill they bertender; 
 Athenistherib orfinew that doth run alongſt the cd to be taken away: then muſt they be pur into 
. . aſtonepipkin,or ſome other yeſlell with burrer, and ſer to the fire againe to ſtew, or boyle gently: 
which mcate is very wholſome,nouriſhing,and of apleaſant taſte. 


roy 


Of the flat Beane called Lupine, Chap.4.91. 
T Here be diuers ſortes of Lupines, ſome of the garden, andothers wild; ſome white, others 


blacke, andalſo of mixt colours, 


. LH. | % Thede 6k java f 
Tz *T* Hetameor garden Lupine hath round hatd ſtems, which of themſelues do ſtand vprigi 
| without any ſuccour,helpe or ſtaic : the leaues conſiſt of fiue,ſixe,or ſeven ioincd togitier, 
like thoſe of the Chaſt tree, greene on the vpper ſide, and on the neather fide wiitgend 
downiez andin the cucning about the ſetting of the ſunne they hang flagging downwardes 5 
though they were withered : among theſe there commerh yp atuft of flowers of a pale colour, 
' which turne into great roughcods, whercin is the fruite, which is flat andround like a cake, of a 
white colour, and bitter in taſte : and where they cleauevnto the cod, in that part they hauc a cer- 
taine dent like alittle nauell. This Lupine hath bur one roote, which is ſlender.and wooGic, having 

hanging on it a few {mall chreds like haires. | ! 
- 2 low Lupine is like to the garden one in ſtalke andleaues, yet both. of theſe leſſer and 
| ſhorter, Iphath beaurifull lowers of anexceeding faire golde yellow colour, ſweere of ſmell,mace 
vpintoaneare of thecglourof the yellow Violer, and Bro yhar of the ſmell: the cods are livall, 
hard,ſomewhar hairiE: the ſecdes be litcle,flar,round, in taſte extreme bitter,of ſundrie colouts, ll 

fauoured,far leſſer than the rame one. oy | 


z 


}; 
[1 
, 
- 


3 Theblew Lupinesare longer thanthe yellow and diuided into more wings and branches ; the 
As be lefler and thinner:the flowers nall andlefler than the yellow,of a blew colour : the ſeeds 


be allo of Ciuers colours, birter,and leſſer than avy of themall,. 


1 Lupin 6 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS 


1 Lupinus /atiuts. 116 fiore lates, 
| Garden Lupines. ' Yell mr {6 


1043 


1 goof 4 | WW 4 Wt 
w___ | 


7 "as 


5 \ OP 170A 


Q I p ys þ ATE lip DP 
M1 LAS F=\\ w/ * 


= S mn Fr 
Polv> Q 0x4 oo 4 / 


A 22, 7A \W 
4 "LE! <= y FA 
Te WA RR * 


WW 0 202 A\ /;» 
VAR 


3 Lapin fore ceruleo. / en%;e, 409 T7 be pace andeime 
'* Blew Lopinios. , faith Theophra#us, a fandy and 
| 23S, bad Mfoyien t ey Rardly come epi itrtilledplaces, be- 
ing of their owne nature wilde, They.growe in my 
garden, and m other mens gardens T4 London. 
They are plantcd in Aprill, and bring foorth their 
+ frviteart twoorthree ſundrie times,as though it did 
. floweroften,and bring foorth many crops, the firſt 
in May, the ſecond in Iuly, the laſt in September, 
burit ſeldome commerh ro ripenes, By 
; * Thenanes. Want > 
' "This Pulſe is named in Greeke ON" I's "P 
"tine Lupines, and Lupin fetiwus : in high Dutch 
"* Feinbonent? in TIratian Expo domeſffreo in Spaniſh 
Entr amocos : in the Brabanders: language” Cit th- 
booncn,and Lupmcn: in French Zapins:in Englith 
GardenLupine,rame Lupine,and of lome atter the 
' GermainnameFigbeahe, © 97! 
& The temper ature DE wvertues. 
Theſeedeof the garden Lopine is ma/zermr,that 
isrofay, much arid often vied; as Galey (aith in his 
' books of the faculties of nouiſhmers: for the ſame 
being boiled and afterwardsReeped in faire water, 
wntil ſuch time as it doth altogirher loſe his natural 
bitternes,8 laſtly being ſeafoned with a reafonablc 
quantitie offalr, itisearen with pickle. The Lupine 
isof an hard 2nd carthy ſubſtance, wheretore iris 
As Vvyv 2 neceſlarily 


#1” 
wc 


(4 
- 
* 
> 


- 
&1.) 


X%2 


$044 THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 
neceſſarily of hard digeſtion, and conraineth in it athicke iuice, of which being not perfeRtly con. 
coedinthe vaines,is ingendred a bloud or juice which is properly called crude,or rawe: but when 
it hath loſt alt his bitternes by preparing or drefling of it(as aforefaide) iris like wis mnics, thatis tg 
ſay,to ſuch things as are without reliſh,which is perceiued by the raſte; and being ſo prepared, it is 
as Galen writeth in his bookes of the facultics of Simple medicines, one of the emplaſtickes or 
clammers. | [ | | [ | | 

B Butwhileſtthe naturall bitternes doth as yetremaine, it hath powertoclenſe, and toconſume 
' orwaſte awayzitkilleth wormes in the belly , being both applied in maner of an ointment and Pi- 


ucn with hony to licke on,and alſo drunke with water and vineger, | | 
C Meoreouer, the decoQtion thereof inwardly taken, voideth the worms; and likewiſe ifir be ſundry 


times outwardly vſcd as a bath,itis a remedy againſt the morphewe, fore heads, the ſmall 

wilde ſcabs,gangrenes, venemous vicers, partly by clenfing, and partly by conſuming and drying 
without Bingen g taken with Rewe and Pepper,thar it maybe the pleaſanter , it ſcoureth theli: 

uer and | $0 BE. S I'sF | 4 
Ir bringgth downe the menſes, and expelleth the dead childe ifit be Iaide ro with myrrh & hony. 
| E Morcouer,the mezle of Lupines doth waſte or conſume away withour any biting qualitie, for ic 
doth not onely take away blacke and blue ſpots that come of dry beatings,bur alſoit cureth Chers- 
azs,and Phymata : but then it istobe boiled either in vineger, or oxymell, arelſc in water and vine. 
er,and that according to the remperature of the greeued parties, and the diuerſities of the diſca- 
bs, QuodeS fo efteligends : and igallo taketh away blew markes,and what thing ſocuer elſe we (aide 

that the decoction could do,all thefanfe doth the meale likewiſe performe. ' 
Theſe Lupines as Djeſcorides duth furthermore write, being boiled in raine water till they yeelde 


a certaine creame,ate good to clenſe and beautifie the face. || Ty - 
G- They curethe ſcabsinſhceepewith the roote of blacke Chameleon Thiſtle , if they be waſhed 
with the warme decoQtion, | | [| 


14 The roote boiled with water and drunke,prouoketh vrine: |} -; 
The Lupines being made {weerte and pleaſant, Tr/ticun acero, and drunke,take awaythe lothſom- 


 K nesof the ſtomacke,and cauſe a good appetite ro tmeate, 


Lupines boiled inthar ſtrong leigh which Barbars do vſe and ſome Wormwood, Centarie, and 
baie ſalr added thereto, ſtaieth the running andſpreading of G:xgrena andthoſe parts that are de- 
prived oBpes nouriſhment ahd begin to- mortifie , and ſtaieththe ambulative nature of running 
and ſpreading vicers,being applied thereto very hot,with ſtuphes of cloth or rowe. 


% 
® 


- | Of Peaſon. Chap.4.9%. 
[4 | II Thefpndes, — | 1% 
fk Here be diuers ſorts of Peaſon,diffcring very notably in many reſpe&s,ſome of the garden,and 

others of the fielde,and yet both counted tame 3 ſome with tough skins or membranes inthe 
cods,and others haue none at all, whoſe cods arc tobe caten with the Peaſe when they be yoong,as 
thoſe of the yoong kidney Beanezothers carying their fruit inthe tops of the branches,arceſtcemed 
and taken for Scottiſh Pecaſon, which is not very common. There be diuers ſorts growing wilde, as 

ſhall be declared. ..- ON LES Cotto : 


1 "7" Hegreat Peaſe hath long ſtalkes, hollow, brickle, of a whitiſh green colour, branched, & 
{preade ypon the ground, vnleſle they be he}d vp with props ſer neere vnto them; the leate 
phe is wide and long, made yp of manylictle leaues which be ſmooth, white , growing 

vpon one little ſtalke or ſtem, and ſer apgright againſt another; ic hath alſo inthe vpper partlong 

claſping tendrels, wherewith it folderh it clfe vpon props and ſtaies ſtanding next vnto 1!t: che 
fowre 1s white and hathyabour the middle of it a purple ſpot: the cods be long, round Cilendri for- 

»4;inwhich ate contained ſcedes greater then Ochr; or little Peaſon ; which being drie are corne- 

red,and that vnequall,of colourſomrimes white and fomerimes gray: the roores are ſmall. | 

2 Thefielde Peaſe is ſo very wellknowne to all, that it were a needieſſe labour to ſpende time 

about the deſcription, . al 4 PN Rode Bl [t : tb 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | | 1045 
I Piſur mains. EE, 2 Piſram mins. 


Rownciuall Peaſe, | GardenandkieldPeaſe. 


=> >. 
4. % 


3 Piſamombelitum. 
Tufted,or Scottiſh Peaſe, 
WELD. Y2Be 


4 Pin 2 excort ical ion. | 
Peale withour skins in the Cods, 


7 


roz6 _ THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE 


| ) F: E-2 %T be deſeriprion. = | | hrs [| 
3 Tufted Peaſe arelike vato thoſe of the fielde, orof the earden, in each reſpe; the-difference 


confiſterh on?ly in thar,thar this plantcarierh his flowers and fruirin the tops of the branches in + 
\ round tuft or vmble, contrary to all other of his kinde,which bring foorththeir fruit in the middeſt 
and 2longſt the ſtalks : the roote is thicke and fibrous. [1 | 
| 4 Peafewithoutskins in thE&ods , differ not from the precedent, ſauing that the cods heereof 
want thattough skinny membrane in the ſame,which the hogs cannor cate by reaſon of the rouoh 
neſſezwhereas the other may becatencods and all the reſt ,cuen as kidney beanes are, which being 
_ © fodrefled,areexcceding delicate meate, Ty þ Fhe;r TN 


| WildePeaſle. if F-4 Euerlaſting wilde Peaſe; 
. Lf oF 


= 


i ' *%Thedefeription, || | 
5 - The wilde Peaſe differeth not fromthe common fielde Peaſe in ſtalk and leaues,ſavir —_ this 
wildekinde is fomewhat leſlerzrhe flowers arc of a yellow.colour,and the fruit is much lefler, # 
5 The Peaſe whoſe rootes neuer die,differeth notfrom the wildPeaſe,onely his continuing with» 
out ſowing,bcing once ſowen(or planted,ſetreth foorth the difference. 
0 }- | | $Thepſace. {7 I | 
Peaſe are ſet and ſowen in gardens,as alſo inthe fields in all places of Ergland. The tufted Peaſe 
arc in reaſoneble plenty inthe welt part of Kent, about Sennock or Seucnoke, in other places notld 
COmmon, 5 # | = = [1 
« The wilde Peaſe do growe in paſtures andearable fieldes in divers places, eſpecially aboutthe 
—___ heldes belonging endo Bithotle Hatfielde,in omg || | 
33070 | ** The time. [} ? 
They be ſowen in the ſpring rime.like as be allo other pulſes,which are ripe in ſommer: they proſ- 
per beſt iq warmeweacheranteaitly taky berme bycolde pegizlly whentarp Bowes! | 
\ A p : 


HISTORIE/\OF/PLANTS. | tog7 


> | .: ct The names. | 
The great Peaſe is calledin Latine P/ſa7 Romanan, or Piſummains : in Engliſh Romane' Peaſe, 
or the greater Peaſe,alſo garden Pealezofiome Branch Peale,French Peaſe,and Rounſiuals, Theo- 
phraitw and otherold writers do call it in Greeke ia»: in Latine alſo P/wr:iinloweDurch Room. 
{che erwitens in French des Pow, The licele Pealc iscalled ofthe Aporhecaries cuery where Piſumn, 
and Pjſammin : it is called in Engliſh little Peaſe,or the common Peaſe, | | 
19713 | % Thetemperature and vertwes, Be 3016; 

The Peaſe, as Hippocrates ſaith, is lelle wimdie than Beanes, but ic paſſeth ſooner through che 
belly. Ga/ex writeth, that Peaſon arein their whole ſubſtance like vnto Beanes, and be eaten after 
the lame manner that Beanes are,notwithitanding they differ from them in cheſe two things both 
bicauſe rhey arenot ſo windie as be the Beanes, and alſo for that they haue not aclenfing tacultie, 
andtherefare they do more ſlowly deſcend rhroughthe belly. They have no effeQtuall qualitic ma- 
nifeſt, and are in ameane betweene thoſe things:which are of good and bad iuice, that nouriſh 
much and little.that be windie and without wince, as Gale# in his booke of the faculties ofnouriſh- 
ments hath written of theſe andot Beanes, 


\ Of the tame orgarden Ciche. Chap.4-93. 


Cicer ſatinum.. WF | | 
Garden Ciche. | % The deſeription. | 

oa. | Arden Ciche bringeth foorthroundſtalkes, 
branchedand ſomething hairie, leaning on 
the one ſide : the leaues are wade of many 
little ones growing vpor'one ſtem or rib, and fer 
one right againſt another; of which cuery one is I 
ſmall,broad,and nicked jn theedges,leſſer thanthe 
leaues of wilde Germander, The flowers be ſmall, 
of colour cither white, or ofa reddiſh purple: after 
which come vp little ſhort cods, puffed vp as ic 
were with winde like little bladders, in which do lic 
rwo or at the moſt three ſcedes, cornered, ſmall to- 
wards the end, with oneſharpe corner, notmiuch 
vnlike to a Rams head, of colour cicher white, or of 
areddiſh blacke purple, inwhich is plainly feene | 4 
the place where they begin firſt roſprowt. The roo 
is flender,white andlong,For as Theophraſtas faith, 
the Ciche taketh deepel roote of all the Pulles, 

*% The place. 

It is ſowenin Iralie, Spaine and Fraunce, cuery 
where in the fields. It is fowenin our London gar- 
dens,but not common, E 

* Thetime. 
It is fowen in Aprill, being firſt ſteepedin water . 
aday before: the fruite is ripe m Avugult, | 
** The names. 
| Iriscalled in Greek iz44:r$25 xpior: in Latin C cer avi. 
[49] etinum, or Rams Ciches, andof the blackith purvle 
colour, Cicer mgrwn, or blacke Ciche : and the other is named Candrdumn wel atbymn Cicer, or white 
ara in Engliſh common Ciche or Ciches,red Ciche,of ſome Shcepes Ciche Peale, or Sheepes 
che Pealon, | | >] 


NEG; w— _—_ 
Tr 


#.» + 
wo 
he - # * 
-” - - » Jr . - . 
4 ” 
"I - 
$ « k 4 _ % 
. % W 
| * = ry 
: - k Og - % of y 4 
by an. . > . 
ww, 4 4 
"x 


Te. 
" i —_ 
VESTN 
A 


” 
_- 


| % The temperature and Vertues. | 
This Ciche,as Galen writeth in his booke of the faculties of nouriſhments,is no lefſe wingie than A 
the true Beane, bur iryeclderh a ſtronger nouriſhment than that doth: it prouoketh Juſt, anditis 
thought to ingender {cedc. 


Vuv 4 | | Some 


FT} z x : | \ : 
TY 


16438 THE. SECOND'BOOKE OF :THE 
C Some = the ſame to {talion horſes. Mozeouer,Ciches doſtower morethan do the truc leanes; 
info much as certaine of them do-maniſeftly djzyniſh or waſte away theſtones in the *F9s ws 
thoſe be the blacke and little Qiches called retina, or Rams Ciches, butitis better to thinks) | h . 
"  brothofthemſoddeninwaret. + |) do poenld aha tho cls rote ay 
D - Boththe Rams Ciches,2s Dioſcorides ſaith, the white and the blacke proucke vrine; ifthe deco. 
Ctionthercof be ma® with Roſemarie, and; given to.thaſe chathauecither the drovfeor ellow 
taundiſc;but they are hurtfull ro the bladder and kidaeies thatbaue vicers in them, ants 6 


” : . $43 it 
» £ 29 
wilde Ciches., 


& j 


, T } . 
( ha -494.. 
. 4 4 # 


644 7 8) Of A 0 pe rs i ge A ou 
T He wilde Cich is liketo.the tame ſaich Dzzforades, but itdiflerethinfecdes the later writers 


y £ 
1 + | 
I BY 
* 4 
A, 


- 


 - 


oo - 
4 


* 


haue ſer downe ſundry kindes of Ciches,as ſhallbe declared... 


I Cicer ſlueftre. | 7 \4 4 \ & l | 2 Cizer aeſtre li/el um. 
The wilde Ciche. | # |} ' Broadleafed wilde Cich. 


To 


Pl 1 nd 

_— - _ - % "I Bo - a = FS; : 
- + % 5 
” £. Wk g .\ [ 

E 'S '\ ” 

n — 

x. & 
* 


4 
F.- 


LEI 


* The deſcription. 


I He firſt wilde Cich bringeth foorth a great humberof ſtalkes branched lying flat on the 
ground: about which be the leates, conſiſting of many ypon one rib as do thoſe of the gat- 
den Cich,bur natnicked inthe edges,more like tothe leaves of Axcich :the lowers come 

foorth faſted on {mall ſtems, which grow cloſe tothe ſtalkes.ofa pale yellow colour, and like vnto 

earcs: intheir places cormevp little ccgs, inforre and bignes of the fruit of garden Cictes, black 


L 


and{omthirg hairie,in which lieth the ſecede, that is {mall,hard;flar,and glittering,in raſte like that 


0! Kidney Beane : che rootg growerh dcepe;taltned with many ithes. | 


p 


2 There 


1:$i-F he 


| {HIST,ORTE (OF PLANTS, 1049 
2: There is another kind-of wild Cichthar hath 41{o'2 2reat number of } iks lying vpon theorounc 
about which ſtande ſoft leaues,fomthing hairy and white,confi{ting&ot three broad leaucs itndin 
n2middlenb.the teattof which ftandeneerelt wo the (tem,and chegre.r:ſt atthe very top : > ho 
flowers-come toorth arrhe barrome'of the leaues many togither,, of colour yel'owe 3 alwerivkich 
erow fmalilonghusks;foft and baitie, in cucryone whereof is » hrtle cod, in which lic waſcedes 
ſkelittle Cichlings. - _ -- Thaw h>zitn: muon of! ob :il dro} 4 - 
; | - as yy 1250 2cvreghd he 
Theſe are ſowen 1n the parts beyond the ſeas fur'to-fecede their cartle with in wi ; 
tares;verches,and fuckiorher baſe pulle: tr [121 11212 nol, PT ayaneY 4 yo = 
26210900 | J.! 0: oh bg} 22204415 540] 1 44a Vy 
Thetime anſ{wereth the ſetch or tate. a} 
| *% Themes, : 
The wilde Cich hath no other namein Latineburczcer Sriefire: the later writers haue hot 
| found any name art all. | A. * EF | | | 
q | | . v% The EI Verfnes. | | v1 1 
Their remperature and vertues' arefeterredignthe gardeniCich.. as Thes 5 afficory 
G:len faith, that rhe wilde Cich is waltrhingslike OR that of the Kan 4s «05 rt ne i P 
eff:ctaall,by reaſon tvismore hoceerand drier,andalio morebiting and bitter, 


10 140» Of Lennlr.».- Chap.495: 


r Lens mitor.' 2 Tens minor. 
. Great Lentils. 5507 Little'Lenriſs, 


3 


| neo, % 7 he deſcription. | | | 
/ 4 -Þ Mb firſt Lentile groweth vp with ſlender ſtalkes, and leaves which be ſomewhat harde, 
growing! aſlope trom both ſides of the ribor middle ſtalke,narrow and many in number like 
thole of Tates » butnarrower, and lefler: the flowers be tmall rending fornewhat cowards 2 


purple, | 


1059 THE SECOND BOOKE| OF THE 


purple,the cods are littleand broad ;the ſeedes in theſe arc innumber threeor fower, little z round 
plaine,and fat : the rootes are ſmall and threddie, | {1 | | . 


Theſecond kinde of Lens or Lencill,hath ſmall, tender,and phantbranches acubite highgwhere. 
on do grow leanes diuided or conſiſting of ſundry other ſmall leaues like the wilde Ferchyending ar 
che midele rib,wich ſome clafping tencrels , wherewith ir rakech holde of ſuch things as are neere 


vnto it: among theſe come toorth lictle browniſh flowers mixed with white, which turne into ſmal 


flat cods,containing lictle browne flat ſeed, and ſomrimes white, 
|  * $$ Theplace. || 


Theſe pulſes row in my garden,& it is reported vnto me by thoſe of good credirethar abour 


Watford in MiddIdcx and other places of England ,the husbandmen do ſowethem for their cate 


tle,cucn as others do Tares, | | 


| % The time. 
They both flower and waxe ripe in Iuly and Auguſt. 
| | % The nenes. {| | 
They are called in Greeke 9#:5;, or e««: in Latine Lexsand Zentical : in high Dutch Linſen tin 
French Lentil: in Italian Lenrichrat in Spaniſh Zeneeia : in Engliſh Lentils, 
wu The temperatureandwertues. | 
A Lentiles as Galen faith,are in a meane berweene hot and colde , yet are they dry in theſeconde 
degree; their $kinne is altringent or binding , and the meate or ſubſtance within is ofa thicke and 
earthy iuice, hauing a qualitie that is a little auſtere or ſomthing harſh,much more the $kin therof; 
burthe iuice in them is quite contraric to the binding qualitic , wherefore if a man ſhall boile them 
in faire water, andafterwards ſeaſon the water with he and pickle, aut cam ipſes oleo condiens, and 
then rake it,the ſame drinke doth looſe the belly. || Pl: =! 
B Thefirſt decoQtion of Lentils doth loofe the belly: bur if they be boiled againe, and the firſt de- 
coion caſt away,then do they binde, and are good againſt the bloudie flixe,or dangerous laskes, 
C They dothciroperation more effecuallyin ſtopping and binding,if all or any of theſe following 
be boiled therewith,that is to fay,red Beetes,Myrrils, Pils of Pomegranates, dried Roſes,Medlars, 
Seruiceberrids,vnripe Peares,Quinces, Plantaineleaves, Gals [be berries of Sumach, 


E Themealcof Lentiles mixed with honie, doth mundifie and clenſe corrupt vicers and rotten 
ſores filling them with fleſh againe,and is r.oft ſingular to be put into the common digeſtiues vſed 
 amongour London Chirurgians for greene wounds. | 
F TheLentile hauing the skntor coate taken off, as it loſeth that ſtrong binding qualitie, andthoſe 
& accidents that depend on the fame; ſo doth it more nouriſh, thery if it had the $kin on. 
G Iringendrerh thicke and navghtic ivice,and ſlowly paſſeth thgrow the belly; yer doth it not ſtay 
the looſenes, as thardoth which hath his coate on: and therefqre they that vſe to cate too much 
1 thereof,do neceſſarily becomelepers, and be muchſubic@ to cankers, for thicke and dry noutiſh- 
ments are apt to breed melancholie, | | || [| 


H Therefore the Lenrill is good foode for them that thorow wateriſh humours be apt to fall into 


_ thedropſic,and it is a moſt dangerous foode for dry and withered bodies z for which cauſeit bring- 
eth dimnes of ſight,chough the {ight be perfe&,thorow his exceſſive drines, whereby the ſpirits of 
the ſight be waſted; butit is good for them that are of a quite contrary conſtitution. | 

I Iris good for thoſe that waar their termes,for it breedeth thicke bloud, and ſuch as very flowlic 
_ pallech chorow rhe vaines,] |} | |} | ij! [| | 
K Buritts ſingular good to ſtay the menſes,as Gales in his booke of the faculties of Nouriſhments 


L Ircauſethtroubleſome dreams (as Diz{corides doth moreouer write)it hurteth the head, finewes 
and lungs. = | &W [1 


M Iris good to fwallow done 30, graines of Lentils ſhelled ot taken from their husks againſt the 


£ c 


ouercaſting of the ſtomacke. | + | vn |? 
N Being boiled with parched Batrly meale,and laideto, ſwagerh the paine and ach of the gout. | 
O . Withhony itfilleth vp hollow fores,it breaketh pony clenſeth vicers : being boiled in wine, 
it waſteth away wens,and hard (wellings of thethrore. [| 


-t . 


P WithaQuinceand Mehlote,and oile of Roſes jt helperh the inflammations of the cies and fun- 
dament: but in greater inflammarions of the fundament,and great deepe vicers,itis boiled with che 
rinde ofa Pomgranate,drig Roſe leaues and honie, | \& And 

» BY - : 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. Ic51 


And after the ſame maner againſt cating ſores thatare mortificed, if ſea water be added itis alſo Q 
a remedy againſt puthes the ſhingles, andthe hot inflammation called Saint Anthovies fire , and 
for kibes,in ſuch maner as we haue wwrirren ; being boiled in fea warer and applied, it helpeth wo- 
mens breſts in which the milke is cluttered,and cannot ſuffer too great abundance of milke, 


Of Cich, or true Orobus. (hap. 4.96. 


Orobs receps Herbariorwn. | | 
The true Orobwe. © *%Thedeſeription. 
. EZ Hepulſe whichof moſt Herbariſts is taker 

for the true Ozcbws, and calledof fomet ir. 

rer Fitch, is one of the pulſes whoſe tender 
branches rraile vpon the ground, as Theophaſt ms 
faich, and whoſc long tender branches ſpread far 
abroad,whereon do grow leaues like thoſe of the 
field verch:amcng which grow white flowers, af- 
ter which come long cods, that a2peerc bun- 
ched on the outſide agamit che place where the 
ſedes do lic : which are fawall,round,rufler of co- 
lour. and of a bitter taſte: the rooteis ſtall and 


langle. 


% The lace. 

It proſpererh beſt in aleane ſoile, according to 
Coluanella:it groweth in woods and coples:it gro- 
weth allo in my garden. 

* The time. 

This is ſowen earely andlarte,butifit be ſowen 
ini the ſpring it eaſily commeth vp, and is plea- 
ſant; and vnplcaſant it tbe ſowen inthefall of 
thelcafe, | 

* 7 he names. 

This is called in Grecke 55: the ſhops of 
Germanic haue kept the name Orobas, and not 
knowing the thing,they have miſtaken i in ſteed 
of Yicta, or the common Vetch: in Engliſh it is 
called bitter Verch, orbitter Ficch, and Orobus, 
afrer the Latine ; of ſome Ers after rhe French 
; name.” | 4 

| * Thetemperature and verines. | 

Men , as Gz/ex in his firſt booke of the Faculties of novriſhments ſaith , doe alrogither abſtaine A 
from bitter Verch,for it hatha very vnpleaſant rafte , andnavghric iuicez butKine m Aſia, and in 
moſt of ather countries doeat? thereof being made ſweere with water: notwithſtanding men be-- 
ing compelled through neceflitic of great famine, as pr, 1" alſo hath written, doe of tenitimes 
feede of ir,and we allo dreſſing them afterthe maner of Lupines, vic the bitter Verches wich honie, 
as amedicine that purgeth thicke and groſſe humours out of the chelt and lungs. | 

Moreouer among the bitter Verches, the white are not ſo medicinable, bur choſe which come' 
neere to a yellow,or to thecolour of Ochar, and thoſe that haue beene wiſe boiled , and fundrie 
times ſoked in water loſe theirbitter and vnpleaſant taſte, and withall their clenfing and cutting 
tacultiefothat there is onely leftin theman earthic ſubſtance,which terueth for nourtthraenr,chat 
driech withour any manifeſt birternes, LO $4 > 
| Andin his booke of the faculties of Simple medicines he ſaith, that bitter Verch is dry inthe la- © 
ter end of the ſecond degree,and hot in the firſt ; morcouer by how much it is burer, by ſomuch it 


bo 


curte.-h,clenſeth andrtaketh away ſtoppings3 burif ic be ouermuch vicdir brivgeth foorth bloud by 
vrine, HE a © 1 z”Þ 
| | Diefeorides 


if! 


| [| 


1052 THE SECOND BOOKE|OF THE 

D © Diofeorides writerh,thatbirter Verch cauſeth headach,and heauic dulneſle : chat it trovbleth the 
belly,and drawerh foorth bloud by vrine;, notwithſtanding being boiled itleruerh to fatten Kine 

E Thereis made of the ſcedes amealc fit to be vſed in medjeine. It is made after this maner ; the 
full and white graines are choſen our, and being mixed tog icher they are ſtceped in water, ang (14. 
fered to lic till they be plumpe; afterwards they are parched rilitheskin be broken, then are they 
gromd,and ſearced or ſnaked thorow a meale fteue,and the mealereſerued, 

F This !ofeth the belly,prouoketh vrine, maketh jone well coloured: being ouermuch eaten, or 

_ drunke,it draweth bloud by the ſtoole with gripings,and allo by vrine. | 


- G With hony it clenſerh vicers,rakerh away freckles, ſunne-burnes, blacke ſpots inthe kin called 
e=2xeandmaketh the whole body faireand cleane, | | 
T Irftaicth running vicers,or hard fvellings,and jangrenes , Or mortified vicers, it ſoftnerth the 
hardnes of womens breſts jt raketh away; and breaketh wilde vicers,called carbuncles, ſores of the 
headzbeing tempered with wine ad applied,it healerhthe bitings of dogs,and al other venemous 
beaſts.) "1:104-5 | S Bw Be”: 0 
1 Witkvineger itis good againſt theſtrangury,and mitigateth painethat commeth thereof, 
K Itis goodforthem rhatare not nouriſhed after their meate,beingparched and taken with hony 
in thequantityofanut. J-4o-F+ 1 © hy EE: | 
L |. The decoftion of the ſame helperh the itch of the whole body, and taketh away kibes if they be 
waſhed or bathed therewith, | | E'1 1 $4] | | 
M Cicer boiled in fountaine water, with ſome Orobz4, doth afſiwage the ſwelling of the yardeand 


- 


i; priuie parts &f man or woman, if they be waſhed or barhed in the decoRion thereof, and the ſub- 


{tance heerofmay allo be applied plaiſtetwiſe, | | Tet, 28 
N lrtis alſo vied for bathing and waſhing of vicers,an drunning ſores,and is applied vnto the ſcurſe 


> 


ofthe head with great profite, 


Of the Vetch,or Fetch. Chap.4.97. 
| | | | 2 Vicia /ylueftrts. 


7 1 Vicia. | 
| Strangle Tare, Tine,or wild Fetch, 


Tare, Vetch,orFerch. | 


: : 
o* A i pa : ? t A F " = 
vh A . CEE ADA 524 : : & Va ng Mu 
DS 9. AYR YL IEEE LH, 1 | Ae q, 
CEILING EE IS v7 
F LES 43 RM” - Pt PERS 7 5 - = , Va 
SY L—_- f < 2 ; * ; ws 


: nd 14 ( 
- : J 
[2 
F k 
$ 
> d \ 
- a —_ — —w 
& - - 1 / M 7 
bx - : 
I ff . - \ 
py \ 
L \ # 
| AS { 
b-4 1 
a 


Re” 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1054 


%* The dcſeription. 


i He Vetch hath ſlender and fower ſquared ſtalkes, almoſt three foore long: the leaues be 
long,with claſping tendrels atthe end, made vp of many little leaues growing vpon one 
rib or middle fteny-cucry one whereof is greater, broader and thicker, then that of the 

Lentile: the flowers are like to the flowers of the garden Beanc, bur of ablacke purple colour; the 

cods be broad, ſmall , and ineuery one are contained five or ſixe graines, notround, bur flatlike 

thoſe ofthe Lentill, of colour blacke, and of anvnpleaſant taſte. | ; 

2 Strangle Fare, calledin ſome countries Tine, andofothers wilde Vetch, isa ramping herbe 

like vnto the common Tare, ramping and climing among corne where it chancerh , thatit pluc- 

keth ir downeto the ground, and ouergroweth the ſame in ſuch ſort, thatit ſpoileth and tillerh not 
onely W heate,but all other graine whatſocuer : the herbe is better knowne then defired,therefore 
theſe fewe lines may ſerue for the deſcriprion, 
ict _ * Thep/ze. 
The Tare is ſowen in any ground or ſoile wharſoeuer, 
+ Thetime. ; 
It fowreth in May,and perfeCeth his ſeede toward September. 
| ' *Thenames. . 

Itis called in Latin Yicr4,aVinciendo,of binding or wrapping,as Yarronoteth,bicauſe(ſaith he) it 
hath likewiſe claſping rendrels,ſuch as the Vine hath by which it crawleth vpward vpon the ſtalkes 
of the weedes that are next vnto it; of ſorne Cracea, and Larachw, and alſo Lphaca: itis called in 
high Durch Uicken : in low DutchCittſent in French Veſece: inmoſt ſhops it is falſely termed 
vibes, and Erumm, for Eruum doth much differ from 7Y4cza: it iscalled in Engliſh Vetch or Fetch. 
The countrey men lay vp this Vetch with the ſecdes and whole plant, that ic may bc a fodder for 
their cattle, We +5 | | 

* The temperature and vertues. | 


Notwithſtanding I haue knowne, faith Galen , ſome that in time of famine haue fed heereof, A 
eſpecially in the ſpring,when as itis as yet bur greene, but itis harde of digeſtion, and bindeth the 
belly, . - | 

Therefore ſceing it is of this kinde of nature, it is manifeſt that rhe nouriſhment which com- B 
meth thereof, hath in itno good juice atall, but ingendreth a thicke bloud , and apr to become 
melancholic. | | 


. Of yellow wilde Fetch,or Tare encrlafling. Chap.4.98. 


* Thedeſcription. 


l Here is a pulſe growing in our high and thick woods, hauing a very thick,tough and woody 
roote : from which rite vp diuers long, weake and feeble branches , conſiſting of a tough 
middle rib, edged on both ſides with a thinne skinnie membrane , ſmooth and of a graſſe 

preene colour;zwhereon doc grow at certaine diſtances, ſmall flat ſtems, vpon which ſtande rwo 


broad leaues joined rogither at the bottome:from berwixt thoſe leaues come foorth tough claſping 
tendrels hich take holde of ſuch things as grow next vnto it : from the boſome of the ſtem where- 
onthe leaues doe growe , ſhooteth fuorth a naked ſmooth footeſtalke ;onwhich doe growe moſt 
deaurifull lowers like thoſe of the Peaſe, the middle part whereof is of a bright red, tending tored 
Purple in graine ; the outward leaues ſomwharlighter inclining toa bluſh color,which being paſt, 
there ſucceede long round cods, wherein is conteined ſecede of rhe bignes of Tares, bur rounder, 
blackiſh withour,and yellowiſh within,and of a bitter raſte. . | 

Ot whichkinde we haue likewiſe another in our woods , like vntothe precedent in each reſpeR, 
= that the leaues heerof are narrower and longer , and therefore called of moſt, which let 
OOT | | 


the deſcription,Lathyrws Anguſtifolia. | 
Ta 2 The - 


1054. THE SECOND BOOKE OF' THE 
2 Theyellow wilde Tare or Fetch, hath diuers yety ſmall ramping ſtalkes,tough.and leanino 11; 
way i way,notable to ſtande of it ſclte widaba the beloepf NR , or habe any S'v 
it: theleaues are very thin,&ſhazpe pointed: the flowers growe amoneg(tthe leaues, in faſhion LA 
the Peaſe flowers, of a bright yellow colour : the rogtes are very finally long; tough, andin number 
infinire,infomuchtharir is impoſſible toroore ir forth, being once gotten into any ground, valeſls 
the earth be digged vp with the rootcs,and both caſt intothe river, or burned: doubcleſſe it is the 
moſt pernicious and harmfull weede of all others,varoall mayer of graine, holſome heibes,or any 
woode whatſocuer. | | 4-4 rind p Bs | | 

The fuſt doth grow in ſhadowie woods, and among buſhes: there groweth great ſtore thereof 
in Swaneſcombe woode, a mule and a halfe from Gicene-Hithein Kent, as yougotoa village there« 
by called Becſome zand in diuers other places, - | |: ny EN % 

The other growethin moſt grafſie paſtures , borders of fieldes, and among graine almoſt eucric 
where. : | | | | +} " 

| ** Therime. | 

The time anſivereth the other Pulſes, | |; 

| 4-1 ' The rawes. 

The firſt is called Lathyrws,to make a difference berweene it, and Lathyris,or Spurge: of Mathio- 
bus Clmenun; of Cordes Erunn ſatiunn of Tragh Prſwn Grecorun : in Engliſh Peale cucilaſting, 
great wilde Tare, and Cichling. |. |; "oy ] | 

The other is cailed CAHracis; of ſon: Cicera: inlralian Mqcho:in Engliſh yellow wilde Ferch,and 
Cichling. * The temperature and vertues. ror 9: I, 

Theremperature and vertues are refetred tothe manured Tate or Vetchz, notwithſtanding they 
arc not vicd for meate or medicine, | Be | Loo oh 


Ooft) 


\ . Of theOylie Pulſe called ſamum. Chap.4.99. 


by 


Sefſarmuwn fue Siſamun. | | als ict .s by . 
The oilic graine, _ |. | | Un * The d:ſeription. 


| Eſamwn hath a thicke and fat vpright ſtalk, 

| g acubireanda halfe high , earniſhcd with 

' ** Jeaues muchlike the Peach or Almond, or 
rather in mine opinion, more like the teaues! of 
| Bafill: among theſe leaues come foorth ſmall 
red lowers, which turne into rounde, long, and 
; creſted gods,containing white fat oileous icede; 
 Theophraftis affirmeth;rhat there is a kind there- 
of whichis white, bearing onely one roote; no 
| inde of beaſt will cate this plant when it 1s 
' Breene, bicauſe of his birternes,but being withe- 
| red anddried,the ſeed therof becommeth fweet, 

ndrthe cattle will feede on the whole plant. 

| | \ % Theplace. | 

| } Iegroweth both in Egypt and in India, Seſs- 

m2 ſaith P4pie,came from the Indics;they make 
 anoile of it.andis aſtrangerin England, 

We \.% Thetane, iter lc 
|. | Iris one of the ſommer graines, and is lowen 

| before the 1ifing|of the ſeauen ſtars , as Plinie 


Fa 


 writerhy yet Columella ſaith , that Seſamum icedes 
; rpuſt be ſowen after Aurunine AEquinoGiiall, 
| againſt the Ides of October: they require for the 
' oſt parta rotten ſoile, which = husbandmen 


| 


MW —_ 


( 
(1 


* The 


HISTORIE, OF PLANTS. = 1655 
bes tht & The names. | 
The Grecians call this graine nzwer:| the Larincs alſo Seſarnwmn, and Siſarmum, and often in the 
Feeminine gender Seſamz : we are conſtrained for want of an Lag nameto vie the Latine: 
iris vnknowneto the Aporthecaries,cſpecially the plant it ſelfe 3bur the ſeede and oile thereofis to 
be found among them: we may call ir Turkic Millet, | | 
| *% The temperature and vertnes. | | 
According to ſome itis hot and dry in the firſt degree : the ſeed thereof as Galen faith, is far, and a 
therefore being Jaid vp it commeth to be oilie very quickly;wherefore it ſpeedily fillerth-and tufferh 
vp thoſe that fecede thereof,and ouerthroweth the {tomacke,and is flowe of digeſtion,and yeelderh 
torhe bodya fat nouriſhment : therefore it is manifeſt, that it cannor ſtrengthen the ſtomacke , or 
any part thereof,as alſono other kinde of fat thing :andthe tuice that commetrh thereof is thicke, 
and therefore ir cannor ſpecdily paſſe thorow the veinesz men do not greatly feede of it alone, but 
make cakes thereof with hony,which they call -r=«ivzs: ir is alſo mixed with bread, and 1s of an hot 
remperature,for which cauſe itprocureth rhirſt : and in his booke of the faculties of Simple medi; 
cines he ſaith,that Seſamwm is not alittle clammic and fat, and therefore ir is an emplaſtick , anda 
ſoftner,and is moderately hot : the oile which commetrh thereof is of like temperarure,and ſo is the 
decoRion of the herbe alſo. | | 
Dioſcorides writeth,that Seſamwnis an enimie tothe ſtomacke,it cauſerh a ſtinking breath if itre+ 
maine ſtinking betweene the reeth after it is chewed. | 
It waſtethaway the groflenes ofthe ſinewes,it is a remedy againſt bruſings of rtheeares, inflam- 
mations,burnings,and ſcaldings,paines of the ioints,& biting of the poiſontom horned ſerpent cal- 
led Ceraſtes:being mixed with oile of Roſes it taketh away the headach,which commerh of hear. 
Ofthe ſame force is the herbe boiledin wine', but itis eſpecially good for the hear and paine of 1 
the cies. | | 
Ofthe herbe is made an oile vſcd of the Egyprians,which as Pliny ſaith,is profitable for the eares, E 
Itis a remedic againſt the ſounding or ringing ia the cares, | E 


Of hatchet Fetch. (hap.500. 


* T he kindes. ; 
There be diuers forts of hatchet Fetches,called by the name Heayſarumas ſhall be ſhewed. 


O * Thedcſeription. £11 o 
I He firſt kinde of harcher Fetch , hath many ſinall branches trailing-heere and there vpon 
{ the ground: vpon which grow {mall leaues pred abroad likethe leaues of the wilde Yetch: 
among which come foorth cluſters of ſmall yellow flowers, which fade away.and turne in- 
tolirtle, flat, thin,and browne cods,wherein is conteined ſmall reddiſh ſeede ofa birrer taſte, 
2 Theſecondkinde of hatchet Ferch,hath many round,cough,and flixible branches trailing vp- 
. onthe ground:wherupon do grow leaues like the former, but more like the leaues of Liquorice, and 
having cherafte of the Liquorice roote, which hath giuenoccaſion ro ſame rodeeme it a kinds vf 
Liquorice :among theſe leaues come foorth pale yellowe flowers, after which there ſucceede ſmall 
crooked cods (which the grazer hath omitred)turning thejr points inwardly, one anfwering at:0- 
ther,like litcle hornes,containing ſmall flat ſeeds,fower cornered,and fafhjoned like alirtle wedge : 
the roote is rough,of a woodie ſubſtance,and doth continue fruitfulla very long time. 

There is another kinde of Secvr jAaca or hatcher Fetchwhich hath branches,leaves, and rootes, 
like the laſt before remembred.and differeth in that,that the flowers of this plantare mixed,and do 
vary into ſundry colours, being on the vpper _ of afleſhcolour, andon the lower of a wh-ire or 
ſnowie colour , with a purple Storkesbill in the midſt: theleaues are in raſte bitter; the c6ds ae 
{mall like thoſe of Birds foote,and not much vnlike the cods of Orobas. k 4&4 

Thereis likewiſe another kinde of Securidaca or Hatcher Fetch, which is dedicated vnto Carols 
Cla/zw, by the aforenamed-DoRor Pexnre, who founde it inthe northparts of England , having 
leaues,rootes,and branches,like vnto the former : but the flowers of this are white, and mizzed with 
fome purple,and bitter alſo in taſte: his cods arehke the clawof a crab, or (as C/ſewslaith) hike tho 
knife which ſhoomakers do vic in Flanders, in which cods are contained {mall reddiſh ſeede: 11. 
foote alſo is of long continuance, 1 


- 
I 
N 


ky 


1956 - THE 5 


. £2 Heayſarmmains. | 


Hatcher Fetch. 


od 
AM 


FAN: 


Z 


al 


N 


"JW 
\ 


7 


72 


F 


Y E 
8 - 
YN rs 
fon 20 
= | \ nk 
. o - 
Sy oy 
h J 
» as (4 


Y 
R 


RY) RK) 
WW. 


= 


3 Ferrum E Jin, 
Horle ſhoe, 


ASI 
by " SVN 


EY -— 
G6 C —_ 
n 


4 


F Lt S > < 
- - < <>387* ww 


" TYFFs | 
$a"? 


& 


- 


f 
p - 
nr | 
= % 


Pd 


þ 


KSASY; 


=, 


es nn eo eons 


: ITS A, « 
" -. . 4 - 
jj bf : 
F 
b = © = « 
_ - — - nn, s 
S> \ SY-- \ = h 
- . > O* 
—# . " 
A ' | 
i J 
i 
c————_—_ > - 
= : 


—=»-/; 


"4 
KH A\ 


fi 
[7 


\ ——D) 
ow. — F — re ng — = 
- 


"} IJJ 
” 
w- 


—_ 


? 
> 
— 


8 


* 0 


it ba : ; 
| 2 : Z 
{ 4 A . 
. £ k F 
L b 
; ; SE 
x : 5 
: : 4 by 
: . o 
ey bd \l 
' Q | 
: 
[ 
þ : : * : 
{ |; q 
: ; c A 
b : ot 
; = 


A 
. 


OKE OF THE 
2 Hedyſarum Glyryrchizta, 
Licorice hatchet Fetch. 


WY ALS 
6 -, Cr -t % 
gm - $='3 Fes » 


_ 
- 


BA, % 
DAISY ANY 
"ASSN I FIN 


SE, 


= — 


| * The deſeription. 
| There is alſo another ſort of Hatcher Fetch, 


| which hath; very long and tough branches trai- 
| ling vponthegrounde, belet with leaues like the 
 former,but mi:ch greater: the lowers do growat 
' the top of the branches of a palecolour , and 


. . 


| turne intorgugh, round and flat cods, faſhioned 
| lke licrle ty | 

 dietharthe firſt approch of winter,afſoone as the 
ſeedeis ripe, but all the reſidue of whe kindes arc 
of manyyeeres continuance. 


ers:the roote(of this as of thefitft) 


'3} Horſe ſhooe hath many ſtalkes, flender,and 
lying vponthe grounde: the leaues be chinne and 
lefler then thoſe of Axſeede : the flowers alng 
the ſtalkes are littlez after which come vp :ong 
, cods ſomthing broad, and alittle bowing,whuch 
| haue vpontheone fide deepc,rounde,and inden: 


Z 


c 


'redcuts, like after a ſort toan Horſe thooe: the 
Fgote is {omewhat long. | 


| |  w%Theplace. * IRET | 
' Theſeplants do grow in my garden:the ſecond 


kinde I founde growing in Suffolke, in the high 
way onthe oo ande, as you go from Sucbury 
'ro Corner Ch 

the ende of the towne, as alſo/in ſundry othe 


urch about an hundred paces from 


place 


ſ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS... 1647 
places Ol {rheſame; countrey' and mn Eſlcx about Dunmow, and in the townes called Clare and 


nyngham. 
lolthiive chnkazch vp As" vntilled and ſimny wlaces of al and Languedock: it gro- 
werh likewiſe in my garden. L *+ Thetime, | 
Theſe plants do flower in Tune,andehair ſcede is ripe in Avgnſt, 
a -*% The names. | bb 
' The Cendand name ookin vherher je beapullic or an infirmitic among cone #9Yze5r: the Latines 


of the forme of theſeede Scpaealna and Hedyſarum: in Eng: Axlecds, Axwoort, Ax-fitch, and 
Hatcher Fitch: iris vaknowne tothe Apothecaries. 

Horſe ſhooe , is commonly called in Italian Sferro ae cauall: you may name itin Latine Ferrun 
equine 3 14n Engliſh Horſe ſhooe.. | 
4 The tompers ture, 
-| The leeds of theſe planes arehot and dry of complexion. 

v% The vertucs. 

Being drunke it is acceptable ro th ſtor acke,and remooneth nopylhes| out of the intrailes,and A 
of like vertue be the newe leaucs and render crops of the whole plant. | 

Lioſcoþraes ſhewerh that itis alſo g9od for the ſtomacke berg taken j in drinke,and i 1s mixed with B 
comnterpoiſons, 

And itis thought to hinder conception, if jrbe mm with hony before the ac, C 

The ſeede of Axwoort openeth the opp gs of the liuer,the obſtruction of the ſpleene, andof D 


allthe inward parts, | . 09. 0D © 
Horſe ſhooe is birrer andlike in nature to Axſcede, | | E 
. Of Peaſe Earth nut. ( bap.5o1. lo 
Terre elandes. 
Peaſe Earth nur. | | &* The deſeription. 


He Peaſe Earth nut, commeth ypwith flen 

derandweake ſtalkes : :the leaues be thin, and 

lictle,growing vpon flender tems with claſ- 
ping tendrels atthe ends, withwhich it inBraceth 
and taketh hold of ſuch thin Sas ſtand neete vnto 
it: the lowerson the rops of the ſtalkesaze lil.e ro 
thoſe of Peaſe, bur lefler, of a redpurple colotir, in 
ſmell not vnpleaſantzin their places come vplopbg 
cods, in which arerhree ot fower rount leeds: the 
rootes bethicke, long, likeaftera ſorre» acorns, 
bur much greater, blacke without, graic £48 10.11 
taſte like ro the Cheſſenu: our of which beneath 
doth hang along ſlender ſtring; there grow our of - 
the ſame alſo other ſtrin gs, bardro the. ſetting on. 
of the ſtalke, vnto which' creepingaſlope do ercy 
otherkernelledreotes whileit the Pl_en dork thus 


multiphlie itlel{c. | 
& The place. 

This groweth in-corne fieldes, both with the 
corne it ſelfe, and al{oabont the betders of fields 
among briers and brambles : iris founde in diters 
woods and paſtures of Englande, cipeciallic m 
Hampſteed woode negre London: it groweth in 
Richmond Heath,and in Coome Parke likewilc. 

*% » The time. 

It flowreth in Iune agd fuly, rhe nuts after har- 
neſt be digged vp and g gathered, 

_ %Thenanes. | 
Iris called; in high durch Erdnuſinzin low.dutch Eerpnotf, Cera cte! 'en, S& PiuYenmetfficr(t:; 


XXX I ; Liiul 


LY 


S ; 


1058 THE SECOND BOOKE-OF THE 


 thatisto ſay,tailed Miſc,of the ſimnlitude orlikenes of domeſticallMiſe, which che blacke, rounge. 
and Jong Nuts,with a peece of the ſlender ſtring hanging our behind,do repreſent: the later writers 
do call :tin Larine Terre glandes, or Terreſtres g/andes, and m Greeks zauailarcve, Chamabalazi- 
in Engliſh Peaſe Earthnut, | © | | nt Sy mw 
| #%Thetemprratureand vertues. 
\ A The Nuts of this Peaſe being boiled and eaten,are hardlier digeſted then be either Turneps or 
| Parſneps , yer do they nouriſh no lefſe then theParſneps: they are not ſo windie as they , they &o 
more {lowly paſſe thorowe the belly by reaſon of their binding qualiric,, and being caten rawe 
they be yet harder of digeſtion,and do bardlier and {lowlier deſcend. 
1heybeof temperature meahly hot,and ſomwhardry,being withall notalitcle binding: where. 
vpon wes nl do not onely Rtaic the fluxes of the belly, but allo all ifſues of bloud, eſpecially from + 
the mothefor bladder, | || = BE | | | 
The rootes of Peaſe Earthnut ſtoppeth che belly , andthe inordinate courſe of womens fick- 
neſle, k &:: 2901 00 1 | 


Of mile Vetch. Chap.502. 


% The bindes. 


"EE Here be diuers forts ofherbes contcined vader thetitle of '—{fragal, whether I may with. 

out breach of promiſe! made in the beginning inſert them among the Zegawmina, pulſes, or 
herbic plants,it is doubrfull : but ſeeing the marterjs diſputable, I chinke irnot aiſle to ſuffer them 
thus topaſle , vnnll ſome other ſhall fiade a place more connenient and agreeing vntothemin 
neighbourhood. % | | [1 


x Aſtragalus luſtenicus Clusj. | | 8 Mbragalus SYrIdens. 
moth milke Vetch. I Wy Aſlyrian milke Vetch, 


3, | | Wi, 
5%. \ J (1 
Þo ? JW. YEE 


= <>; (ll SON. 
« ey, JI — ET 
__ » _ WF) : ' 

*; : —— Kryeoy' 


id a:y ? => <2» 
«Mts $54 ) » Ms, io, A 

. — ye v4 7 Jo rnn Nj 7 b 
— — "#7 WP pp ae we = 


as ** 


-/!{ HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1059 


j FT He fuſt kinde of Aftragalu hath reddifhiftalkes; a cubire high , afingerthicke, ſomewhae 
creltcd orfurrowea,and conered over with.an hairie mofiines; which diuide themſclucs in- 
to ſundry ſmail branches " let with Jeauies , conliſting of findty fittle Ieaues ſet vpon a 
middle rib,like the wilde Vetch, ſauing thateuery ſmall leafe is taſhioned like a Butchers knife pla- 
ced onthe (inal pliant branches like teathers,which are likewife couered ouer with a woolic hoari- 
nes;in raſte aſtringent afthe firſt, but afterwards burning hot : among theſe Jeaues come foorth 
many {mall white lowers;in faſhion like the lowers of Lupines which betoretheir pong ſceme 
tobe ſomewhat yellow : the roote is maruellous great and large, confidering the ſmalneſic of the 
plant,for ſometimes it growethto the bigneſle of a mans arme , keeping the ſame bignefle for the 
ſpace of aſpannein lengrh,and after diuiderh it ſelte into two or more torkes or branches, blacke 
without and wrinckledzwhire within, hard and woodic, and in taſte vnpleaſanc, which being cried 
becommeth harder then an horne, | | 
2 Theſecond kinde of ©Aſtragalms is a rare and galant plant,and may well be termed Plants Le- 
wninoſa,>y reaſon thatit is accounted for a kinde of T4ſirazamw ,retembling the ſame mn the fini- 
Frude of his ſtalkes and leaues, as alſoin the thickneſle ot his toores, and the creeping and toulding 
thereof; and is garniſhed with a moſt thicke and pleaſant comlineſſe of his deleQable red lowers, 
owing vp togicher in great tufts,which are very leemely cobehold, -:P | 
There hath beene ſome controuerſie about this thirde kinde, which I amnot willing to proſecme 
orenter into : it may very well be Aſtraga/us of Mathis his deicriprion,or elſe his Polygala,which 
doth exceeding wel] reſemble the true Aſtragains : his mall ftalkes growea foote high, beſer with 
leaves like C:cer or Galega but that they are ſomewhat lefſer:among which come foorth ſmall Pea 
like towers,ofan Orenge colour,very pleafantin fight: che roote is rough and flexible, of a finger 
thicke, SY | | 
The fourth is called of Afutonm andother learned Herbariſts Afrazadazdes, for that itreſembleth 
the true LAſtrazatus, which groweth a cubite high, and in ſhewe ccfemblerh Liquorice : the flowers 
grow at the rops of the ſtalksin ſhapelike the Peaſe bloome , of a faite purple colour, which rurne 
into ſmall blacke cods when they be ripe: the roote is tough and very long, creeping vpon the vp- 
per part of the earth,and of a woodie fubſtance. ; | 
Ee. *% The place. | 
They grow amongſt ſtones, in open places, or as Oribaſzawriteth , inplaces ſubie&towindes, 
& couered with ſnow : Droſcorrdes copies do ad,inthadowie placeszit groweth plentifully n: Phenea 
acitie in Arcadia, as Ga/cx and Pliny report: m Droſcordes his copies there is reade , in Meimphis 
acitic of Arcadiaz but Memphis is acitic of Egypt, and in Arcadia there is none of that naine : 
ſome of them grow in my garden, andin ſundry other places in England wilde; they growe in the 
meadowesneere Cambridge,where the ſcholers vſe to ſport themſelues: rhey grow allo in ſundric 
places of Eſlex, as about Dunmow and Clare,and many other places of that countrey, 
| % The tine. | | 
They flower in Iune and Iuly,and their ſeede is ripe in September, = 
| | *% Thenames. | 
Milke Vetch is called of Mathiolus Polygala,bur notproperly; of moſt it is called Aſtrazalus :in 
Spaniſh Garevercilles: in the Portingales roong <Alphabeca: in Dutch Clepne Ciceten, 
| * The temperature and vertues. : | 
| Cſtragalusas Galen ſaith, hath aſtiingent or binding rootes , and therefore it is of the number A 
of thoſe Simples, that are nor a little drying; for it glueth and healcth vp old vicers, and ſtaicth the 
duxeofthe belly,if they be boiled in wine and Pa : the ſame things alſo rouching the verrues of 
Aſtragalus Do ſeorriazs hath mentioned, the roote ſaith he, being drunke in wine ſtaieth thelaske, 
andprovokerh vrine, being dried and calt vpon old vicers , it cureth them; ir likewiſe procurerth 
grcar ſtore of milke in.cattlc that do eate thereof, whence it tooke his name. 
I: toppeth bleeding,bur itis with much adoo beaten, by reaſon of his hardnes. B 


Xxx 2 | Of 


roo THE SECOND. BOOKBE OF THE 
Of Kidney V. etch. Chap.503. 


By Sa at. = 6 ICE! | + ws 
: | - :  £ « f Lo wil. +4 k : | F | 'S) + 3g 
A Xu accordingto Disſeoridey)is of two ſorts the ones like to the Lentill; the otherro the 
ground Pine, [.. = we bi diag M917 | 
14 orhghs ewninoſes |- | þ 14-112. Shea legrominele, 
Kidney Vetch, | | | [4 [2 4 | Srarrie Kidney Vetch, 
«> | $ © 4 id eb, | WE 
i ACES> Yau 


% The deſe ription. 


1 K Idney Vetch hath a ſtalke of the height of a cubire , dividing it ſelfe into other branches; 

L > whereon do grow long leaues,made'of digers leanes, like thoſe of the Lenrill, coucred as it 
were witha ſofrwhite downineſſe: the flowers on thegops of the ſtalkes, of a yellow colour , verie 
many ioined togither,as it were in a ſpokie rundle; after which grow vplittle cods, in which is con- 
teined ſmall ſeede: the roote is flender.,and ofa woodie ſubſtance. 


+ 


2 TheStarrie Kidney Vetch, called $zella leeuminoſa, or according to Cortuſus CArHaro, hath 


b 


many ſmall flexible rough branches, full of ſmall knors or knees: from whence ſpringerh forth one 
long ſmall leafe, like Birds foote, butbigger: from the boſome of thoſe leaues come foorth little 
tender ſtems, on the ends whereof do growe ſwall yellowe flowers, which are very lender, and 
ſoon vaded, like vntothemof Lampſana: theſe flowers turne into ſmall ſharp pointed cods, ſtanding 
one diſtant from another, like the diuiſions of aſtarre, or as rhough it conſiſted of lictle hornes, 
wherein is conteined ſmall b:cke ſeedes; the roort is tough aud deepely growing in the ground. 

/ There 


': + HISTORIE OF PLANTS. I6Et 
There is another ſort of Kidney Vetch called Birdes foote, or Ornithopodixm, which hath veric 
many ſmall and render branches, trailing heere andrhere cloſe vpon the groumde, fer full of ſmall 
and {oft leaues,of awhitiſh greene,in ſhape like the leaues of the wilde Vetch.,burt a great Ceale le. 
| ſer,and finer,almoſt like ſmall feathers : amongſt which the lowers do growe., that are verie ſmall, 
yellowiſh,and ſometime whitiſh zwhich being vaded , there come in place thereof lictle crooked 
cods,fiue or ſixe growing togither,which inſhew and ſhape are like vnto a ſina!l birds foote, and 
each andeuery cod reſembling a clawe;inwhich are incloſed ſmall feede like that of Tutneps. 
There is allo another kinde of Ornithopodtiom or Birdes foote, called ſmall Birds ſfoote, which is 
very like vnto the firſt, bur that itis much leſſer: the branches or ſprigs growe nor aboue a hand or 
halfe an hand high, ſpreading thewſclues vpon the ground with his ſmall leaves and branches, in 
maner of the leſler Ha: hue: the lowers are like vnto thoſe of Coronara Melilot ws. 
ow. "+ Thepare. 1 | 
Theſe plants I found growing vpon Hampſtead Heath neer London, right againſt the Beacon, 
vpon the right hand as you go from London,neere vntoa gravell pir zthey growe alſo vpon blacke 
Heath,in the high way leading trom Greenwich to Charleron, within halte a mile of the rowne, 
he % The time. 
They flower from Iyne tothe middle of Seprember. 
| 1 |  . %* Thenames. {= 
I cannot finde any other name for theſe plants, but Ornthopodium : the firſt is called in Engliſh 
great Birds footeythe ſecond (mall Birds f50te. ; 
1+) * Thenature andwertuts. >» 4:2 200 Des 
Theſe herbes are not vſed either in meate or medicine, that Tknowof as yer; bur they are verie A 
good foode for cattle,and procure good ſtore of milke, whereupon ſome haue taken them for kinds 


of Polygala. 7 LED h 

| Of blacke milke T are.  (ſhap.504. 

Glanx Dioſeoridn. | Wk 
Disſcorides his mulke Tare. + Theleſeription. 


He true Glawx of Diofcorides hath very ma« 

ny tough & wondee branches,trailing vpon 

'. the ground,ſer full of ſmall leaues, in ſhape 
like the common G/auxbut a great deale ſmaller, 
reſembling the leaues of Tares, but rather hke 
Birdes foote, of a verie graic colour: amongſt 
4 whichcome foorth knoppie and ſcalic or chaſe 
S& |  heads,verylike the Medowe Trefoile; of a faire 
| purple cold : the roote 45 exceeding long and 
woodie,which the picture doth not expreſle ad 
ſer foorth&. <4] 


The comfr.onor beſt knowne Glaux hath ma- 
ny long,torgh & flexible branches , proceeding 
immediately from 2 thicke and tough roote, 
growing very deepeinto the grouncezand leaues 
conſiſting of ſundry fmallleaues, ſet vpon borh 
ſides of a ſmall rib, each Jeafeftanding oppolie 
one againſt another , etien like the leaues of Lis 
We, = quorice, but ſmaller, of agrayiſh greene colour 

SILBUANSEP,, I © aboue,bur vnderneath of 2 skic colour, called in 
wad, = RRIELZ 00 Latine Glancrs color , or like the cieof a Lion or 
| | \ +, Owle, whereof it tygoke his name : the flowers 
grow at the top of the ſtalkes;/inihape bke Gate- 
£4, bur of a-pinple | colour; which being paſt, 
there ſucceederha {mall bunch of ftraight cods, 
whole pointsor cnds ſtand vpright fulloftcede, 

_ {ncaſte like Pulie or Verches, | 
Tax I | | *The 


1262 THE SECOND BOOKE OF /THE 


f | +. Thaplace. + | 
Gl1ux 1wwulearisorthe common G/aux, ME ey nr placesneer the ſeacoaſtes, as at Landi. 
me: Lading,and ſundry other places, | G 2:11; | | 
Thetrue G/aux groweth ypon Barton hill, fower miles from Lewtonin Bedfordſhire, vpon both 
the {ides of the declination of the hill, | P' ; | 
Theſe plants do flower and flouriſh about Midſomer, | 
Theſeplants haue in times paſt beqnecalled Glawsx .z.folia habens glances, ſave pallentia, thatis, ha- 
uing skie coloured,or pale leaues, | | = 1 | 
Sithens that in times paſt, ſome haue counted G{aux among the kinds of Polgela, or Milkwoorts, 
we may therefore call the firſt kinde of G/awx blacke Milkwoort,the ſecond white Milkwoort. 
| | *%Thenature. | | 
Theſcherbes ate drie in the ſecond degree, | 
| : | | *%$Thevertues. þ | 
A Theſe:des of the common Glawx are in vertuelike the Lentils,butnot ſo much aſtringent: they 


ſtop the fluxe of the belly,drie vp the moiſtuce of rhe ſtomacke,and ingenderſtore of milke. 
Of red Fitchling, Medick Fitch,and Cockes head. (hap.50s. 


I Onebrychts ſue Ca put Gallen 'cenm. [4 | 2 Onobrychis flore dur pures. 
Medick Fitchling,or Cockes head, 1 Purple Cockes head, 


CNV 
SEEERNS 

11» W/V Jn0O/7x 

Cs N AD of I UE 


Shs 
&\ V 


4 #4 
- W& : «I 
174 4\ UF? J 


—_— 


|» 24% Thedeſeription, | | OY 
I He firſt kinde of Onobr5chichath many lwall and vinie pliant branches, rampingand cree- 
ping through and about buſhes,or whatſocuerit groweth neere vnto : the Jcaues andal the 
reſt of the pulſe ox plant, 'is very like vne9 the wilde Vetch or Tare :the flowers grow at po 


of ſmall naked ſtalkes,in ſhape like the Peaſe bloome , but of a perple goes laide, oucr wi 
ut Cc Co 
| | 2 The 


*rop by | 
blue,which turne into ſmall round pricklic huskes,that are nothing elſe 


HISTORIE OF'PLANTS. 1! | 1053 
z "Theſecond kinde of Firchling or Cocks head,of Cls/iw his deſcription, hath very many ſtalks, 
eſpecially when it is growen to an old plant, round, hard, and leaning tothe ground like the other 
Pulſes; and leaues very like Ga/ege,o7 the wilde Vetch, of a bitrer taſte an lot Wome ſauour:among 
which come foorrh {wall and raund ſtems, atthe endes whereof do growe flowers {pike faſhion, 
three inches long,n (hape like.choſe of the A; Lagopit,or ar wee refoile, bur longer,of an ey- 
cellent ſhining purple colour, but without {mell; atter whichtherefollow imallcods, couraih 
litle hard and blackeſeede , in taſte_like rhe Yerch. TheToote is prear $4 ,hardand' 


14 +>- 
of 


woodic {ubſtance,ſpreadingirclfe fat abroad, and growing very deepe into tic ground, © 7 
| 13760} TOE BITT: >a | s E: | & 89 19 BW 2 

3 Onebrichio2.Clusy. mw 4 Omobrycbis 3.Clugipflore pallide. } 
' Blew Medicke Fitch. & ©. _ »,* Palecoloured Medicke Fitch, / 


* T he deſerjption. 


3 Thethirdkinde of Fitchling or Cocks head, hath from a tough, ſinall and woodie roote, many 
Vinie branches growing a cubite high, full of knots, ramping and creeping on the ground. the 
leaues are like the former, but ſmaller and ſhorter: among which come foorth {mall tender ſtems, 
whereupon do growe little flowers like thoſe of the Tare, but'of a. blew colour tending to purple. - 
The flowers being vaded,there come the ſmall cods, which containe little blacke ſeed like a kidney, 
ofa blacke colour, | | | 64.574 

4 Thefourth kinde of Ficchling hath firme greene hard ſtalkes a cubite and ahalfe high, where. 

n growe leaues like tothe wilde Tare or Ga/ega,but ſmaller and ſomewhat hairic, birter and vn- 
pieafantin raſte,and in the end ſomewhat ſharpe, Atthe top of the ſtalkes come foorth longipiked, 
flowers,of a palc colour, and in ſhape like thoſe of the ſecond kinde z which being vaded, there fol. 
low ſmall bottle cods,wherein is contained little black ſeede like the feete of Fenegreeke, but ſmal- 

-The rooteis thicke and hard,and of a whodie ſubſtance, andlaſting yery long, 
| AxXX 4 | || 5 Onobrycha 


* 


toy THE SECOND*BOOKE OF THE 


LY 


5 Onobrychis montana 4. Clach.. bs If! 
Mountaine Medick Ferch. "Tf 1 '* The 
; £61! dd inde of 


% # 


lour tending to purple, and aftefthem 'come ſmall 
cods,wherecin the ſeede is contained, | 

| 1. *% Theplace. 

The firſt and ſecond growe vpon Barton hill, 
fower nules ffom Lewron in Bedfordſhire, vpon 
buth the ſides of cthe-hill 3 and likewiſe-vpon the 
grafſic balkes herweene the landes of core two 

miles from-Cambridge, neere vitoa water mill ro. 
wardces Londoh; and diuers other places by the 
way frum London to Cambridge : the reſt are 
ſtrangers in England. | | 

|| 1! ++Thetime. - 

Theſe plants Go flower in luly,andtheir ſeede is 

ripeſhoruly after. | 

oo 11) $ Thenames, | 

It 1s «»drvazs;,/or without __ among thelater 

writers: theolde and ancient phiſitions do call ic 

| 5-045: forall thoſe things that are found written 

| | in Dzofcorrdes or Pliny concerning Onobrychw, do 

eſpecially agree hecreunto,Dzoſcoy. writeth thus; O-phrycbu hath leaves like a Lentil, buflonger;a 

ſtalke aſpan highzacrimſon flowerza little roote : it prowerth inmoiſt and vnrilled places: and P/- 

me in like maner; Onobrychr: hath the leaues of a Lenrill,fou.whart longer, a red flower, a {mall and 
flenlerroote:it growerh about ſprings or fountaines of water., 

All which things and cuery particular are in this 44s, ornameleſle herbe, as it is :ranifeſt: 

and therefore it-is not to be doubted ar all , but that the ſame is Onobrychis of the olde wri- 
eers: it may be calledin'Engliſhred Ferchling, or as tomeſappoſe Medicke Firch, or Cockes 


+ The temperature. 


| Theſe herbes a5 Galen hath written in his bookes of the faculties of ſimple medicines, doerati- 
fie or make thinne and waſte away, | Hcy »F11” | | 


A Therefore the leaves thereof when itis greene, bei qor 25 yet laide vpon hard ſwellings, 
waxen carnels in maner of a falue, doe waſte = Lahbome the Mm wo ,buc being dried and drunke 
in winetheycure the ſtrangurie zand laide on with olleir procuterh ſweate. | 
B © Which things alſo concerning Ozebrychts Dioſerrides hathin theſe words ſet downe : the herbe 
ſtamped and apoled waſterh 1% hard (wellings of the kernels; bur being drunke with wine it 
-heiperh the ſtranguric,and rubbed onwich oile it caufeth ſweatings. Ri 


= 
[1 4 


of 


HISTORIE OF PLAN: $| 
Of baſtard Dittanie, Chop. 50 6. 


F 14 ximella. 
Baſtard Ditranie, {1n4lt %7 rhedofripnie, 
| mu ke s wa veric rare and alane 
lanrghaving browne ſtalks, ſGmwhit 


rough, dizide mk ſindrie ſmall branches, 
og with leaues like Liquorice,or rather like 
the leaues of the Aſh Tree, bur blacker,thicker ,8& 
more full of inice,ofanvnpleaſanc ſauour: among 
which growe flowers ; confiſting of five whitiſh 


leaues {trippedwith red, one which gro- 
weth dumed; gs downe y9w-a4dom bur che 
| fower which growe 


and vpright : outof Wrath oft this devesi com- 

meth foorth a Tafſell, which is like a beard,hang- 

ing alſo downwards, and ſonſewharturning vp ac 
the lower end :which being vaded, there come in 
lace fower huskes joined rogirher, wuch like che 
mr or cods of Columbines, ſomewhat rough 

| without, ſlimie to handle, & of a lothſome fauour, 
almoſt likethe ſinell of a goatezwh creupen ſome 

Hetbariſts haue calledir Tragiwm: in the cods are 

contained ſivall blacke ſhining ſeedes like Peonie | 

ſeedes incolour : the rootes are white, a finger | 
thicke,one twiſting or knotting within another,in 
taſte ſomewhat bicter, 

+ There is another kinde heereof growing in my 
garden,not very much differing; the leaues of the 
"1 p one are greater,greener,harder,and ſharper poin- 
edzof bh aches bids ſo hard,not ſoſbarpepointed: : the flowers allo heereof be ſomerhing 
more bright coloured, and of the other a little redder, | 

| + Theplace. 

Baſtard Dirrany growerh wilde itt the mountatnes of Italy,and Gennanizqand l haueit going 

mmy garden, | 


% The time. 

| Itflowreth in Inneand luly: and the ſecede is ripe in the end of anguits/ 

 *Thenames. 

Thelater Herbariſts name it Fraxinells,moſt z=uaruaicy,as though they ſhould fay Humzlic Frext: 
»w,0r a lowe aſhetin Engliſh baſtard or falſe Dittanie: the ſhops call it Did7ammnun, and Dypramus, 
butnor truely,and vie oftentimes the rootes heereof in ſteede of the right Dicranie. Thatir is not 
the right Dirranie it is better knowne then needful] at all tobe contured , and iris as euident that 
theſame'is' not Dioſcorides his P ſeudoditFemmuny , or baſtard Dirrany: :buririsplaine to be akince | 
of Tragium of the old vwridets when): irſeemcthrto agree in ſhewe,burt notin ſubſtance, ”, 

* The temperature. 
The roote of baſtard Dirranie is hot and dric inthe ſecond TIES its ofa wang open 
andopening facultie, | 
% The vertues. 
Itbringerh downe the menſes, it alſo bringeth'away the birth and aherbitn 45 Patel 2 
_ of the matrix :andit is reported to be good! for thoſe that have il! flomackes andaſy wr - 
c | 
They fay alſo, chat it is vrofirable againft the ſing gs and "Pikes of ven F NON F ſerpengs No; Y 
aeainſt deadly poiſons,againſt conragious and peſtilent diſeaſes, and that! itis with pb: natal 
Xxx s | The 


_ with counterpoiſons. 


4 


1066 THE SECOND BOOKE!OF. THE | 

The ſeede of Baſtarde Ditranie taken in the quantitie of a dram is ry againſt the ſtrangurie 
proucketh vrine,breaketh rhe ſtone iri the bladder,and driueth itfoorch, | | T 

The like vertue hath the Jeaues and inice taken after the ſame orr,and being applied outwardly, 
it draweth thornes and ſplinters out of the fleſh, | | 

The roote taken with alittle Rubarbe,killeth and driveth foorth woormes. 

' Dioſeorrdes reporterh, that the wilde Goates being ſtriken with darts or arrowes, willeate Dic. 

tam, and thereby cauſe them to fall out of their bodies, which is ment of the right Di#am, though 
Dodettews reporteth that this plant will do the like, (which I do nor belecue.) | 


Of land Caltrops, Chap.$07- 


* Tribulw terreſtris. [| 
Land Calrrops. %* The deſeription. _ 

: ' Ande Caltrops hath long branches full of 
joints, ſpred f bc, ypon the ground, garni- 
” ſhedwithmany leues ſet vp6 a middle rib,af- 
ret the maner of Fetches : among which grow lic- 

tle yellow flowers,confiſting of five ſmall leaues, 
| like vntothe flowers of Tormentill : Ineuer fawe 
the plant beare yellowe,but white flowers,agrec- 
gp! $;-:=>8 ing with the deſcription of Dodonews ws re- 
85 =" AEXNN; Thaw, } 5 _. ſpeR, ſaueinthecolourof the flowers, which do 
VLLABNEPDNY 0/8 + rumeinto ſmall ſquare fruite, rough, and full of 
{/ prickles, wherein is a ſinallkernellor ſecede : the 

\. roote is white and full of ſtrings, | 

«14 . w%Theplace. | 

| Itgroweth plencifully in Spaine in the fieldes : 

it.is hurtfullto corne, butyer as Pine faith, it is 

rather to be accounted among the diſcaſes of 
corne , then among the plagues ofthe earth : itis 
alſo found in moſt places of Italy and Fraunce1I 
founge,it growing in a moiſt medow adioining to 
the woode or Parke of Sir Fraunces Carewe, neere 

Croidon, notfarre from London, and not elſe 

where: from whence I brought plants for my 

garden. |] | 


i, 


| Ic flowreth in Tune and Iuly: the fruite is ripe in 


11% The nones. 


 » | Iriscalled in Grecke rei6s105 : and in Latine T'r;- 

Sh a OL... .. 1 balw and thatitmay differ fromthe other which 

groweth in the water,it is name ellen gapoiiin, or Tr:bulas-terreftris : it may be calledin Engliſh 
LandCaltrops,of the likenes which the fruitc hath with Caltrops, that are inſtrumenrsof warre 
caſt inthe way to annoic the feere of theenimics horſes, as is before remembredin the water $4- 

_ ligot. 2. 1: | Thetemperature and vertues. 1/11 

A © Inthis Lande Caltrops thete is an earthy and co|de qualitie abounding, which is alſo binding, 
as Galen writeth, | Bp | | 

B The fruite thereof being d 
nelcs, EPR B YR'Ty 3 | | me - 

C © Land Caltrops faith Dioſeoriaes being drunke to the quantitie of a French crowne waight, and” 
alſo applied,curerh the birings of the viper... .-} 4. 1 1 Js vet 7 

And ifir be drinke with wine , it is aremedic againſt poiſons: the decoRion thereof ſprinkled: 

abour killeth fieas, * MA TE 1-41 I. | al Th 


Fo 
| x ; [#] 
: . £ . by 
: F, . 
Ar 7 es Þ I : 
ba - = . - : 
% 


. 
< 


cugke by reaſon itis of chinne parts , waſteth away ſtones in the kid- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | $067 


Of baſtar d Rubarbe. Chap.508. \ 


1 Thatlietrwn,/iut Thalittr um maine, 2 Thalifirwn mint. 


GreatbaſtardRubarbe, | SwallbaſtardRubatbe. 


PA, 


SRIQ HR 
EN \ f 7 
<< Mo 

m_— \\ if 


== 


i 


% The deſcription. 


1 FT” He great Tha/ictrwn or baſtardeRubarbe, hath large leaues parted or dividedinto diners 
other ſmall Jeanes, ſomwhart ſnipt abourthe edges, of a blacke or darke greene coldur : the | 
ſtalkes are creſted or ſtraked,of a purple colour,growing tothe height of rwo cubirs: atthe 

top whereof grow many {mall and hairie white flowers, and after them come ſmall narrowe husks, 

like little cods,fower or fiue groning togither : the roote is yellow, long, rounde,andknortic,diſper- 
ſgit ſelfe fatre abroad,on the vpper face of the earth,  . JIRA 

2 The ſmal!baſtard Rubarbe is verie like vnto the precedent , but thatiris Aogiony lefler : his 

{talkez are a ſpanne ot a foote long ;; his leaues be thinne and tender; the roote fine and flender 

thelitcle lowers grow togither in {mall bundles, or tufts,of a light yellow colour almoſt white,and 

ate of a greeu5us ſauour, | | 3 


” 
\ 
ws 
« 
P 


NEE” 0, % Theplace. bY pedath Het gioe- 
Theſe plants do growe alongſt the ditch fee. lovin from Kentiſh ſtreete vnto Saint Tho- 
mas Vatrings;the place of execution, onthe right hande zthey growevpon- the Thamesbinkes,' | 
leading from Blacke Wall to VWoobvich, necre London,and in ſundry other places alſo,” | 
CIOs io 14.14 % Thetime. VS OPTI TORRE 2: 8 
The flower for themoſt part in Tulyand Auguſt, Bi e556 bn of 


o-, 


; iq 
2 
; 


05S THE SECOND BOOKE OF: THE 


: : 
/ = 


Al | ** Thenames. 

Diuers of the later herbariſts do call it P;gamwmas though it were mhevvr, that is, Rue; wheruwpon 
alſo moſt call it Ruta paluFris, or/Fen Rue: others Pſebdo-Rbabarbarum ,and Rhabarkarum Mong. 
chorumby zeaſon of the yellow colour of the roore. Burneithec of their iudgements is greatly tobe 
elteemed of: they iudge bertey that would haue it to be Tha/etram, which Dieſcorides deſcri- 
beth ro haue leaues ſomething farrer than thoſe of Coriander ,and the ſtalke like that of Rue, vpon 
which the leaucs dogrowe, Penacalleth it Thalietrum, Thaliitrwn, and Ruta pratenſis : in Engliſh- 
baſtard Rubatbe,or EngliſhRubarbe : which names are taken ofche colour ,and taſte of the rootes, 

| | | wh Thetemperatare. || 
Theſe herbesarc hot and dricof complexion. 
| -} | '\$Thevertmes. 
A _Theleaues ofbaſtardRubarbe,with other potherbes,do fo 
B Thedecodtion of the roote doth moreeffectually. 


: 


mewhar mooue the belly. 


C Droſeorides ſaith, that the leaues being ſtamped do perfeAly cure old vIcers, Galen acdeth, that 
they drie wichour biting. | | | || | 


Of Goates Rue. | Chap.509. 


* Thedeſeription. 
FR Megs or Goates Rue, hath round harde 
F ſtalks ſer full of leaues, diſplaiedor winged 
| 7 abroad, cuery leafc conliiting of ſundrie 
ſmall leaves, fer vpon a {lender rib, reſembling 
thelleaues ofthe field Verch or Tare, burgreater 
anf{ longer. The flowers growe at the top of the 
ſtalkes , cluſtering rogither afterthe manner of 
thewilde 'Vetch, of a light skie colour, which 
turne into long cods, ſmall and round, wherein 
the ſcede is contained. Theroore is great,thicke, 
rough ,and ofa white colour. 
my 7 [-1 * The place. 

It groweth plentifullyin Iralic every where in 
fat mn , andby rivers ſides : it growerh likes 
wiſe in my garden. | 

Ex wu Thetime. 

It flowreth in Iuly and Auguſt. 

be”: | || th Thenanes. | 

The Italians callit G2/eza, and Ruta Capraria; 
divers name it corruptly Gralega, Hitronymus 
 FracaForimcalleth it Herbs Galleca: the Herruſ- 
 cians Leazneſe; & itis alſo called by divers other 
' natnes in ſiindrie places of Tralie, as Geſner faith, 

' aSare Caffracane, Lananna, Thoring, Or Tanrina, 
' Martanics,Saryacens, Capragina, Herbaneſa, Fa- 
 Pum gr ecum fyluetre, and as Braſanolus witnel- 
eth,Giarga.Itis named inEngliſh Tralian Fitch, 
| 1 |} | and Goates Rue, 
Some iudge,that the olde Phiſitions were woontto cal it Onobyychis,others Glauce, diuers would 
haue;ir to be Polemoniam , but not ſo miich Perry. And. Mithiolm in his commentaries, as cuery 
oneof thedeſcriptions mentioned by Dzo/corides do gainſay them ; as alſo thoſe, whothinke that 
Galegais Polygalon; and that thename of Ga/egycame of Polygalon , the very defcription alſo of 
Polygalen is againſt them: for Galegsis higher and greater, thanthar it may be calledalictle ſhrub, 
onely of an hand breadth high. | (pact = 


LY 


+ The 


'HISTORIE' OF PLANTS ['T .-F 


&*+ The temperature. | | | 
' This plant is in a meane temperatue betweene hot and cold. Morel ac; daortofent yt 
| * T he vertues. «| zþ Mt 17997 
Goates Rne is a ſingular herbe againſt all venomeandpoyſon, and againſt wormes, cok and A. 
driue them foorth ,if the iuice be giueato lirtle children to drinke, | 11// 
Iris of like vertue if itbe fried with Lineſerdeoyle,int bound vpon the childes navell. | B 
Iris miniſtred vnito Fo which hog ER what HE RPMEE: 18 EgY yAeO 
ning'1n milke. LOL WIRIA £fT a) & EYOMN 2] 
Fain boiled in v ineger, and Anke with alittle Treacle;.it is BN good againſt the nfetion of D - 
the plague,eſpecially it the medicine be taken within twelue howersy -- 
he herbe it {cifeis caten being boyled with'flefhyarwe ve to cate Cabbage and other woorts, E 
and likewiſe in ſallads,withoyle, vineger, and pepper, as we do careboyled Spmage; and ſich t.c. 
Which is moſt excellent zbeing ſa caten,againit al poyſon & peltilence,or any venemous infirmuric 
wharſoecver, and procurerh fweate. 
Italfo hc aleth the bitings and ſingings of Wy 0 12% yl ,if ether thei juice orghef a tam- F 
pedbe laid vpon the wounds;  ''/* WK CI 
Halfe an ounce of the iuice inwardly taken is reported to helpe hole that are croubled with con- G 
uulfions,c rampes,and all other the diſcaſes aforeſaid. - . 
The leedes do feede POO Wat and cauſcth them to poplde greater ſtore oFegs than H 
ordinatic. + - 


J 


Of Plni his Leadwoort. So hp. 


Plambazo Pliny, | ME. 
Leadwoort, | | % CP rs | 
| Entaria Or Dentillaria ; ; bath offeridedin 
= the luperlatie degree, 1 mrthar he hath kid 
himlclfe like a runnagate foldier, when the 
aſſault ſhould haue beene given vat > the:planc 
L-p14n9m,whereof doubtlefle itis akinde. 
the tault be mine,as without queſtionir is,lcrat 
pardon for the querſight, anddo intreate-thee 
youre reader to cenſure me with fayour, ;eby 
may more boldly infer: it in, this place. rather 
than toleane it vatouched, The learned of Nar- 
bone, eſpecially Xoadelct:as, have not without 
good cauſe *ccounted this goodly plant for a 
ki::0e thereof, bicauſe the whole planr 15 of a biz 
ting raſte. and: a burning faculcie, andchat in fuch 
extiemit'e, that it will raiſe bliſters ypon a mans 
hand : for which cauſe ſome of the ainod fore 
hane accountedit Þ/qnits Motyb./en4, or AE Ct 
netahis Lepidioms but the new herbariſts calle 
Dentaria,or Dentillaria R ndel. ty, whomadethe 
like vic hereof, as he did of Pyrethramn, and luch 
burning plants, to appeaſe the immoderate paine 
of the taothach and fuch like. This p!ant hath 
great thicke rough rootes,of a woodie ſubſtance, 
from whence {pring vp long and tough ſtalles 
two cubites high, confuſed!y garniſhed and beſer 
with ang leaves, incolour like Woad,of a ſharp : 
and biting raſte, The flowers growe a” the - F 
theſtakkes of apurp'e colour z which being paſtahere lucceede coſe, giitering and lairie h 
wherein is cantained lazall blackiſh lccae. 


4 %* The 


r070 THE $t00ND Þ TITTY OF THE 


+» They 
Pens reporteth that Denplatic groweth about eng te hedges acorn hieldes : k lhe: 
wile groweth in my garden' in gat plerays. 4 
+ Therime. 
Ir flowreth i in a. and Augiſt |: 4: : 
The men P. 


Leodrwouteiacalled Malybdens  Plumbago ? oP + Demeillria Randle :in Iancopand 
che Romaines Herbs S, q- 7 in Ilyriac Cucuridat in Engliſh Leadvoort, - | 
| | * The femperature. |:} 


— 


| Dentillariai is of a cauſticke quaitc. 


| + The wejebes ed $199 code 
A It helperh he rooduchgſpcallyi if irbe eld F the handfGme ial while. 


o Ret bee hi? Cup 5IL. 


abortenſn, |. |. E ns Rte lueftrivg raveolias, 
arden Rue. | || {| pk Stinkngyrlde Rus, 


Arden Rue or planted Rue,is a ſhrub full & PARK": BY and then ayard high,or higher: 

ſtalkes whereof are couered with a whitith barke , the branches are more greene : the 

leaues heereof conſiſt of diuers parts,and be diuided into wings, about which are cerraine 

lirele ones,ofan odde number, ſomething broad more long then round, ſmooth and ſomwhar fats 
ofa graiecolour,or erceniſhblue:the flowers in the tops 0 oft branches are of a pale yellow,con- 
Giſting of fower lirtle leaucs km. hollow : in fan middle of which ſtandeth vp a litle Roy Or 
uecon 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. -: 1091 
button fower ſquared, ſeldome fiue ſquared, containing as many lirtle coffers, as it hath corners. 
being cowpalled aboutwith divers little yellow threds: out of which hang pretie fine tips of one 
colour z the {cede growerh in the litrle coffers: the roote is woodie,andfaſtned wich many ſtrings: 
this Rue hath a very ſtrong and ranke ſmell,and a biting taſte. © | | | 
2 Theſecondbeingthe wild or mountain Rue, called &uts /plueſtri, is veric like to garden Rue,in 
{talkes, leaues, flowers; teede,colour, rafte, and ſauour, _ at every little leate hath {maller 


cuts,and is much narrower :the whole plant dieth at the approc of winter,being an annuall plant, 
and mult cither ſtande till it do fowe himſelſe,orelſe muſt be ſowenofothers. — | 


2 Ruta fylueftrieminima. | <<. - 4 ado 
The livalleſt wilde Rue, | | 3s 4404 


Mountaine Rue, 


% The deſcription. .. | 


, 


3 This plantis likewiſe a wilde kinde of Ru, and of all the reſt the ſmalleſt, and yet more viru- 
Jerir, biting, and ſtinking then apie ofthereſt: the whole plant is ot a whitiſh pale greene, agree. 
ing with the laſt before mentionedin- each reſpeCt, faucin grearnes, and in thatthe venemous 
ſumes or vapours thax come from this ſmall wilde Rue, are more noifome and hurtfull then the. 
former, | | | 

4 There is another wilde Rue growing ypon the mountaines of Sauoie and other places adioin- 
ing, having a great thicke roote;: from which do ariſe many ſhootes orſtalkes , whereon do growe 
leaues very thicke and fat , partedinto diners ſeQions, reſembling the leaues of Stonecrop, of a 
ſtrong and ftinking ſmell : the owers grow on the tops of the ltalkes Lonlilting of fower {mall yel- 
loweleaues : the ſcedes ate like the other, F(5 ET: 
3 | a7 


| 


— ——————— — "__ 


Ph 
ONE 


1072 THE SECOND BOOKE|' OF' THE 
Wilde Rvewithwhite flowers. 141 | + The deſcription. 
\f ; ,- 5 Harmellisone of the wilde Rues ; icbring- 
I | \eth foorth 'immediately from the roote divers 
little ſtalkes/of a cubite high : whereupon doe 
' growe greenie leaues diuerſlic cutte into lon 
{peeces;, longer and narrower then thoſe of the 
wilde ſtrong/{melling Rue: the flowers be white, 
-compoled of five white leaues : the frut is three 
ſquare, bigger then thatot the planted Rue, in 
which the ſcedelierh: che roore 15 thicke, long, 
and blackiſh: this Rue in hot countries hath a 
-maruellous ſtrong {mell, 'in co!d countries nox ſo, 
| | || * Theplace. 
; GardenRue ioyeth in ſimnie and open places, 
itproſperethy in rovgh and brickiz grounde, and 
awong athes,it can th no wile away with dung. 
The wilde are founde on mountaines in hot 
countries, a$.in Cappadocia, Galatia, and in di- 
' vers prouinces of Italy & Spaine3and on the hils 
0 Lancaſhire and Yorke. | | 
| Pl:nylaich, that there is ſuch friendſhip be- 
eweene it and the Figge tree, thar it proſpereth 
no where ſwell as vnder the Figge tree. The belt 
for Phifickeg ſc is that which groweth vnder the 
| Figge tree, 4s Dzoſeor. ſaith 3 the caulc isalleaged 
by Platarchjin the firlt booke of his Sympoſracks or 
feaſts: forhe ſarth,thar it becommeth more ſweet 
and milce intafte, by reaſon it takerh as it were 
4-4 A} ſome part of the ſweeteneſle of the Figge tree, 
whereby the over ranke qualiric of the Rue is alaide ; vnleſſe itbe that the Figgc tree whileſt it dra- 
weth noutriſhiwent vntoirſelfe, it likewiſe wi my | drawerh away the ranknes cfthe Rue. 
B20 4 | [ak Thepone. {7 4*. 
They flower in theſe colde countrits/in Iuly and Auguſt in other countries ſooner, 
| on | {+ The names, © | ; 
The firſt which is Horfen/is Rers , garden Ruc:; m high Durch Nauten :inlowe Dutch RNutite : 
the Italians and Apothecaries keepe the Latinc name: in Spaniſh Aruda:inFrench Kue de Tar in : 
in Engliſh Rue,and herbe Grace, || | || | * 
Wilde Rue is cailed in Greeke marr, Peganm in Latine Rats fylue/fris,or wildeRuc: in Galatia 
and Cappadocia «4»: of diuers Harmala : ot the Ar2bians Harmel: of the Syrians Beſara. 
| By 146 Thetemperature. ; | 71 
Rue is hot and Crie in the later end of thethirdeidegree : and wilde Rue! in the fourth : it is of 
thinne and ſubrill parts,it waſterh and conftmerhiwindeyit cytterh and digeſteth groſle and rough 
humours, * | = * The VErtAes, [14 | | 
A Rueorherhe Grace,prougketh vrinebringerh egowne the ſicknes,expelleth the &ead childe and 
afterbirth, being inwardly raken, or the decoftion drunke ,/ahdis good for the mother, being but 


w: ; : : 
4 g : E 


j 


=, , ” 
vx 7 
= F _ 
” 
Pw) 

- PP \ 
#. 

WB 


0 
P,/2 
4 


o_ 4 
; —_—_— P 
—J)" 
, #. 
MW 


: 


onely {melled voto ; vhecmeunto Macey adde th n theſe verlos, 
 Tufimfibriitur compeſert, menſty ud purgets 

$1 £49144 Hare 177 egpua, ci6t IHR tm XEr I Gere 
C 0'11peſett 14/5 decofTis termiraventrt. | 

 Pulmones mit & teTusgnor bog, medetur || 

Cc oftar wn quer: plear If 20s word rttica Yorrg4d. 

_ Arthn et1168,Scya/apgue buiar,jcbribu/que mederar 
Hanſa &e. | | [11.7 0 


; 


HISTORIE/ OF: PLAN 
Itſtaies the cough ifit be drunke, 
Itclenſeth monthly flowres, | 
It youir ſeethe in water, and je: Mat 
Thereroput *wine that ſcoures; | * vineger 
Snch broth doth ſtaie the belly gripes. 
Ithelpeth breſt and 7 
Ircures the ſicknes ofthe ſides, | | 
Cald *P/emrſie in Greeke toong, bl * Pleuriſie 
The gour and the ſciatica, I | 
| Ani agues.it doth cure, l 
It it be drunke: and other things, | 


As writers do aflure. 


® 3 
bt 
T H 
+ F 
T » 
5 
: 
. 
* 8 


Plinie ſaith in his 20. booke 13.chapter,thar it openeth the matrix, and bringethit into herrighe B 
place,ifthe belly all ouer,and the ſhare (the breſtſay the old falſe copres) be annointed therewith: 
being tempered wich honie, itis aremedie againſt the inflammation and fwelling of the ſtones, 
proceeding of long abſtinence from yenerie,called ofour EngliſMonntibankes, the Coltes. cuill, 
ifit be boiled with Barrows greace, Baicleaues, and thepowders of Fenugrecke and Linſecde be 
added therto, and applied pultis wife, whereupon the Poer hath thns written: * 

| Hac etjan tettes paterss curave twnentes, | 
Cum folys Lauri bene tritam, [i ſuperattns. 


Wirh this likewiſe you may reſtore the cods when as they ivell, 
Ifthereunto you put Baie leaues all bruſed verywell, | 


It taketh awaythecraditic or rawnes of the humours, and likewiſe windines, and oldepaines of ©: 
the tomacke; whereu»on acer hath thus wricten: 1 
Piganon in Grecalingua quod Ruta wocatur, 
Illus Antidoti confettio talis habetur : 
Pondere tunge pars nitrwn, piper, atque Cyminum 
De tribus his, quaytuwn de rut s, ponito tantian : | 
Sed Prews EX Acrs 410 maceraye Cymmun | ; 
Conuenit, in * ferro poſt aſſaricalefatto: { * farno 
Omnia deinde [anal bene trita ex mellt ingabis. | 
Pettorts,cy latera, tecorts,renwmaue aplores | 
Hoc ex * antidocurantur ſpe come ſto, | * antidets 
_ Extennat bilcm zollit fine tormine ventrem. j 
Confortat ftomachwn facit vt bene digerat eſcam. I 


Rue, which in Grecke js called P;ganon, 

The making of his antidote heere warnecach one: | 
OfNitre, Pepper,and Cumine, like waighr of all rake you, 
Put ” as much of theſe ſamerhree in quantitie woo zi 
Butfirſt ts meete youlay to ſoke in vineger umen, 
And after to be baked, pur itinaheated Tabss | 
Then all rogither bruſed well, with honie-you ſhall joine; 
The paines and ſorenes of the breſt, the liuer, ſides, and loine, 
And kidneies helped are, by this good medcine caten oft: 
Itmakes thin choler,bellie free from gripes,it maketh ſoft: 
| Vntortheſtomacke comfort great, | 
Caufing itwell to brooke itmeate, 1 


1 


Rue boiled with vineger,remooucth gripings, it gm againſt the ſtitch of the ſide and cheſt, D 
>. ſhortnes of breath vpon atolde cauſe, and alſo 


againſt the paine in the ioints and huckle 


; EZ =0 * 
F þ II] if 

| : ; = 

[1 * 

; 


15794 THE SECOND 80OKE OFTHE 


E Theoyleof it ſeruerh for the purpoſes | laſtrecited: irtakerh away the colicke and pangs in the 
guts, notonely in a cliſter, bur alſo anointed vpon the places iffefted. Bur if this oyle be made of 
the oile preſſed our of Lineſeede, itwill be ſo much te berter, $0d of ſingular force to take away 
hard lwellings of the ſpleene or wile, | / 

F lrisgiuen with good ſuccefle againſtrhe drophie, calledi in Greek nionhus, being applied to the 
belly in manner of a pultisz ; whereof the foreſaid Poet adderh: 


[| 1 


Cum Carici dtcoilh din,vini f {iquore, j | 
Pr ofunt Hydyopien, (i fint ſupey 
With drie figs boilde if lon C1 Thang i of wine,theſe wo 


Do helpe the dropſie if heyke laid overight thereto, 


The herbe a lirtle boyledor ſealded ang keptin ple, as we Þ vie Sampier, and eaten, quicke, 
neth the fight : whereof is written | | 


Nobuli eft htajake FLO phi aeuts { 
AWXido rat ever loppe videbte aentd, | 
NobleisRuegbicauſe it makes th'eie ſight hoth ſharpe and cleere 
With belpe of Rue 0 blear- eyd mangthouſhal: ſee far and neere, 


hs The ſame applied with honic and the/i iuice of Fepnel] isa remedie againſt dim ejes ; whereaf 


ſpeaketh thus: | 
Et weltin Marathyi enum ſucto fe 4: ww | 
Melt /iuecms e ago magitar emer, | 
Indeg, (int ocu'i patientts [ape pernntth, 
And hetter with greene Fennel ice, Vf of acocke the gall, 
Andhonie,if the twice thereof alike be putof all 
And withit oft the pationnn cles annointing tutfer ſhall, 


I Thei ivice of Rue made hot in the rindeof a Nojegranate, and dropped into the eares, taketh 


- away the painethereo! zwh: ercof Macerhach thus written, || 


In poriomall granats [1 repefs Fo 299 & 
Aurrbus jnfunda depelics inde delorem, | | 
In a Pomegranate pecle the ute lukewarme there to remaine, 


Ifyoy powre into tli'cares you (hall from pacy driue quite the paine, 


K Saint Anthonies fire i on uenched therewith zit Kllerh the hingles,and running vicersand ſores 
in the heads of yoon ren, if it be tempered with Ceruſeor white Lead, vineger, andoyle of 
Roles made into the X: of Nutriton.pt Triapharmachon whereof the Poet ſpeaketh: 


ſromiſtems oleo nec non Oþ acets $ 
the cam gapitiocurare | 
( Quaruis ;mmodrcum )poter is hoc ſepe 

With oyle ot Role and vineger,minglin - ice ofthis, 

The headach(though the ſane be great)you may __ andnotmis, 

Angoingng oftentimes the head cherew 


L | Dioſeorides faith,thar Rue put vpin the noſtrels ſtaierh bleeling, ; ; whereof the Poer Macer : 


N aribus expreſſus fi \ſuce us funditar a) 
Sſtit manantem bene deſitcamdo eruorens. 
If that the iuice thereof cruſht out be powr'd into the WHY 


Ir ſtaies the ſtreaming blood full well,by drying vp that flowes. 


M Of whoſe opinion Phnical ſos : | when normichſtandingjc is of power rather to procure blee 
ly Wh the ſharpe andbiting wo oy — © [The 


|| 


IMISSORTS OF PLANTS. | | 1075 


_— *n Rue yon and dri Wight willegand an Antidote ormetlicine againſt poiſons,as N. 
tec 
—_ feeriderwriterh, whus a oveltopenit: weight of the ſeeds Sas wine, is a counterpoyſon O 
22 jw _— ly rhedicines; orthe poylon of Wolfes bane, birdlime, Muſhroms or Toadſtootes,the 
bringsoff nes, ſtinging of ſcorpions, ſpiders,bers,hornets, and jim en , andis reported, that if 

a man be antivinted with thetuice of Ree, "theſe will nothurchim the {erpent is Eriucn 
away at the ſmell thereof when it is burned, inſo much thatwhen the W ceſel isto fightwith the 
ſe;pent, ſho armerh hiy ſelfe by theeating otRue, againſt rhe might of the ſerpent : whereof the 


Poet Macer ? | 
| Atanteleg themes obſiftere poſſe-wenent ; 
Mirifiee rutan comedunt que primitmm itlom, 
Ciirm * pug nare ſunt cum ſer pentibmatrhs, i "PHCnatur 4, 
And Weerels reach it canwithſtand ſroagpen $ ſpire, 
Which whenthey are about with ſerpents blackero fight, 
In woondrouy (fort do firſt of all, Rue nibble care and' u 44 


The leaves of Rue eaten with the kernels of Walnuts, or "gs amped rogither and hide ib a Þ 
malle ar paaſte,is good againſt all gail aires,thepeſtilence orp ti pong poiſon and al venom 
whereot the toreſaid Poet hath hi written 2 


ObHat pet mereuel eruda comeſta venents : | 
Hoe Mithridates rex ry, of ho probamt, 
Qui rate fof fs viQUntt enm ſal 

Et magni wactl us bins, Cariehs rel 
Jetnn ns vel rcon prong lebat. 


CArmatmng, rye IIS | 
Quilober inf in/ Ro ſh1 tendere hand nou 
Rue drunke with wine,or eaten rawe, | 
withſtandeth poylons ſtrong 
This Mthritates king of Pont 
tride oft ahd prooued long: 
Who vſed riſing in the morne 
faſting and freſh toeate, 
A ſcore RueJeaues and ſalt therewith, 
in quantitie not great: 
Andarmed with ſuch meate as this 
fear'd not/whar ſnares ſoeuer 
By poyſons any laid forhim, 
cotheir vtmolt endeuor, 


Likewiſe Salerng inthe rearile De conſernanda valetudine hath thus written: 


Alla yape pre a &f raphanu cum Theriaca wn, 
Preſia nt dos contre lethale venenun, 
Garlicke,Rue,Peares,and Radiſh allo, | 
with Nuts likewiſe and Treacle, 
A ſow'rcigye medcine to vs doſhow, 
againſt: adly poyſonan obſtacle, 


 Vrginge che fn further faith thus: 
| Saluia can ruta faciunt tibi pocula tut a. 
| Thar ts, 
Sage and with i irherbe Grace or Rue, 
Make _ both ſafe and ſound ms : 
ue 


"1 


oh ak 
Ld 


1076 _ THE SECOND iBOOKB OF. THE 


Q Rueboiled with Dill,Bennell ſeede, and ome Sager, in titie of wine,freagerh the 
rorments and griping paines of the belly, the pai reaſt, the difhicultic of brea- 
ting,thecough,and4 {topping ofthe lungs, andh wear me rnd" vato add 

 R Theinicerakenwich Dill,as aforeſaid, heipeththe cold oy agues;and . ns theiscourſe: it 
A hel perii che inflammagion of thefundamentand paines of ay! ET Rettum; 

S, ihejuiccof Rueguinke with wine, purgerh on phanl ir delyerance ; driuing foorth the 
{econdine, the dead childe,and the vanarurall birth, 1; 

7 ». Ree vicd very oftcu either inimeate or drinke, quencheth S driech vp the naturall leede of ge. 
nexation,and the milke of thoſe that y eſucke. = 

V Theoyle wherein Rue hathbeene yled,andinfuſe8 formany tine rogither i in the ſunne,war- 
met! and chafeth all coldmembers if they be annojated therewith : alſoit proucketh vrine, if the 
region of the bladder be annointed therewith, a. 

X Tf ir be miniſtredin Wh it jxppljcch windineſſe, and te corfion or  gnawing paines of the 

uts. 

Y Theleauesof oardan Ruch boyledi in water and drunken, cauſerh one to make water, prouoketh 
the termes,and ſtopperhthe laske. | 

L Ruta ſplne tris or wildeRuc, is much more vehbrdent both & ſmell andoperation, and therefore 
the more virulent and pernitiqus. For ſomerimeir fumerh out a vapour or aire ſo hurtfull , that ir 
ſcorcherh the face of him that lookerh 1 ypon it, raiſing vp bliſters, wheales, and other accidents, ic 
| venometh their hands that touch ir,which alſo will inte& the face if it be touched with them before 
_they becleane waſhed: ueportt itis not to be qdinicoed vnto meate or medicine. 


: 


? ) | 
; F iq 
| = | 7 
[ L nf : 
. © » 
Th £1 | 
eend 0 the econd 00KEC., 
, ' ' 
| ; : $ " 
4 i: 4 7 TY 
o : | P 
wy F4 j 
£ 4 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF, 
as Hh 'THE'| HIST OR1E: or pt 
TN bo PLANTS: fr ES p) 


$756 


Cont taining the deſcri tion, lace, time, names, ans and wertues. _ 
Ti rees, ShrubsBuſhes, Fruit-bearing plants Rogins,Gums,Ryves, © 
| Heath, Moſſes : fome Fudian plants, and other rare plants 
not remembred in the Proeme to the firſt booke. 
Alſo Muſhroms, Corall, and their 
| ſenerall kindes,&c. | 


The Proeme. | | 


=== Aung finiſhed the clear at hetbes andplanrs in el vcd for meate,medicine, 
23S Al or ſweerte ſmelling vſe, Jews ſome few omitted for want of perte&t inſtruftion, and 
ELLIS 8 alſo being hindered by the 
oo 8] wants we intend to fupplie inthisthirdand1alt pare.\ The Tables, as well generall as 
B particular ſhall be ſer foorchin the end ofthis preſent yolume, 


Of Roves. Chap. 1i/% of 


[1 


ckneſle of the curters or'grauers of the figures, which 


| *% The kindes.” ' © is 

| He plant of Roſes ;though i it bea ſhrub full of prickles,yeri ithadbeene morefir and 
|/Conuenient to haue placedit with the moſt glorious flowers of theworlde, than ro 
z| inſert the ſame here among baſe and 'thornie ſhrubs? fortheRoſe doth deſerne the 
chiefeſt and moſt principall place among all flowers whatſocuer, being nor onely 

=272=-=4 ceſtccincd for his beauric, vertues, and his flagrant and odoriferous ſmell; bur alſo 
bicauſcit is the honor and ornament of our Engliſh Scepter, as by the coniunQion appeereth in 
the yniting of thoſe two molt royall houſes of Lancaſter and Yorke, Which pleafanr | flowers de- 
ſerue the chieſeſt place in Crownes and parlands, as out of —Anacreen Thizs a moſt ancient Grecke 
Poet, Henricws Stephanus hath tranſlated ina gallant Latine verſe: | 


Roſa F+ aecuſy, flor um, 
Roſ+,cura, amory, Vert. ”— 
Roſa, celitws eft-voluptas, | : of 
Roſen puer Cytheres | & 
Ca put implicat corents, 
Charitur Choyos fequentans.- | 
Which is engliſhed thus : | 
TheRoſeis the honorand beautie of flowres, F 
TheRoſeis the careand love of the ſpring, | 
The Roſe is the pleaſure of th'cauenlypowres, 
The boy of faire Venus, Cyther.cs\darling | 
Dorh wrap his head round with aphids of Roſe, 
When tothe daunces of the Graces he goes. 


erimn FOR | ſpeaking of the: eſtimation and honor of the Roſe, reporteth rhat the 
Tukecan no meanes endureto fee the leaues of Roſesfallro the ground, dicauſethar ſome of 
them haue d.thatthe firſt or moſt ancient Roſe did {pring ot che loodef Foray) und Callers 
of ſhe Mahumetans ſay,chatitf} prang of the ſweate of Malnonet. | 


Aaaa I F Bur 


1678 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
But there are many kigge\ bf, Rok | $6 0 1 in heblgneflgof the lowers; arthe plant it 

{elferoughnes ex fmoorhhes, br in * multitude © x i Ynk. gp 9 fewne = elle Me 

and lme[l: for divers of them pre high and tall, 6ther hott ahd low (one have five leaues,others 


very many. Theophraſftzatelleth of a certaine Roſe (rounga ut Phlippiwith an hundred leaves, 


[ : 


Which the inhabitants drought toorth of Panpizifn, and planted itin Campania, as Pane faith 
which we ho}d tobe the Holland R: fe\that divers call the Province Roſe, bpt nat properly, : 
Moreover, ſome be red, others white, and moſt bt them ot all,veerely (alting,cſpeciall thoſe 
of the gardenzwyheretore Serabe Girlz In his little vey dothnotonly (peake of Rofes themitlue; 
burof the ſhogtes and ſprigs, which he goth call Fe{arae writing thus: = ith 
1.0 Janpniſtme ſeſſune ic longivy inaupedever,) | 
Scrapens at jue wont tryereryr car mmis orde, 
Debueram Vil wing Roſe rretroſa metallo | 
Paoli, & ninets CArabum crreundare genmir, 
Thatis mn Evgliſhs |! ov | 
Now were it not,tharweatie and a longer way dothler, 
 Andofmy new deuiſed verſe were worne the ſtonie ſer 
Iſhould with 7aetwetall and ſnowe white Arabian gems, 
Be'er abour of Role and tree the pretious ſhootes and ſtems. 

- Notwithſtanding Yrig:lzu and Uudarelne N emefianwaltirme,that YViburnum is a certaine kinde 
of ſhwubbierree, linle, lowe, tough and bending, who his firſt Eclog commending thecitic of 
Rome ſaith, [-- 5'$ "44 {4 | | | 

Veruwmn hec tantin a/ias inter caput extulit vybes, 
Quantwn lents ſolent mrer viburna Cupreſd. 
' Whichis thus eugliſhed: | 


Burt * this, among/othet.ciries/and townes, *Rowe vpon 
Hathſo much mofe ſtarely borne vp hir head; ſeuen hils, 


By how much the Cypreſies carrie their crownes, 
KY bit Abpue theilowe viorus bending (like leadg,). 
And N.emeſiana in his ſecond Eclog in theſe verics:; ;_ | 
#9 |, Nos quoquete propter Donate dinabimur vrbi, 
Ss moto con:feras iter viburna Cups efſos,. 
| it inter Piros Corylumn frunie/cere {45 off. 
os | " VVhich are thus WA f af 


. And we(O Doxac,$o the towne will giuen be for thee, 
It yet among the lichic ſhrubs a lawfull thing it be | 
For Cypreſlc trees with pointed tops theirlcaues roſhoote, 
Or Hale! crees aihong the Pines to take xheir roote. 
| | 


| | +The a: ſeription. 


ZE F the curiouscould ſo beconrent, one generall deſcriptionmight ſerue to diſtinguiſh 
Rb z#| the whole ſtocke or kiarcd of the Roſes , being things ſo welknowen z notwithſtanding 
by Das I thinke itnoramiſle,to ſay fomething of themſeuerally in hope to farisfie al.The white 
— Roſc hath very long ſtalkes of a wogdie ſubſtance; fer or armed with divers ſharpe pric- 
kles : the branches whereof ate likewi{e full of prickles, whereon do growe leaucs conſiſting offiue 
leaues forthe molt part, ſet vpon a mziddlerib by couples z the od leafe ſtanding at the point of the 
{ſame,andenery one of thoſe ſmall leaves ſomewhat ſnipt about theedges, ſomewhat rough,and of 
an ouerworne greene colour z from the boſome whereof ſhoote foorth long footeſtalkes, whereon 
do growe very faire double fgwers ,of 4 white colour and very ſweete ſmell, hauing in the middle a 
few yellow threadsor chjucs g which being paſt,there ſuc« edt a long fruit greene at the firſt, red 
when it is ripe, and ſtuffed with a dovinie choking matter, wherein is,contained feede as bard as 
ſtones. The roote is longgtovgh, and ba woodie ſubſtance. | | l 

2 | TheredRoſegroweth vetylowe jnreſpedt of the formet-:'the ſtalkes are ſhorter,ſmoother,and 
browner of colour: the lucy are hke, yetof a worſe duſte colour: the Aowers growe on the tops 
of the branches.cenſifiing of many leayes,of a pete & red colour : the Eruitis likewile red when'1t 1s 
ripe zthe roote allo woodie, | Fe leke nds id 420 ae nds Hole rl [14 


if 


HISTORIE OF PLAN* 


t Reſt abs, | 2» Ro/arabre. 
The WhiteRoſe, 


, 
4 


—_——— 


PAID FS 
4 Koſa Wer; anrn 
Thelefler Damaske | 


: F 
Pd ty 


, 
; $1 $ © 


1030 


THE THIRD B 
3 The common Damaske Roſe in {kature , prickley branches, and in other reſpeRes is like the 
White Roſe ; the eſpecial difference; conliſterh in the colqur and ſmell of the flowers; for the(e 
-arcofapale redcolour,ahd ofa more vleaſant fimell,and firterfor meate or medicine. 

4 Theother differeth not,bur is altogither leſſer :the flowers and fruiratc like: the vic in phiſicke 


alſo agreeth with che precedent. 


a ſine pint, © | | 1 « 
cRoſewithout prickles. | | * The deſcription. 


: \ i 
= 
. 


OOKE| OF THE 


' 
| 
F- 
| {| 
| 
F 


5  TheRoſe withour prickleyhath many 
oong ſhootes comming from the root, dj. 
uiding themſclues into diuers branches , 
tough, and of a woodie ſubſtance, as are all 
the reſt of theRoſes,of the height of five or 
|  faxe Eubites, ſmooth-and plaine withour 
-\| | any roughneſle orprickles atall; whereon 
| dvogrowe leaues like thoſe of the Holand 
Role, of a ſhining deepe greene colouron 
the vpper ſide, vnderneath ſomewhat hoa. 
ric ak haitie, The flowers growe at the 
rops of the branches, conilling of anin- 
finite number of leaues, greater than thoſe 
of the Damacke Roſe, more double, and 
of a colour betweene the Red and Da- 
maske Roſes, of a moſt ſweete ſmell. The 
fruitis rounde, red when it is ripe, and ſtuf- 
fed with the like flockes and ſeedes of thoſe 
of the Damaske Roſe. Therooteis great, 
woodie,and far ſpreading, 


| %Thedeſeription. 


6 The Holland or Probinge Roſe hath diuers ſhootes proceeding from a woodicroote, full of 


ſharpeprickles, diuidingit ſe 
leaues fer vpon a rough middlerib, 


e Rolez in 


tielfe into diuers branches z whereon do growe leaues conſiſting of fue 


andthoſe fnipr about the edges. The flowers growe on the 


tops of the branches, iy ſhape and colour like the Damaske Roſe, bur greater and more double, 

in ſo much thar theyeltyr hives in the middle arc hard to be ſeenc; of a reaſonable good lmel!, 
| butnorfull ſo ſweere asthe common + Roſe, The fruit is like the other of his kince. 

WehaveinourLondong 5 one of the red Roles, whoſe lowers are iri quannitic and beati- 
- tie with the formet, bur of greater eſtimarion, of a yerfet redcolour , wherem eſpecially 


ſtalkes, ſtature, and manac, vi growing it agreeth with out 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS | 1681 


6 Roſa Hollandica ſour Baraua. | | | | 
The great Holland itoſe, commonly called the great Prouince Role, + Theplace,, 
EGF <.-, *., COFTT 1 _ AV theſe forts of Roſes we 


have in our London gardens, 
except that Rote wiuhyut pric- 
kies which as yer is aſtrangerin 
Eqglande. ihe double whitc 
| Roſedoth growe wildeinmany 
hedges of Lancathue m great 
abundance , even as Briers do 
with vs intheie ſoutherly parts, 
eſpecially in a place of the. cun- 
rey called Leylande , andin 2 
Piace called Rougi::oorde, noc 
tar from Latham. Morcouez,in 
the fſaide Leitlande figlds Goth 
grow our garden Roſe wilce, in 
the plowed fieldes'ainong the 
c9renc in fuch abundance, that. 
there may be gathered daily,du- 
ring the time, many buſhels of 
Roſes, equall with the beſt gar- 
den Roſe in cach reſpec ; the 
thing thar giueth great caute of 
woonder is,thatina field inthe 
place aforeſaid, called Glouers 
ficide, eucry yecre that the field 
is plowed for corne ,that yecre 
the field will beipredover with 
Roſes; and when ic liech as they 
calirleye,andnortplowed, then 
| ſhal there be bur fewe Roſes to 
begathered: by therelation of a curious gentleman there dwelling, ſo otten remembred in ous Hi. 
ſtorie, | % Thetime. "7: | 
Theſe flower from theend of May to the ende of Auguk , and diuers times after , by reaſon. the 
tops and ſuperfluous branches arecur away inthe end of their fowring z and then do they fome- 
tines flower eucn vntill October,and after, RK Fhe names. | . | 
The Roſe iscalled in Latine Xofa: in Grecke #5»: and the plant it ſelfe 54%: which in Latine 
keepeth the fame name that the Gower hath, and it is called Rodon ,as Platarchiaith, bicaule it ſen- 
dcth fogrth plentie of finell, | | | 
The middle part of the Roſes,that is,the yellow chiues,or ſcedes,and tips, is called ©Anthes, and 
Fhos Reſethe flower of the Role :1n ſhops tantbera,or the blowing ofthe Roſe, 
The white parts of the leaues of the flower it ſelfe , by which theyare faſtned tothe cups,be na- 
med 7ngwes or nailes, Thatis called Ca{zx,07 the Cup, which contgineth and holdeth in togither 
the yellow part and leaues of the/fiower, | | TY 
Altbaftri,are thole parts of the qup which are deepely cut, & that compas the lawer cloſe abour, 
before 1t be apcned; which be 1 munber frue, two haue beards andywo havenone,and the fift hath 
but ha!fe onc: moſt do call them Certices Roſaram,or the buskes of the Roves, The ſhores of the 
plant of R-ſc$,Strabs Galbes in iy lictle garden doth call Fiburme, WT1I"g 2s belure in the Proeme; 
The whitc Roſe is called 89/4 4/ba : ir: Engle the white Roxie - 1n hugh Dutch TOs Kopita; 
mnlowe Dur. h 7Ziatie Coon: French Blanche: of Flange Spaned's hoſe Oi Kifa © am aarte,. 
lhe red Riſe 1s called in Lawie 4o/a Rabra: if the FrenGhionnn (fot Fronely, Ros tf Progemt & 
tone ww Canpaigne : of Pam Frootanies Fr enrff ne 1 | | 
the Damazke Role is called of the hatians Zefa rr ar 4's: 1 bet | hc it wo fhEf as bigee BY tri 
whkow Dutch joungie ABBIE: 0 fon Aſs rom enerect cn Hott bf Prometss| orga offer 


TSS Þ7 | I 


- 


it & # 


all lkelyhood i came 


Theleaues of the lowers ofRoſes, 
ſundric facutties ; for there be in them cerrainethar are carthie and binding , other moiſt and wate- 
rie,and ſundry that are ſpirituall and airie parts which notwithſtanding arenot all after one ort;for 
in one kind theſe excell,in another thoſe: al of them hauca predominant or ouerruling colde tem- 

| perature,which is neereſtto a meane,thatis ro ſay;of ſuch as are cold in the firſt degree: moylt airic 
and ſpirituall parts are predominant in the white Roſes, Damaske and Muske. 
A Thediſtilled waterof Roſes is good! forrhgſtrengrhening of the hart, andrefrething of the ſpi. 
rits,and likewiſefor all things that require a gehitle cooling, | | = nike 
B Thefſamebeing puriniunkerring difhes,cakes,ſawces,and many other pleaſant things, giueth a 
fine anddeleRableraſte,, | | | 
' C Irmitigateththepaine ofthe cies proceeding of a hot cauſe. bringeth ſleepe,which alſothe freſh 

' Roſes themſclues prouoke through their ſweere and pleaſant ſmcll, 

D Theiuiceof theſe Roſes, eſpeciallyof Damaske, doth moue to the ſtoole, and maketh the belly 
ſoluble : but moſt effeRually of the Muske Roſes, nextrothem is the iuice ofthe Dantkske, whichis 

E Thceinfuſion of them doth the ſame, and alſo the firupe made thereof called in Latine Dro/atam 
or Serepium:the Apotheearies callit ſirupe of Roſes ſolutive, which muſt be made of the infuſion,in 
which a great number ofthe leaucs of theſe freſh Roſes are diuers and ſundrie times ſteeped. 

'F Iris profitable to make the belly looſe and ſoluble , when as cither there is no neede of other 
ſtronger purgation, or thatit is notfit.andexpedient to vſcit: for beſides thoſe excrements which 
ſtick to the bowels,or that in the firſt andneereſt vaines remaine raw,flegmaticke,and now & then 
cholerickzit purgeth no other excrements,vnleſſe it be mixed with certain other ſtroger medicines, 

G Thisfirupe doth moyſenandcoole, and therefore ir alayeth the extremitic of heate in hot bur. 
ning feuers,mitigateth the inflammations of the intrailes,and quencherhthirft : it is ſcarce good for 
a weake and moyſt ſtomacke,for ic leaueth it more ſlacke and weake, Wk 

H Of like vertue alſo afe the leaues of theſe preſerued in Sugar, eſpecially if they be onely bruiſed 
with the hands,and diligently tempered with Sugar,and fo hear ar the fire racher than boiled, 

'. '  w* Thetemperdtureof Red Roſes. 3 

Thereis in the red Roſes, which are common euery where, and in the other that be of a deepe 
purple;called Prouince Roſes, a morecarthie ſubſtance, alſo a drying and binding qualitie, * not 
without certaine moyſtute ioyned, being in them when theyare as yer freſh , which they loſe when 
they bedried : forthiscauſe their juice and infufion doth alſo make the bodie ſoluble, yernot ſo 
much as of the others aforeſaid. Thelc Roſes being dried, and their moyſture gone, do Dinde and 
drie; and likewiſe coole but lefler than when they are freſh. ay” 

I They ſtcengthen theHart,and helpe the trembling and beating thereof, | 

K They giue ſtrength tg theliuer, kidneies, andother weake intrailes; they dric and comfort a 
weake ftomacke that is flaſhie and moyſt ; ſtaythewhites ang reds; ſtanch bleedings in any part of 
the body,ſtayfwearings,binde and looſe, and moyſten the body, 

L Andtheyareputintoallkinde of counterpoyſons and other like medicines, whether theybeto 
be outwa plicd or to be inwardly raken,to which they ive an effeuall binding,and certaine 
ſtrengehening\qualitie. | {4k f | | 

M HonicofRoſes,or Mel Reſarwm;calledin Greekefw,which is made ofthem,is moſt excellent 
good for wounds, icers, iſſues, and generally for ſuch things as haue need to be cleanſed 8 ow 


[8 


* 
. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTE. wth 
| ve oyle doth all kinder of heate, ann ul! no fiſher fhanprngtions pation: 4 hot b gllungs to A 
Ee hadeietns "> Trl —— 


| % T he tamper atns and © rr ines of the part er, 
The flowers of s of Rofes,that is to fay the vellow haves 
and bunde,and that more lly chan the leaves of the Rotes tom 
the cups and beards be of : but ſeeing none (24 thetehaue any iweere 


tips do $3 like rmaner dric B 
rluer;the tame triperatioe 
, they aye not fo profita- 


blc,nor fo fannliar or beneficiall tomans nature ; norwithitanding 1 at the te x xt thall avatle 
ho Chinnen gary, to carrie ſtore chereof with bum, which doth there prevaile much more 
than atthe land, | | 


1 he ſawe yellow called Centhers,ſtaicrh not only thole laskes and bloodic fiuxes which do hap- C 
pen at the ſea, burthole at the land allo, andlikewile the white fluxe and red in women, if they 
dried,beaten to powder, and two ſcruples therot giuen inred wine, with a lirtle powder of Ginger 
added thereto: and being at the ſea, for want of red wine you may viefuch liquor as youcan getin 
ſuchextremitie, | | 

The little heads or buttons of the Roſcs,as Pliny writerh, do alſo ſtanch bleeding & ſtop the lask, D 

The nailes or white endes of the leaues, of the flowers,arc good for watering cies. E 

The roote of the wilde Roſe is a ſingular remedie (found out by ofacle) againlt thebiting of a F 
mad dog,as he alſo declareth in his 8 booke 41.chapter. | 

The iuice, infuſion, or decoction of Roſes, are tobe reckoned amang thoſe medicines which are G 
foft,gentle, joofing, openinggnd purging gently the belly, which may betakenar all times andin 
all places,of euery kinde or ſexe of |people,both olde and yoong,withour danger or perill, 

The firupe made ofthe infuſion of Roſes,is a moſt ſingular and gentle looſing medicine,carrying H 
downwards cholericke humors,openeth the ſtoppings of the liuer,helpeth greatly the yellow jaun- 
dies, the trembling of the hart, and taketh away the extreme heate/in agues and burning feucrs, 
which is thus made: ! | ] 

Take twopound of Roſes,the white endes cut away, put them to ſteepe or infuſe in ſixe pintes of I 
warme water in an open veſlell for the ſpace of twelue howers; then ſtrainethem our,and pur ther. 
tothe like quantitic of Roſes,and warme the water againe,ſo let ir ſtand the like time: do thus fower 
orfiue times; in the end adde vnto that liquor or infuſion, fower pound of fine Sugar in powder ; 
then boyle it ynto the forme of a ſirupe, vp a gentle fire, continually ſtirring it vntill it be colde ; 
then ſtraine ir, and keepe it for your vie, whereot may be taken in white wine,or other liquor, from 
one ounce vato two, {| | | | 

Sirupe of the iuice of Roſes is very profitable for the griefesaforeſaid,made in this manner: XK 

Take Roſes,the white nailes cur away,what quantitic youpleaſe,ſtamp them,and ſtrayne out the [, 
iuyce, the which you ſhall purto the fire, adding theretoſugar, according to the quantitie of the 


: 


ps. ayes on a gentle fire vnto a good conſiſtence, Il. 
nto theſe ſirupes you may. adde a few drops of oyle of Vitriol, which giucth it a moſt beau- M 
tifull colour, and is helpeth the force in cooling hor and burning feuers and agues : you likewiſe 
may adde thereto a ſmall quantitie of the iuiceof Limons,which doth the like. | 
The conſerue of Roſes as well that which is crude and rawe, as that which is made by ebullition N 
or boyling, taken in the morning taſting, and laſt at night, ſtrengtheneth the hart,and taketh away 
the ſhaking and trembling thereof, ſtrengrhenerh the liver , kidneies, and other weake intrailes, 
comforteth a weake ſtomacke that is moyſt and rawe; ſtaierhthe whites and reds in women, and in 
a word,is the moſt familiar thing to be vſed for the purpoſes aforeſaid, and is thus made : 
Take the leaues of Roſes, the,nailes curcff, one pound, put intoacleane pan; then put thereto O 
apinte anda halfeof ſcalding water, ſtirring them togither with a wooden ſlice, fo ler them ſtande 


: 
: 


to macerate cloſe couered ſome two or three howers; then ſet them to the fire flowly to boyle, ad- 
ding thereto three pounds of ſugar inpowder, letting them fo fimper togither according to diſcre- 
tion,ſome hower s anus ae cor it for your vie, - | ED 
| The ſame made another way;bur better - many degrees : Take Roſes at your pleafure,put them Þ 

to boyle in faire water, hauingregard to thequantitiez forif you hauemany Roſes, you may take 
the more waterzif fewer, the lee water will ſerue : the which you ſhall boyle arthe leaſt three or 
fower howers,cuen as you would boyle a peece of mearte, vntill inthe cating they be very render, at 
which time the Roſes will loſe theircolour, that you would thinke your bdur loſt, and the thing 
marred. But proceede ; for thoughthe Roſes haue loſt their colour, the water hath gotten the 


Aaaa 4 tincture 


{ 4 
! 2 


'Þ 
pf 5 


1084 THE THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 
tiaQture thereof; then. ſhall you adde vnto one! pounde of Roſes fower pounde of fineſugar in 
pure powder, and fo according to the reſt of the Roſes, ThuFfſhall youler them boyle gently after 
the-Sugar is put thereto, continually ſtirring it with a woaden Spatula vntill it be cold, wherof 
one pound waight is woorth fixe pound of the crude or rawe;conlerue, as well for the vertues and 
goodnes in taſte,as alſofor the beaurifull colour. | [ 6x1 | 
Q __ The making of che crude or rawe conferue is very well knowen, asalſo Sugar roſet, and divers 
other pretic things mace af Roſes and Sugar, which are impentinent vnto our hiſtorie, bicauſel in- 
trend neither tomake thereofan Apothecaries ſhop, nor a Sugar bakers ſtorchoule, leauing the reſt 
ſor our cunning confeEtioners. = j W- | 


|Ofthe Murke Rove. |Chap.2. 


| | . ' %* Thekindes. | | 
*T' Here be divers ſortes of Roſes planted in eardens,beſidesthoſe written of in the former chap- 
ter, which are of moſt writers 1eckoned among the wilde/Roſe:,notwithſtanding we thinke ir 
qpnuenient ro put them in} 2 chaprer berweene thoſe of the garden and thebrierRoſes, as indiffe. 
rent whether to make therh of the wilde Rotes,or 6f the tame, fecing we haue made them denizons 
in our gardens for diucrs 1efpeRs,and that woorthily, | 


I Roſa Meoſchita ſamphici flore. | | | || 2\ | Roſa Moſe ' ata gc wy 
. the ttngle MuskeRoje, | | [Ine double Muske Roſe, 
| | G3: 


Y 
». # 
x; 
” 
WF 


4 
\ 


= 
hs. CO 4 
-—_ [ 4 % 
A, — _ . 4 »# 
* - — —_ *-- 


o** 


| EE 4409 1% T, he deſerirtion. I! | 
I He fingle Muske Roſe hath diners long|ſhootes of a greeniſh colour and woodie ſub- 
{tance,armed with very ſharpe prickles, dividing it ſelfe into divers branches: whereon do 
growelong leaues,{moorh and gry, of dinersleaues ſer ypon a middle rib,like the 
other Roſes. ihe towers growe on the tops of the branches of a white colour, and plezfanr ſweete 
ſmell,uke thatof Maske,whereof it rooke his nave ; having certaine yellow ſeedes in the middle,as 
the reſt of the Roſes haue; The fruitis/red when itis ripe, and filled with ſuch chafhe flockes and | 


2 The 


+ 
. 


ſeedes as thoſe of the other Roſes, | heroote is cough and woodie. 


1 


HISTORIE/OF PLANTS. to2g 
> The double Muske Roſe differeth'not from theprecedentjn leaues, ſtalkes, and rootes, nor ity 
the colour of the flowers,or fweerenes thereof, but onely in the doublenes of the lovers, wheteirr 
conliſteth the difference. * | bt A Fo | 
Oftheſe Roſes wehave anotherin our London gardens, which of moſtis called the bluſhRoſe : 
. ir fowreth when the Damask Roſe doth. The flowers heerof are veryſtngle,greater then the other 
Muske Roſes , andofa white colour,daſhtover wich a light wath of carnation, which maketh that 
colour,which we call a bluſh colour. The proportion of the whole plant , as alſo the ſmel! of the 
flowers,arclikethe precedent, | _ 
3 Roſa Holoſericea. TY 4 Roſa lute. 
The veluetRole, | | The&Fellow Roſe. 


1 *% Thedeſcription. | 
3 Theveluer Roſe groweth alwaies very low, like vnto thered Roſe, hauing his branches couered 
with a certaine hairie or prickly matrer,as fine as haires,yet nor ſo ſharpeor oo that ft willharme 
the moſt render skin that is : the leaues are like the leaues of the white Roſe: the flowers growe at _ 
the to>of the ſtalks,doubled with ſome yellowe thrums inthe midft, of a deepe and blacke red co- 
lour,ceſembling red crimſon veluer,whereupon ſome haue called ir the VeluerRoſe : when the flo- 
mom be vaded, there followe redberries tull of hard ſeedes, wrapped in a downe or woollines like 
the others, | [ IEP} 
4*. Theyellow Roſewhich (as divers do report)was by Artſo colotred, and altered from his firſt 
eltare,by grafting a wilde Roſe vpon a Broome talke; whereby ({ay they) ir doth not onely change 
his colour, but his ſmell and forces. But for my partI having found the contraric by mine owne ex- 
perience:cannot be induced to beleeue the report: for the rootes and ofsprings of this Roſe haue 
brought foorth yellow Roſes,fuch as the maine ſtocke or mother bringeth our, which enent'isnot 
to be ſeene in/all other plants thar haue beene graffed. Moreouer, the ſeedes of yellow Roſes have 
brought ſoorth yellowRoſes , ſuch as the Gower was from whence they were taken 3 which = 
| | 1 | | Wou 


1086 THE THIRD BOOKE |OF THE 
woulde not doby any conieQurall ceafon, if char of themſelyes they were nota naturall kinde of 
Roſe. Laſtly,it were conttary to that rrue principle, [4 | | 
Nature ſequitar ſemina quodgue ſux, that istoſaie: | | | 
Euerie ſecede and plant bringeth foorth fruiclike vntoit ſelfe, both in ſhape and nature: but leauing 
that errour,l will proceedto the deſcription. The yellow Roſe hath browne and pricklie ſtalkes or 
ſhootes, fiue or ſixe cubites high,garniſhed with many leaves like vnto the Musk Roſe,of an excel. 
lent ſweete ſmell , and morepleafant then the leauies of the Eglantine: the lowers come foorth 
among the leaues, and at the top of the branches of a faire golde yellowe colour: the thrums in the 
middle,arcalſo yellow ,whichbeing gone,rhere follow ſuch knops or heads,as the other Roſes bear, 


5 Roſa Cinema pleno fore. | 
The double Cinnamom Roſe. | + Thedeſeription. [i] 
1. | | The Canellor CinnamomRoſe, ortheRoſe 
{melling like Cinnamom , hath ſhoores of a, 
browne'colour, fower cubirs high , beſer with 
thorney prickles , and leaues like vato thoſe of 
Eglantine , bur ſmaller and greener, of the {auour 
or ſmell of Cinnamom,wherof it tooke his name, 
and not of the ſmell of his lowers ( as ſome have 
deemed )which haue little or no ſauour at all :the 
flowers be|exceeding double, andyellow in the 
middle, of a pale red colour, and ſometimes of a 
carnation: the roote is of a woodie ſubſtance, 
| We have in our London gardens another 
OM V |CA82 Cinnamom'or Canell Roſe, nor differing from 
WA WE A EDT 7 the laſt deſcribed in any reſpeR, but onely inthe 
N == = doubleneſſt of the flowers ; for as the other hath 
\'Y: >= very double flowers : contrariwiſe theſe of this 
plant are very ſingle,wherein is the difference, 
| | , *% Theplace. | | 
| Theſe Roſes are planted in our London gar- 
dens andelſewhere,but nor tound wilde in Eng- 
\ *% The time. 
' The MuskeRoſe flowreth in Aurume, or the 
fall ofthe leafe: the reſt lower when the Damask 
and redRofe do, 
| [: * The names. 


| Thefirſkis called wv Meoſchats,of the ſmell of 
Muske,as we hauc ſaid: in Italian Roſa Meoſchetta: 
in French Roſes Muſquees, or Muſeadelks : inlow 
£29118 | Dutch Buſket Rooſentin Engliſh Muske Roſe: . 

118. | the Latin &Engliſh titles may ſerue for the reſt. 

| 11 * Thetemperature. | _ $64 11 
The MuskeRoſe is cold in the firſt degree,wherein airie and ſpirituall parts are predominant: the 
reſt arereferred to the Brier Roſe,and Eglanrine. | { | 

FR: 1 | w*% Thewertwes, | 


tH 


Conſerue or ſirupe made of the Muske Roſe, inmaner as before roldein the Damaskeand red 


o 


Roſes zdoth purge very mightily wateriſh humours,yer ſafely, and without all danger, taken in rhe 


quantitie of an ounce in weight, = Il, FN 3a 

The leaues of the flowers caten in the morning,in maner of afſallade,with oile, vineger & pepper, 
or any other way according to the appetite & pleaſure of them thar ſhall eate itzpurgeth very nota- 
bly the belly of wateriſhand cholericke humours,andthat mightily,yer withour all perilibr paine at 
all,inſomuch as the ſimpleſt may vie the quanritie according to their owne fancies for if they do de- 


: 


firemanie ſtooles,or lieges,they are to eate the. greater quantitic of the leaues3 if fewer » the leſſe 


. 


# £ 
# 2 
& 
8; 
iy 

y 
FF 

» 
* 7 
LF£ 
Es 

: 


? 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1087 

quantitie,as for example: the leayes of twelue or fowerreene flowery giue ſixe or eight ſtooles, and 
ſo increaſing or diminiſhing the quantitic,more or fewer,as my ſelfe haue often prooued. 

The white leaues ſtamped in a wooden diſh with a peece of Allum afid the iuice ſtrained foorth | 49 
into ſome glaled veſlell, dried in the ſhadow and kepr, is the moſt fine and pleaſant yellow colour 
that may bedeuiſed,nor onelytolimne or waſh pitures and Imagerie in books, but alſo rocolour 
mcates and ſawces which nocwithſtanding the Allum is very holfolhe. | | 

There is not any thing extant of the others, butare thought ro be equall with the white Muske D 
Roſe, whereof they are taken and holdento be kinds, | 4 37” 


Of the wilde Roſes. Chap.3. 


| | _ Thekindes. | Ed 
There be diuers ſorts of the wilde Roſes differing verie norablic as well in flowers ,{me},as ſtature. 
1 Roſa ſylueſtris odora. | | Cani in 
The Eglantine, or ſweets Brier, Bri 


| ——- ; . * I / 
FD ( . A -) -PÞ WP Us 
# \\ lw//4; \ Wil | \\ ” 
1 I IT} We at w. -{ 1 05, | 2 
2's —I X £\P 
\ 4 


lp.7 
/ p 


Az 


- 
— : 


I He ſweere Brier doth oftentimes grow higher then all the kindes of Roſes; the ſhoores of 
it are hard,thicke,and woodie; the leaues are glittering, andof a beautifull greene colour, 
of ſmell moſt pleaſant: theRoſes are little, five leafed, moſt commonly whitiſh, feldoine 

rending to purple, of litrle or noſmell atall: the fruite is long, of colour ſomewhat red, like a little 

Olive ſtone, and like the little heads or berries of the others, burleſler then thoſe ofthe garden ; in 

which is contained rough cotton, or hairie downe and ſeede, folded and wrappedyp in the ſame, 

which is ſmall and hard. There be likewiſe found abour the flender ſhoots heerof, rounde, ſoft, and 
hairie punges, which we call Brier bals, ſuch as grow abour the prickles of the Dog Roſe. 
Wehaue in our London gardens another ſweerte Brier,hauing greater leaues, and much fwee- 
ter: the flowers likewiſe are greater,and ſomwhar doubled, exceeding ſweere of ſmell,yherin ir dif- 
fereth from the former. | } | | 
2 '[he Brier Buſh or Hep tree, is alſo called Roſe Canine, which is a plant ſo common and well 


| knowne, 


£ ? , : 

: E y | , 1 - 
F [ 1 , #3 
? : ? 'SF 


1689. THE THIRD BOOKE|OF THE 
knowne,thatit were to foyroi to yſe many wards in the deſcriptiontherof:for cuen children 
with great delight care the berries cheregfwhen they be ripe, mike chaines and other pretic gew: 
gawes of the fruite : cookey and gentlewqmen make Tarts and ach like dithes tor pleaſure thereof 
and therefore this (hall ſuffice for rhe deſcription, | ts ! 


3 Roſa Pimpinelle, || | | 
Lhe Punpernell Roſe. | 


| The deſeription.. 


ernell Roſe is likewiſe one of the 
wilde ones , whoſe ſtalkes ſhoore foorth of the 
ground nay places, of the height of two or 
three cubzjrs, bf a browne colour, and armed with 
ſharpe prickes, which diuide themſclues to- 
wardethe tops into diuers branches , wheron do 
grow leaues, conſiſting of diuers ſmgll ones , ſer 
ypon a middle rib like thoje of Burner, which is 
called in Layne Pjmmpinells, whereupon itwascal- 
led Roſe Fimpinells,the BurnerRole. The flowers 
grow at the gops of rhe branches, ofawhiteco- 

Jour, veryſtygle, andlike vnto thoſe of the Brier 
_ ot Hep tree;/after which comethe fruite, blacke, 
contrary to all the reſt of the Roſes, rounde as an 

apple ; whereupon ſome haue called it Roſe Pomy- 
fera,or the Role bearing Apples : wherein is con- 
reined feede, d in chafhe or flockiemat- 
ier. The roote is tough and 


= 


4,47 - i 
io a — 
Wd Sm IEF 


- 2» Vi a 
yo A LS 
& » HT: 


brinke of the riuer Thames) vnto Horndon on 
the hill, infomuch that the fielde is full fraught 
therewith allouer. _ 
| 08. | ; Ar groweth likewiſe in apaſture as you go from 
a village hard by London called Knights bridge, vnro Fulham a village thereby and in many other 
laces, ML | | ; IT i.- | "in HE 
: Wehaue them all excepethe Bricrbuſh,in our London gardens, which we thinke vawoorthie 
the place. 181 | w% There. 118 | | 
They flower and flouriſh with the gtherRoſcs. | FRAP - hu 


| 


% M4 - | *% The hames. FE 1 | 
The EglantiueRoſe yhich is Cynoryhod:, or Canme Zoſe ſftties, akinde of Dogs Role, and Koſs 
ſplueftris, the wilde Roſe tin Jow Durc| Eglantict ; in French Eſe/entine, and as Ruelizws reſhfierh 
Englenterium, who allo ſuſpeE&erh it to be Cynosbaton, or Canirubes, of which Dioſcor iaes bath 
written in theſe wordes z Cynosbatme, or Canirubus, which ſorpe call Oxycantha, is a ſhrub grewing 
like a tree,fall of prickles,with a white lowerylong fruite like an olive ſtone 3red when itis ripe an 
downie within: in Engliſh Eglantineor ſweete Brier, 14s a ge 6 IE 
The ſpungic bals which are found ypon the branches,are moſt py properly called Spong#- 
ole ſylueſtrts Roſe the little ſpunges of the wilde Roſe: the ſhops miltake it by the name of Bedeguar* 
for Bedernay among the Arabians 1s 4 kinde of Thiſtle, which is called in Greeke 9xa1%e 267" , that is, 
Spina altathe white Thiltle:not.the white Thorne, though the word do import no lefle. == 
The Brier or Hep 11116 ones Syipeſtris Roſa, the wilde Roſe: in high Dutch UUrden Roſen: 
in French Re ſes ſanuages': Plinie in his 8 booke atd 25, chapter faith, that iris Roſe Canine, Dogs 
Roſe: of divers Canna fentis, or Dogs Thorne: in Engliſh Brier buſh, and Hep tree: the laſt hath 
beene touched ip the deſcription. | 7 | Aj 


HISTORIE OF PLANITS. © 1039 
t& The temperatare and vertues. | 

The faculties of theſe wildeR9ſes are referred to the manured Roſe, but not vſed in Phiſicke A 
whete the other may be had: notwithſtanding 'Ply afticmech rhat| theroote ofthe Brier buſh is a 
ſiopular remedy found our by Oracle,againſt the biting ofa mad dogge, which he ſetteth downe in 
his 8.booke,q 1.chapter. | = | 

The fame author affirmeth in his 25. bookeſeconde chapter, thac the lictle ſpungie Brier ball B 
ſtamped with hony and aſhes,doth cauſehaires ro grow which are fallen away throughthe diſeaſe 
called _Aoperia, or the Foxes euill,orin plaine tearmes,the Frenchipockes, | | 

Fuchſaus afficmeth ,thar the ſpungic excreſcence or bail,growing ypon the Brier,are good againſt C 
the ſtone and ſtranguy,if they be beaten to powder, and inwardly taken. | | 

They are good not as they be giuretikes,or prouokers of vrinez br as they are wearers away of D 
the ſtone, but as certaine other binding medicines that ſtrengthen the weake and feeble kidneyes, 
which dono more good to thoſe that be ſubie& ro the ſtone then many of the diuretickes , eipeci- 
ally of the ſtr6ger ſort: for by roo much vſing of diuretickes or piſſing medicines,it hapneth thatthe 
kidneics are ouerweakned,and oftentimes roo much heatedzhy = meanes not onely the ſtones 


 arenortdiminiſhed, worne away, or driuen foorth, bur oftentimes are alfo increaſed, and made 
more hard: for they ſeparate and take away that which in the blohd is thinne, watery, and as it 
were whayiſh; and the thickerparr, the ſtronger forts of diurerikes do drawe togither and make 
hard;and in like maner alſo others that are not ſo ſtrong,by the ouermuch vſing of them, as Gale 
in his fifc booke of the faculties of fumple medicines doth report. | 

The fruir when itis ripe maketh moſt pleaſant meates and bankerting difhes, as Tartes and ſuch E 

like : the making wherof I commit to the cunning Cooke, and the|teeth to cate themin the rich 
mans mouth, f | | || | 


| Of the Bramble,or blacke Berrie B | . Chap.2. 


On j *% The kindes. 
There be diners forts of —_— ſhall be declared, 


| 1 Rubs. ll © 
Lhe Branible Buſhy, * 


; 
: ? 
4 


4 
bi 


S; 
1 


, 
F| —— 


4 P20 
1% 


—_ 


by. 4 


" 


Y a” 


Ex 
ſE 


1096 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE , 


13 


1118 The deſeription. || 

1 *T" Hecommon Bramble brin foorth ſlender branches , long, tough , cafily bowed , 
| rampingamongl edges , and w atſocuer ſtandeth ere vnro it, armed with harde and 
prickles : whereon do grow leaues, confiſting of many ſet vpona rough middlerib, * 

greene on the vp fide.and vnderneath ſomething white: on the tops of the ſtalkes ſtande cer- 
taine lowers,in ſhapelike choſe ofthe btier Roſe, but lefler, of colour white, and ſometimes waſhe 
oucr with a little purple:3he fruite or berric is like thoſe ofthe Mulberie, firſt red, blackewhen iris 
ripe,in taſte berweene ſweete andſower, very foft and full of graines: the oore creepeth and ſen- 


deth foorth heere and there yoong ſpringes, ; Thtz:] | | 

2 TheRaſpis or Framboile buſh hathileaues and branches not much vnlike the common Bram. 
ble, but not ſo tough nor prickly, and ſometimes withour any|prickes atall, hauing onely arough 
hairines abour the {talks :the fruit in ſhape and proportion is like thoſe of the Bramble red when 
they be ripe, and coucred ouer with a little downines, of taſte not very pleaſant: the roote creeperh 
far abroad, wheicby it greatly increaſeth, = | iy | 


3 Rubus Saxatilin,, | bo 2 | | . 
' Stone blacke Berrie tree, | | | |. KnorBerrjierree, 


| 4 Chamemorns. 


= ; 
" 


: 
: 
is * 3 
7 + 
+1 3 


oue a foote high having many ſmal flexible branches trai- 
ddrſh barke, and ſomwhat h 


detnaked footeſtalks; omwhar nipr aboue the 


. 


endes of the branches, conſiſting of fower ſmall white leaves, cof 
which comeſinall grapelike fruite,conſiſting of one, two, or tl '5 ſer 
the common Bramble, of a red colour when they be ripe aac 
what aſtringent: the ro&tes creepe along in the grounde e eby it Fen ! 
increalcth, E817 | [0 | 


o : j 
[1 'W'; 


44 
= 


| -HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. TA9r 
4 Chamemorascalledinthenorth partof Englande (where they eſpecially do growe) Knot her * 
ries, and Knought berries," is likewite one of the Brambles, though withourprickles : it bringe th 
foorch ſmall weake branches or render ſtems, ofa foore high ; whereqn do grow at certaine di{tan- 
ces,roughleaues, inthape like thoſe of the Mallow, not vnlike to the leaues of the Gooleberrie 
buſh :on the top of cach branch ſtandeth one lower and no more, nn of five ſmall leaves; 
of a darke purple colour; which being fallen, the truite ſucceederh ,hke wnto tharof the Mulbe- 
ric (whereof it was called Chamemorus, dwarfte Mulberie) at the firſt white and birter, after red; 
and ſomewhar pleaſant: rhe roote is long, ſomething knortie z from which knots or joints thruſt 
foorth a fewe ; remmey {trings, | 
] | %* The place. is 

The Bramble groweth for themoſt part in cuery hedge and buſh, | | 

The Raſpis is planted in gardens; it groweth not wilde char Lkno# of, except in the fielde by a 
village in Lancaſhire called Harwood, not farre from Blackburge, | 

I have found it amon 
I went to ſchogle. two miles from the Nantwitch in Cheſhire. | 

The ſtone bramble Lhaue foundin diters fieldes im the Ieof Thaner, harde by a villagecalled 
Birchintonneere Qi1eakes houſe, ſomerimes Sir Henrge Criſpes dwelling place, 

Knot berries do toue open fnowie hils, and mountaines : it groweth plentifully vpon Ingle. 
borough hils ajong-the Heath and Ling , ewelue miles trom Lancaſter , beingthought to be the 
higheſt hillin England, | | 


It groweth vpon Stanemoore betweene Yorkcfhire and Weſtmetland, and vponother wet Fels 


and Mountaines. | 


| *% The time. | 
Theſc flower in Maic and Iune with the Roſes: their fruire is ripe in the ende of Auguſt and Sep- 
rember. | % The names. | | 


The Bramblc is called in Greeke Bes: in French Rowges, Loi Dayts Brebmers: in Latine Rubs, 
and Septis,and Yepres,as Onid writeth in his firſt booke of his Meramorphoſis; 


Aut lepart, qui epre latens hoſiilia cernit | 
Oracanum. | 
an | 
Of diners it is called Cynosbatas but not properly, for Cynosbatwsis the wilde Roſe, as we have writ- 
ten: in high Dutch Byemen: in low Dutch Bycemen: in French Rouce :in Iralian Carz:; in En- 
gliſh Bramble Buſh and Blackeberric Buſh, | "Bae 
The fruit is named in Latine Aforum Rubi: and as Fachſins thinketh Faciniwn, but norproperly: 
in ſhops Afors Bari: and in fuch ſhops as are more barbatous Mord Baz: in Engliſh Blackberries, 
The Rafpis is called in GreekeBtne idzizt in Latine Rubus 1415, ©) 
it groweth :in Englith Raſpis, Framboiſe,and Hindberrie, | 
| **'T be temperature and Vertnes. 


do very much dry and binde withall: being chewed they rake away the heate and inflammarions of 
the mouth,and almonds of the throtezthey ſtay the bloudy flixe, and other fluxes, and all maner of 
bleedings3ofthe ſame force is their decoQion, with a little honie added. 
Theyhe 
the leaues be laid thereunto, | | 
— The iuice which is preſſed out of the ftaſkes,leaues,and vnripe 
1s moreeffeGuall for all thoſe things. 


The yoong buds or render ropsof the Bramble Buſh, the flowers,the leaues.and the vnripefruit, a 


the mountaine Ida on which 


g the buthes of a cawſey, neere vnto a village called VViſterſon , where _ 


ale the eies that hang out z hard knots inthe fundamentzand ſtaie the hermorrhoides,if g 


ies,and made hard in theſun, C 


Theripefruite is ſwecte, and containeth mir much juice of atcmperate heate, therefore itis not 


vopleafant to be caters, | 
thath alfoa certainekinde of aſtriftion or binting qualitie, 


| | p 
Itis likewiſe for that cauſe holſome for the ſtomacke zand if ___ eate toolargelythereof, ſaith x 


Galer,he ſhall haue the headach; butbeing dried whileſt itis yet v 
then the ripe frur, Þ W916" | 


ripe, it bindeth anddrieth more 


{ | | W—_ | 
'  Theroote beſides thatiris binding,containerh init much thin ſubſtance , by reaſon whereof it G 


waſterh awaic the ſtones in the kidneics, faith Galen,  * 


Plinie 


' 


| 


NES THE. BOOKE| OF THE 
Plinie writerh that the 


iEagair andy in nd ctr dead dew | 
wine,is a preſent remedieagai 


The leaues of the Brammble boiled i in wame with honie,allum, and a lictle white wine added ther. 
to,makerch a moſt lotion or waſhing water,to —_— ſoresin themonrhghe priuy Parts 
ot manor woman; and faſtneth the teeth. ; 


The Raſpis is thoughtrobe like theBramble,in remperat reand vertues, but nor ſomuch bin- | 


ding nor drying, The ſame faith Droſco Maperfolnac that thoſe things tharithe Bramble doth.” 
o ſioquaches, 


The fruitis good to oy pe to thol io _ weake _ 


0) Hyli Roſe, or Cifts, | Ga 


"8s * The fade, [4 | 
'$S 1fwbath beene ak of diuers tobe a kinde vofRoſes: the olde writers hane made two Gr 
thereof, Male and Female; and likewiſe a thirde ſorr, whichi is called $-; the later Herba- 
riſts haue diſcoucred divers Fn0,2s = be declared. [ | 


So of general defer ron ,where:m al the ſorts / Ciltm are ceprifed 
[tm and his kinds arc woody ſhrubs, full of branches ,of the height of two or three cu- 


birs:ſome haue þroad leaues; þthers rough, vnecuen, wrinckled, ſomewhat downie , and 


moſt like the leauesof Sage, 
of thoſe ofthe Poplar tree :the flowers 
yer ſuch as very quickly fade, periſh, 


round, in which is conteined {mall ſec 


hough ſome hauerthe leaues of Raſemariezothers the forme 
rowe onthe tops of the branches, like vnto the wilde Roſe; 


nd fall away: thoſe ofthe Male , are moſt of areddiſh blew, 


.4-of purple colour; and of the: Femalewkhi 


ice: intheir places come vp lirtle heads or knops ſomewhat 
de: therogtes ofthemall arewoodie. 


There groweth yp ſomrumes vnder 


e ſhrub harde tothe roots,a cerraine excreſcence or TOR 


ciſte,which is thicke fFar,groſſe, full ofjuice, withour leaues ,wholy confiſting of manie little caſes 


or boxes ., as do thoſe of: Henbane , © 
kindegand i in another whitezand i in cert 


v 
\ 


'He firſt kinde jj Cilim growet 
or fowercubits hight; garniſhe 


- the Pomegranate tree, of ayellowiſh ced colour,in one 
aine other (groene or graſhe, as Da corides faith, 


% The Lotion 


th vplike a ſmall buſh « or -hrub,of; a woodie ſubſtance, three 
d with many ſmall and brictle. bragches,ſer fullof crumpled 


' or rugged leaues,very like vato 
purple colour, in ſhape like vnto a ſing 
new dried be{orc ic wr yeh x 
the moſt part doperith and fall 
the moncth of Maie vntorhe beginn 


Sage leaues : attheropef the branches come flowers, of a 
le Brier Roſe, having leaves ſomw that wrinckled, like a cloth 


gan) Nh midlt a fewe yelloy chives of thrums: the owers for 
away bifore noone,and neuet ceaſe flowring, in ſuch maner, from 


of Septeinber, at which time the ſecede is ripe , being ofa 


1 
reddiſhcalour,and is contained i in an go hairie huske,not much vnlikethehuske of Henbane. 


2  Theſecond fore of Gait 
cum hypeciſtide, is like vnto the former; 
taihe excielcence;or outgrowi 


r, whit 
from whichis drawne byan arti ciall excraRtion 4certaine jujce,called iti ſhops H 
3 This kind of Ci/*@hath many wood) 


a being another kindeof the Male Ciſtzes,vhic h Penacalleth Ci/fav mas 


but that from the roote of this kinde- there commeth a cer- 
his ſomtirpes yellow,ſometimes greene,8: ſomtimes white, 


i{1is. 


 ſtalks,diuided into dibers brictlebrac aruſlet colour; 


$, 


whereon do grow rough|leaves, ſomwhat cut or reothed on the edges, and ofanouerwornecolour: 


the lowers grow on the rops ofthe 

_ , Purplecolour:afrer which 1 wan rou 
_ 45tough and woodie. {| 

4 This fourth fort of Cſt hath din 

diucrs ſmall leaues,narryw,hke thoſe 

and flowers atc like rhe] (861 wands 


ad 


nches in form of the Muske Roſe,but of an excellent bright 
ONE 20 is TORY ſimal reddiſh ſeede: the roote 


rs oedicdenches whereon a ſer thicke duſt rogirher 
winter Squeakjeny x von gona RE} root 


HISTORTE' OF PLANTS. 1093 
1 Citi mas ancuſtifolins. | ' 2 Ciſlusmas cum Hypociſtide, | 
The male Holly Roſe.” \| The malc Holly Roſe with bis excreſcence, 


+ % | 


1 # ) | 
ll = - __ 
! AP} ; 


wee, 


Toothedor ſnipt male Ciſtus. Ciſtus, 


3 Ciftwmas dentativs. by l Yr 4 penufolius. 


. o 


iy $ 
x % F/ 'F 
: L # / 
: \ \.T 11. 
! | o 7 46 P 
: ' , EV a 
x . / 
ſ V1 , 
1 L - 
y if 1A 
4 
| : 


F 13 bt 1 FL 
£ | .* 7 . . : # { 
PO 4 74; b 1 IH! Þ 
— Dn F we, 
==: 109% 


BOOKE OF. THE 


; 
» 


6 Cite fankins Mathisli. 
| mT temalc Ciſtus, 


T 
E 
Wl, 
& & o = 
|S: 4 = 
i" F | 3 
* / 
& i j «6G 
F © : it : < iz : 
: Cs ; EF ” 
-: - | 
WS 0 | ; 
897 4 Thed! jon. l ; 
q: [i | : J 
+ 
+ 
's. 


5 \Toiaſuerh Remo nt mak Cine: hreſpe ing 1 er 
Ke a-white c colc ED ery yous chrums the middle , and hi others purple, 


of Math: Aexipeidal bet many hard antlecadic kt; branched 
| 1 * ME on are ſer by couples,rough ,hoarie and hairie leaues,of a darke 
rg whic ne foorth ſmall white flowers, like wit! thoſs of the Iaſmin: rhe 


he growerh vp tothehei be of: a ſn bedgebuſh having divers brittle 
CO a ioraby cur es, hke hoſe of ſea Purflane prhar is:o faie, 
fofr, hoarie, and as itwete Eoncred ouer with a kinde ofn ines; abs flyers are likewiſe white, 
and therefore one of the nales,as be all the others with white lowers, | 
'$ Ciſtus theeight,hath likewite ſhrubbie ſtalkes, in manerof a 
certaine diſtances diuers leaves cloſc icinedtogither at the 


rote is JL Land [I MW: 
| The ſeuent £ oro Ti . 
branches full o thz\ h 


| | ib ocron at 
{#) ers we haue not cxprel- 


ſedin the figure by reaſon | havenocertaine knowledge of then,  ” - . 
9 Thisninth Ciſtusis likewife a woodie ſhrub ; the ſtalkes axe-ve! 6 VET are allthereſt ofhis 
kinde:whereon do grow! yer) ſmall leaues like thoſe of Ti mew are whiregvhich maketh 


it one of the females. / i 
10 Theloweorbaſe Ciſtus with broade leaues erowerhiibl a ſimall 


ſtance;the leaues are many,of Idarke greene colour the "__ are in! 
ofa yellow colour: thareyeenlikente — 


- 
> 
z 
*+ 


of a woody ſub- 
d} others ; but 


7 Ciitu 


7 Cittas folio Halimi. 
Ciſtus with leaues like Sea Purſlane, 


9 Ciftus folio Thymi. bh 
Ciſtus with the leaues of Thyme, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


4: 
S'! 
1 


1095 


$ Ciſtms falio Lauendale. 
Lauanderleafed Ciſtus, 
UP 


a ” a As A -_ . ” 9G Lane AAA ALIAS FAA robes PH ASS} Of ASI NO EA TH» OTA OE ICs IRA A916 
DN £646 AM BA 6 nth SE EAA a DE BRI a ors ne 521A, AAS I ICOS* p90 FAS CUI " . » hs " 


* 


10 cif humilic latifolizs. - 
Low Ciſtus with broad leaues. 


i #5, 1 
* 


r095/ oy THE THIRD nooKE| or. "THE 
it Ciftus humilis 


12 [29M Fey 4 AnſtrizcaClusy. 


evffolim | | 
Low Ciſtus with: narrowe leans. | [Low » Cie of Auftrich. 


b #The Lferpin | 
1t Thisnarrowlea [ | FIT 6 divers egu ugh bra leanin to thegrounde, whereor: 
do grow many ſmallnarrow leaucs fomwhar long,ot a taſte ar the firſt, afterwardes birter ; 


| the flowers grow on the tops of the branches Ws. a yellow colqur, conſiſting of five leates,with cer- 
raine chines in the middle} after 


iddle which follow three ſquare cofs or ſeede veſiels: the roote is tough 

and woodic, a- | j i 
32 'Theloworbaſe Ciſtu of Auſtrch,growerh lkewiſe leach og to the gr, al jhauing many wOO- 
die branches, very firme. £ rovgh,covered with a blackiſh barke; wheron do grow very manyrough 
| li ſeofthe final Myrrill,of a ſhining greenon the vpperſide,se of an 


y br | 2 __— one ih devs; two, in forte like thcotherbur ofa 


Aftus y long;rout h branches trailing Don the ground, of a red- 
dai rrO% ſmall les ues hke thote of wilde Time, ofa darke greene colour ;very 
thicke and Prandfe >mey s, at hairie :the flowers grow at the topot the branches,of a yellow golde 
coun , conſiſting of fi fi 1s in lemicy, of a very ſweerc linell : the =_ USGS harde, and 
” We-14- 

5: This ſtrange id Wk plane of L Obel:s tlie : I haue No t meere to be inſerted 
among. the kinds of Ciſtus,as a friend of theirs, ifnot one of ithe kinde : hath leaues like vnto the 
male Ciſtus(the $r{t in this Chapter deſcribed)but more hairie; bearing at the top of his branches . 
a ſmall knop, in ſhape like aroten Strawberiez bur not of the ſame ſubſtance: for it is compa@ of 


, a ſcalic or chafffe m—_ il as is in the middle of the Caimonill wn; 8h and ofa ruſlct c0- 
" Jour. | 


' 13 Cifta 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 
13 Cit humili ſerpilli felia. | Citus exotica L'Obelh. % 
Low Ciſtus with leaues like wilde Thyme, L'obeliwshis ſtrange Ciſtus, 


Yom JV; / 


» 
-_ 
C.- 
I 


- 
(7 
KY 


D 


 _—_ "= A » ; % G9 | 4 - 4 - 4 8 » 
$/3\\(; i (6 "7 —— | SED 
*/\ 7 SY , das 
; == - : — we " *\ - __ 
- p - VI mm i : 


 Cillmadutterins. 
Counterfeit Ciſtus, 


ov» Et; 
»1” 


Penne: Anglhi. 
Pernyhis Ciſtus, 


4 


” 
. 7. » 
64 
iS 7 
f - S* 
by _—_ n, *k 
”_ *1\ 
x = 
k . 
A 


\a 
o 
44 


PA. 


iN 


Wi. 
f 


By i 
VG ' 
Y\ 

” Wi 


: 
- 


1098 THE THIRD OOKE' oF THE 


Wi |-4 # The deſeriggias ww | 

15, This adulcerine or clibnielrfcire or forged Ciſtus : grow to the nefohy of an hedgebuſh : 
the branches are long andbritcle, wherepn do growelong leaves like thole of the Willow, of an 
ouerworne ruler collng. he flowers are ſmall, conſiſting of five little yellow leaues. The whole 
plant being well viewed, ſeemeth ro be a Willow, bur at the firſt ſight, one of the Ciſtus; ſo that it 
15 a plant participatir ofbe 1.The roote is woodie, | 
16 This kinde of Ciftus, which DoQo: Pennie (a farious Phi of OW deceaſed) dd 

gather ypon the T'ands Maiorica or Maigrca, and calledirby the name wpmr/r, in Latine Cs t- 
BA Battearica,is a (brubby tree, growing to thehei cight of vide ubires,haujn a very rough barke, 
beſcrround about with rough & icabbedwarrtes, which bark of it ſclfe eaſily fall away from the 
oldebrafches or kesof the tree. Theleaues of thisrree arealmoſt like them of Myrtas, very 
rough vnderneath hke the branches aforeſaid : bur the leaues that growe higher, and towards the 
top ofthe branches are ſingothe, growing about the branches very thicke togither, as inthe other 
kindes of Ciſtus. The flowers are ycllow, growing of the top oe be twigs,conſiſting of fiue long 
leaues, fullof many very long chiucs withiu, When the flowers be vaded, there followerh a very 
long and five ſquare head of huske, full of ſecede. The wholetree is very ſweete,out of which iflizeth 
a gum or roſine,or rate thicke, Clam and tar! wice , fuch CITE "078 of the kindes of 
Leadum. 


17 Ciftus annum. | bf | 18 77 he BH Sifolin LObely. 
Ciſtus laſting one yecre. | | ty leafed yeeſely Ciſtus, 
=—4 | | | | 
= <> 'S. i 
SUE 
'# | A'S 


- gona $ 


— 


i The defriprion | | 
from ſeedewith one vpright Akers the "OP of acubite, 


17 This nowall Ciſtus w 'p 
oftentimes divided into other {mall branches : whereon do grawe oy cs ſomewhatlo , of 


 adarke greenecolour, The flowers growe ar the top of the ſtalke ting of five ſmall y low 
leaues : which being paſt, there tollowerh a three ſquare ſeed Anton of mall reddiſh ſecde. The 

FOOT is tar and doch & it ; when he fnGis PRs, i ib; T0 
7 : 


PRO 


: 2 
; W if. , | d « js — 


<a. 


13 This other Ciſtus that laſtech but one yere,harh long ſtalks, diuided into other branches ,of the 
height of two cubits; whereon do grow long rough leaues, ſer three togither at certaine diſtances, 
che middlemoſt whereof is longer then the other two; the flowers groweon the fides of the bran. 
ches like the female Ciſtus,of a whire colour : the roote is of a woodie ſubſtance, as arc all the reſt 
ofhis kinde, | | | ; 
| * The place. | | 

Hollie Roſes grow in Italy,Spaine,and Languedoc, and in the countries bordering vpon theri. 
ver Padus, in all Hetruria and Mafſiles, and in many other of the hotter prouinces of Europe, in 
ery andſtonie places,varying infinitelyaccording to the diuerfitic of the regions where they grow; 
of which I haue two forts in my garden,that is the firſt and the laſt but one, 

| | * The time. | 
They flowerfrom Maie to September. | 
| *% Thenames, ! a 4 

The Hollie Roſe is calledin Greeke «+5, or /-%: in Larine allo Ciftus, and Roſa fyluatica; of di- 
uers Roſa Canina, as Scribonins Largus writeth, butnot properly :in Spaniſh Eſtepa: ofthe Portin- 
gales Reſ/a: in Engliſh Hollie Role, and Ciltus atter the Greeke name. That Fungans af, cr 
which groweth at the roote of Ciſtus,is called in Greek www, bicaule it groweth vnderthe ſhrub 
Ciſtus; itis a!fo called Limederow:giuers cYl it w/2r:6, among whom is Paulus AEgineta, who 
alſo doth not call that Fhpocrſti which growerh vnder the ſhrub Ces, butthe juice heerof; wher- 
upon might, grow the worde Hypecr#is, by which the Apothecaries do rudely name this iuice 
whea itis hardned : of ſome itis called Erithanon,Cirimus and Hypoguiſtidos. 

| | | w%The temperature, . | 

Ciſturas Galen faith,doth greatly drie, necre hand m the ſecond degree;andir is of that colenes, 
that ir hath withalla temperate heare 3 the leaues and the fir{t buds baing bearen,do onely dric and 
binde,in ſuch ſort as they way cloſe vp vicers,and ioine togither new wounds, | 

t *% Thevertucs. i 

The flowers are ofmoſt force,which being drunke with wine, are goodagainſt the bloudy flixe, , 
weakenes of the belly,fluxes,and ouerflowings of moiſt humours, | _ | 

Ihey curepurrified vicers being applied in maner of a pultis: Dzoſearides teacheth that they are a 
remedre for eating vicers zcalledin Greeke 1944, being annointed chetwith, and that they cure bur- 
nings,fcaldings,and old vicers. | ; | | 

Hypocr#tiis much more binding, itisa ſure remedie for all infirmities that come of fluxes , as C 
voiding of bloud,the whites,the laske.and the bloudie flixe: but if it be requiſite ro ſtrengthen that 
part which is ouerweakned with a ſuperfluous moiſture, it doth notably comfort & ſtrengthen the 
ſame, | | | 

It is excellent to be mixed with fomentations that ſerue for the ſtamacke andliuer. D 

Ir is put -m the Treacle of vipers,to the end it ſhould comfort and ſtrengthen weake bodies, as x 
Galen writeth,. ors "WE MN LY 


Of other plants reckoned for dwarſſe kinds of (lt. ; Chap. 4. 


| * 7 he deſeription. ig 
He 2 dwarfte Ciſtus,called of L'Obeliimus Panax Chironium (but there is another P.;- 
nax of Chironsdeſcription , which I hold tobethe true and right Panaxs notwithſtanding 
| hehatrh inſerted it-amongſt the kindes of Ciſtus, as being indifferent to ioine with vs 
and others forthe inſertion) is a/lowe and baſe plant creeping vpon the grounde, having manic 
ſmall cough branches,of a browne colour: whereon do growe little Jeaues {A rogither by couples, 
thicke,fat,andfull of fubſtance,and couered o11cr with a ſoft downes from the boſome wherof come 
foorth other leſler leaues;3 the flowers before they be open are finallknaps or burtons, of a brown 
colour mix dy ye bw; andbcing open & ſpredabroad are like thoſe of the wilde Tanſic, & of a 
yellow colour, with ſome yellowerchiues in the middle;theroote is thick &of a woodie ſubſtance, 
2 Thefecgndis very e vnto the precedent, ſauing that the leaues are long,and donot grow fo 
thicke thruſt rogither;and are more woolly zthe flowers are greater and of a white colour,wherein 
the eſpeciall diff-redicocoaliterbrihe cooteis like the former, 
f 7X ex £7 S004 I 1 Felianthes 


——— $4 


ws _ _ 


* 
* 


{E| THIRD BOOKE OF THE - 
| # Anelicun luteum. | 2 Helianthemum | licum athum 
Englih yellow Dwarffe Ciftus. White Dwatffe Ciftus of England, 


*: Nc | 
RN ? : \ 


{*; 


< — 
' , 
+ — 


4 Helianthemun album Germanicam, « 
The white Dwarife Ciſtus of Germanic, - 


: 
3 


" 
S) b 


" 
+4 4 - - 
C4 
A. . 
+ 3 o A | , » 
j / . 4 
—_ , 
k # 
p I=4 JW 
s 4 
ww 
o 


WHT. 


: , 


ddI 


o 


, 
8; 


t 
; % © _ - 
k'& , ', 
b.4 '£ 
3 % 8 [ _ of ; " 
+ ; 6 # 
J b \ C4 \1 as \ ——<R 
{bY « , \ 
\ »; : 4 B< 4 i vs 
- _ , A. { % p 
WE — WS WAKEr 
* : , 
| "s N : k i 
: 5 
4 


HISTORIE" OF PLANTS. 8 nor 


* The deſeri;tion. i 


| There is found in Germany a certaine plant like to Ciſtus,and Zydop, but much leſſer, creeping 

| yponthe ground, vnleſſe ic be propped vp,hauing a multitude of twiggie branches,flender,and fine: 

| whereupon do grow leaues lefler then thoſe of Ledon or Ciſtus, very like to that of —_ liſh 

_ white dwart Citltos,of a full ſubſtance lightly haired, wherein is conteined a tough iuice:r ” 2 
ers are ſinall like little Roſes,or the wilde Tanſic, of a yellow colour: therootes be flender, woody, 
and ſomthing red. | | | 

This differeth not from the laſt deſcribed, ſauing that the flowers heerof are very white, and 

the others yellow ; wherein they eſpecially differ. jp | 


6 Helianthemun eneuftifolium. 
Narrow leafed Dwarfte Ciſtus, 
f : | % | 


- 
$F — 
H % 


E AY 


£4 x PAS ; 
4 ap <=] — dl 


N [ts % JS — " 
3 I 8 of 


* PS ©... %Thedeſeription. . | | 
5 The Dwarf Ciſtus of Sauoie hath divers tough branches , ofa reddiſhcolour, yeric tough 
and woodie divided intodiuers other branches :wherconare ſer ſmall leaues , fower togjther, - 
certaine ſpaces zthe flowers grow at the top of the branches likethoſe of our yellowe Dwarffe Ci- 
ſtus, ofa Sea colour: the roote is very woodic. Þ PRE OY 
6 This Dwarffe Ciſtus with narrow leaves, hath very many ſmall flexible branches, of a browne 
colour, very ſmooth,and ramping vpon the ground; whereon do grow ſmall,long,narrow leaues, 
like thoſe of Time of Candie z/ from the boſome whereof come foorth diners other ſmaller 
leaues : the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, of ableake yellowe colour: theroote is like- 

Theirſeuerall titles haue touched their naturall countries : they grow in rough, drie,and ſunnic 

Places ,in plaine fieldes and ypon mountaines, : | 

| | PEE, - | Thoſe 


7" Ts THE THIRD BOOKE. OF THE 
_ "op of our Engliſh | wing I haue foundethemin veric wany places, eſpecially in 
che chalkie banks about Graues cnde ,Southflcere, and for demol Kb ena fo 
TNENCE Yhito Canterburie and Douer. | | 
|» Thetime. 

They flower from lalyto che end of Auguſt. 1 

22  * The __ [| | 

Tragws calleth Dwarffe Ciſtusi inthe hi ef Dutch oong Heyacen Bſope : t in Latine Gratie Dj: 
bur chere is another herbe called alfo of the later Herbariſtes Gratiola: Valerims Cordusnamet) i 
Heltanthemun, and Solis flas,or Sunne flower: of Cluſius Chameciitius,or Dwatffe Ciſtus, 

Pliny writerh, that Hedia the groweth inthe champion c untrey Temiſcyrain Pontus, and in 
the mountaines of Ciliciar neere ro the ſea: and he ſaith further, that the wiſe men of thoſe coun- 
ecics ,and rhe kings of Petſia do annoint their bodies Recrewith, boiled with lions far ,2 little Saf. 
fron, and wineot Dates, that they may ſeeme faire and beautifull zand therefote haue they cal. 
led it Helrocalliaen , or the beautie of the Sunne; which if it be the Sunneflower, yetrhere is ano- 
ther of the ſame name , bur] which may be caken for the right ic is hard to tell (but that experi- 
ence teacheth vs ) ſeeing Plnie is {q breefe : Mathiolus faith, that Heliznrheman is taken of 
ſome tobe Panaces Chiretany or Ch iy ons All heale: bur it 1s nothing likelic as wc hauc ſaide, 

[ * The temperature, | 

The faculties and tempt rature arereferied to the kindes of Ciſtus, Chiron aemerd chati it hea- 
| leth wounds,ſtancherh ble udgand Gooyeth che ſpitting of bloud, the bloudic flixe, and all other iſ- 
ſues of bloud. Ci. 

B Theſameboileu inwine healerh vlcers i inche mouth and ptiuie parts, if ” be waſhed there- 
with:ro be brieſe, it ioineth rogither and ſtrengthneth; ; whicl is: do plainly and euidently ſhew 
thatir is not onely like to Ciſtys and Ledon in forme, bur in vertues and ficuſ 
fore it is maniſeſt titers it i cerraine wike kinde of Ciſtus and Ledon, ? 


ties allo; and there- 


| 
$ +4 
| ; ® 
 *| 
4 [ 


ofa ctw, , Led, and Lada a 5. 


| | % The bis 


Here be Joly ſorts | SLY wheteof that cummic matteris abtedcalldin ſho s 
ann pL oepey : . : DO 


3 ; ; | + The deferptio 
Iſtus Ledon i is alittle ſhrub, growing to the height of 2 W._ ſomtimes higher, bs 
uing many harde woodic branches, couered with a blackiſh barke: whereupon 4 1 
leaues ſet rogither by couples,one right againſt another like vntowings of an inch broad, 
of a blacke ſwart greene on the ypperſices , and whitiſh vndetneath; whereon is gathereda cer- 
taine clammie tranſparent or through ſhining liquor, ofaverig hot ſvecreſinell, which being ga- 
thered andhardned,is thatwhich in ſhops is called Lapdanum: | the flowers grow atthe ends ofthe 
branches like little Roſes,gonfi Iſtingof five white feds ,cuery bne'dec kedot qrvepe ward the 
botrom with prety dark p i liſh ſpors tending ro blacknes,hauing in the mi any yellow 
chiues,ſuch as are in the middle of the Roſe: atter come the knaps or ſeede Nelſcls of molt ſmall 
reddiſh ſecede; the whole plant being dricd,growerli ſomewha ewhitiſh and ofa pleaſant ſmell, the 
which it retainerh many yeeres. 

2 Theſecondgroweth likewiſetothe hei ghr of anihedge buſh; ;thebranches are long, and yerie 
fragile oreaſie to breake ; whereon dogroweleaniet Ray” i. then any of the other of his kinde, yet 
vnderneath of a hoatie colbur z growing | roward winter to __- wr reddiſh,of a ſowet and bin- 
dmg taſte; the flowers arc hike the porcarnry Ws a Miebe gra uel och arp other 
Ic _ like the former, * | | —\j 


1103 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS 


2 Ciftusledon 2. Clus 


4 


bh 
* 
| tl 
« C2 
Dy q .2 
; oy 
E 337 
| ® 


3 Cifhk 


h leaues like the Poplar, 


The firſt Ciftus bringing Lademon. 


© 
y. = 
8 Y 
"L ES 
L 3 
J 2: 
Do IV 
To De 
[E) 24S 
'TI® 
ey 


1104 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

BO ED %* Thedeſeription. | { | 
3 Thethird fort of Ciſtus Ledon groweth vp to x height of a ſmall hedge buſh, hauing man 
twiggie branches; whereon do growe leaues like thoſe of hy Poplar tree , ſharpe at the oo 
coucred ouer with that clammic dewe thatthe others arc: the flowers grow at the roppes of the 
branches, of a white colour like the precedent. | | | 
4 Thefourth of Cla/aw deſcription, proweth likewiſe to the height of a ſhrubbie buſh , hauing 
many branches, flexible, hoaric,and hairie : The leaues are like the reſt of his kind, but lofter, more 
hairie,of a ſwarte greene colour , daſht over with that dewie'fatnes , not-onely in the ſpring time 
butin the heat of ſommer likewiſe, The flowers ate white with yellowe thrvms in the middle: the 
reſt anſwercth the laſt deſcribed. | | | Þ 


5 Cilla Ledon 5.Cluſii, | | | 6-Cild Ledon 6.Cloft, 
The 5.Ciſtus Ledon, | | || The6.Ciſtus Ledon. 


bl 
o 


þ. 7 
[ 


_ 


5 The fift pas vp like a hedge buſh with many rough branches z whereon are fet long 


rough caves, hoaric vnderneath , ſomewhar daſht over with that fartie dewe or humour that the 
reſt arepoſſeſſed of: the flowers are likewiſe of a white colour, with certaine yellowe chiues inthe 
middle: the roote is woodie. | | | |; z 
6 Theſixt- hath divers ſmall branches couered with a blackiſh barke : the flowers are ſertogither 
in bunches many in a cluſter by certaine ſpaces. They are white and like the former in eachreſpeR. 
The ſcuenth is a lowe/ſhrub growing ro the height of two cubits ,thauing many branches co- 
ucred witha barke of the colour of aſhes ; wherebn are confuſedly ſer diuers leauesar certaine 
diſtances,ſ.vall,narrow, like thoſe of winter ſauoric, of an ouerworne ruſlet calour,veriethicke,fat, 
and glutinous :the flowers difter not,ncither the ſeed from the reſt. S 
$ Theeightgroweth vp' like a little hedge buſh, hauing leaues like the common female Ciſtus ; 
ſaning thatthole of this plantare ſprinckled ouer with tha clammie moiſture,and the orher not ſo: 
the flowers and ſeedes arcalfolike. From the roote of this plant commeth ſuch like excreſcens cal- 
led L.imodoron.Orchanche of Hypeciitis, as that doth of the firſt male Ciſtus, wherin it differeth from 
| ii | bh 4 7 Cillw 


% 


HISTORIE OF. PLANTS. Log 


cifims Ledon 7. Clush. $ Ciſtus Ledon cum Hypociſtide LObety.. 
4 « > Ciſtus Ledos, The$.Ciſtus Ledon,wirh his excreicence, 
| 6 MW V 


7-4 
\\ 
> S 


e 
= 
IV 
S. 
' 


y 


. 
. 
£ 


%Bf 
: 


LN 


o 
, . 


N % — —. 
— 
v: 


9 Ciſtus Ledon 10. Clusy. 10 "Ciſtw Ledow Ayrtifolium. vis 
The :0.Ciſtus Ledon. Ciſtus Ledon with leaucs like Mirtilh 
| | | |. 


* The 


| þ ' 
: 


E 'THIRD. BOOKE| OF THE 


1106 TH 


| + The deſeyiption. | | 
9 Theninth hath divers brittle ſtalkes of hg colour tending to a ruſſet ; whereon are fer 
very many leaues like thoſe of _ ,of an outrwornecolour :the flowers are white with certaine 
wits chives 1n the middle,whic the grauer hathomitred inthe figure, _ 
10 Thetenth groweth'yp like a ſmall ſhrub, haujng brircle ſtalkes,couered with a blackiſh barke, 
and divided into divers branches; whereon are fer vpon { truncheons or far footeſtalkes, 
fowet or five leaues like thotcof the Myrele trec,of aſtrong 


ell: the lowers arc likewiſe ofa white 
colour. | IS EY" 
' 


| 12 Ciftus Ledurn Rori erini folio, 


11 Ciſti4 Ledum Sileiatum. | L 
| CiſtugLedon with caves like Roſemarie, 


Hh 

- Fa. 4 | 

- ThePolonianC us Ledon, | 
4 F 


NN | 

> N=; | 
IQY 1 == 

. - 


2 
£ 
: 
7 
£ 


=: | 
- 


12 Thetwelfth kinde of Ciſtus Ledon,growett vhright with a fraight bodice or ſtocke,bringing 
forthat the top many ſmall twigs or rods of a cubit long, couered with a bark of the color of aſhes, 

which divide themſelues intogther branches, ofa purpliſh colour, beſet with long and narrowe 

leaues,not much vnliketo Roſemarie,b longerzof a greene colour aboue, bpt vnderneath hauing 

as itwere along rib, made or compact ofwooll or downe; of a fweete and pleaſant ſmell, and ſom- 
what ſharpe intaſte : on the tops of the branches grow knops or heads, campatt as itwere of ma- 
ny ſcaleszof an iron or ruſtie colour; out of whichcommerh and proceedeth a certaine rounde and 
long mane,or hairie panickeldtuft ot Aowers,with many long,tender, greet; and ſomwhat woollic 
ſtalkes or twigs growing yntothem, of a ſiveete ſent and imell: rhe flowers confiſt of five little 
white leaucs, within whichare corcined ten white chiues with a long ſtile or pointle in the midit of 
the flower :when the flowyers be vaded,there ſucceed long knops or heads which are fiue cornered, 
in ſhape and bignes like vnto the fruite and berries of Corus; which being greenc, are beſpeckled 
with many filuer ſpots, butheihg ripe, are ofarted colour; conteining within thema long yellowe 
_—_— is jo {mall andflenger, that it is like to the duſt or powder which falleth our of worme 


| -- 5 13 Ciſtus 


| 
: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1107 


13 Ciftus Ledunm Mathioli. 14 Cr. we Ledion alvinum Cluſe. 


| Ciſtus, 


ne. 2.26 © "*% Thedefeription. | 
13 Among the ſhrubbie huſhes comprehertde-vndet rhe title of Ciltms Ledurn, Afathio/nns Hark 
_ * ſetfoorthonewheredfto write at large ard ee pe deringthe Author is fo briefe, and of 
our ſues we haue not any acquaintance withtheplant it ſelfe: Draſeorides to helpe whar may be, 
faith, thar itis a ſhryb growipg like vnto the ſtocke or kinred of the'C:#:: from whoſe leaties is ga- 
 thereda clammiedewe which makethrhat gummie matter, —_ in ſhops called Lapdampn : it 


5, fal of ſeed like duſt of veric 
therro:the roptis longhard,& very woody. 
art of the ftgllscerraineexcreſcences, or our- 
©, likethofeof Torchwoode, white within , and 


' Fl 


Pies in needs fs ng 
red without of an aſtringent or binding raſte. 


F 
LT 5a 
4% a of © 


1108 THE THIRD BOOKE |OF THE 
| | 1 | 4 Thephice. | $7 
Ciſtus Ledon groweth in the Tland of Candie,as' toni doth teſtifie, in vntilled places eueric 


where : itis foundalſo inCyprus,as Pl4me ſheweth | and likewiſe in many places of Spaine that 1; 
opento the ſunne: moreouer both the forme and bignes of theleaves _ alſo of vom apebin 
ſelues, as well of theſe thatbripg foorth Ledavum, as the other Ciſtus,do varic in this woondertul} 
maner,according tothe giyerfitic of the places and countries where they grow: they are ſtrangers 
in theſe northerly parts, being very impatient of our cold climate, | 


They flower for the moſt partfrom Maie to hedaag Auguſt .The clammie matrerwhich £1. 
leth vpon the leaues , which is a liquid kinde of Roſen of a ſweete ſmell, is gathered in'the ſpring 


time,as Droſcorides ſaith ; bur as Petrus Belnims affirmerh ( being ancic witneſſe at the gathering) 
in the midſt of ſommer, and in the extreme ney the Dog das z the which in our time not 
without great care and diligence and as great labour,is gathered from the whole plane (with cer. 
raine inſtruments made in maner of ch pickes, oreare pickes, whichin their roong they call 
Ergaſti#4) and not gathered from the beards of Goares , as itis reportedin the old fables of the 
lying munkes themſclues,called Caohjerps, that is to ſay, Gredkiſh munkes, who of very mockeric 


£ 


have foilted thar fable among others extant in their works, 

ſhrub itſelfe is called in Greekepiy.or x4fr: theLatines keepe the Greeke name, Ledox 
Ol Lid and is a kinde of Ci{/asor HallieRoes the far or ie matter which is gathered 
fromthe leaues,is named Zadenon,and Nedanon, according che Croke the Apothecarics cor. 
ruptly call it Lapdanmwn : Dioſeoridescounterh that ro bethe which is fweete of ſmell.and ſom. 
whartgreene, that caſily waxcth ſoft, is far without ſande*,-and is noteafily broken, bur, full of Ro- 
finor Gumme. F| | | | | 7 

v| | 4|Thet ature, | p met | 

Lidenum ſaith Galen ishot in the later ws c firſt degree , hauing alſo a little aſtritiue or 
binding qualiric; itis likewiſciof athinne lubſtance;and cheretate it ſoftneth, and withalldoth mo- 
* The Mop 


fy 


derately digelt,and alſo concoRt, 
' Ladanwn hath a peculiar propertic againſt the inficmities ofthe mothers itkeepeth haires from 


falling; for itwaſteth awayany fecled 1H 2 990! hbmour thatis at theirrootes, 

B Dioſeorides ſaith,that Lidanwn doth bindeyheare, fouple, and open, being rempered with wine, 
Myrrhe,andoile of Myrtils ; it keeperh hairgs fromfalling being annointed therewith; or laide on 
mixed with wine, it maketh.che markes or ſcars of wounds, fai eand well coloured. tn I ROI, Pe 

> Irtakethaway the paing inthe cares fit bepowted or droppedtherein, mixed with honied wa- 
cer,or with oile of Holes. 5: | o | | L- | 


D A fume made thereof dr reth foorth the aftexbirth ; an{l rakerh away the hardneſle of the 


matrix. 


'Þ Beingdrunke with wingzit ſtoppeth 
G. Thereis made heereot Quers forts 


mixed herewith, _ +; | 


c laske,and prouoketh, vr MV! 
Pomanders , chaines , and bracglers , with. other ſweetes 
| (eat 2.9. "54 Fxrrate 2 $1 


Itis with ood fi y ceſemixed wich ue lace aiſters thatmiti 


- 
- 
: 
" £ 


: 


f 
bl 


. E © 1 
- 


- i ; 
I 2 
- $ & ? 4 
WW 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1129 


2 | The wilde Roſemarie C/u/iws hath referred vnto the kindes of Ciſtus Ledonz we have as a 
poore kinſman thereof inſerted itjn the nextplace, inkinred orneighbourhood atthe !caſt. this 
wilde Roſemarie is a finall woodie ſhrub, growing ſeldome aboue a foote high, hauing hard bran- 
ches of a reddiſh colour, diuiding themſclues into other ſmaller branches of a whitiſh colour: 
whereon are placed without order \diuers long leaues greene aboue, and hoarie vnderneath,noc vn- 
like to thoſe of the dwarffe Willow, or the common Roſemarie, of| a drie and aſtringent caſte, of 
little ſmell or none at all. The flowers ſtand onthe rops of the branches ſer vpon bare ornaked_ 
foateſtalkes,confiſting of fiue ſmall leaues of a reddiſh colour, fomewhat ſhining; after which ap- 


*% 


bi 


$ pccrelittle knaps full of ſmall ſeede, The roore is tough and woodie, 


I Roſmarinun Coronariun. | 2 Roſmayinum /rineſtre. 
Garden Roſemarie. | Wilde Roſemarie. 


? 


. « 
+ &3 & A | 
« 2 x i 3 
£"# -» #*© 'Y >} 5 
- at, 0 
6 
g r>#77 
- A F. .- 
ww , 4 £ o 
2 
T. 


JR 
\ 
% 


* The deſcription. 
3 This plant hath ſer ſome contronerſic among the learned, who vndiſcreerly have confounded 
Caſia with Caf Canelland Cinnamome. © {nguillara and Guillandinu (two moſtexcellent in. the 
knowledge of plants)differ as touching the knowledge hercof, onetaketh ito be a kince of Laner- 
. duls, the other Roſmarinum'Coronarium. Throphraſias taketh it tobe Caſia, miſtaking Cammomull 
for the ſame. Notwithſtanding their controverſies reſting diſpurable, the queſtion may caſily be 
decided by the ſimpleſt that haue raken any paines-in the knowledge of plants, if theyhadat any 
time ſcene the plantut ſelfe where it growerh naturally in great abundance; as in «.gro' Romano, © 
and diuers other places, in Narbone,, Spaine andiralie. Examine the deſcription;who liſt; ard 
they ſhall eaſily perceiue thereby, that it cannot bee Polygonum Pling, neither the: Spaniardes _ 
0/74, It groweth vp like an hedge ſhrub of a 'woogis ſubltance; to/the heighrof ewbarithree 
Cubitesz hauing many ewwiggie branches. of a greens colour : whereupon doe growe-natrowe 
leaues bke vnto Zine, or Faxe weede, of a bittertaſtez amongwhich come foorth ſmallrnoſſic 
flowers, of agrecniſh yellow. colour like thoſe of-che Comell tree; and of the fineltof Roſerwaric: 
which bath moyed mer place ir with the Roſemauigsas ld eg 
: 1 | | ccece | | 


- ho p k > Sa | 
. . 4 j . 6 WD 
 D_ | = we, & - 
yy | Wavy "> 
J) ———ne ] 
- F 


-— 


: + M4 4 + P | 

: = FP - 7 | n:-4 

i: 6 ! i | i 

© x ' e i 
- 3 ; S : 

"x $i 


TY THE| THIRD BOOKE| OF THE ( 


ſoneere vnto itinkind and neighborhood : afterthe flowers be paſt, there ſucceede fruirlike thoſe 


. 

x 
: 

« 


of the Mirtle tree, greengatthe firſt, and of a vp red colgur when they be ripe, like Corall 


. 
7] 
< 

- 


7 


or the berries of T{ſþaregww,oft and fweere in taſte, leauing acertaine acrimonic or ſharpe taſte in 


= 
k 


the end the ſtone withinis hard as is the nut, whetein is conteined a ſmall white kernell, fweere in 
taſte: the roote is of a wopdie ſubſtance: it lowreth in the ſornmer; the fuire isripe intheend of 
Oober : the people of Granade, Monrpelicr, anfl of thekingdome of Valentia, dovieitin their 
preſſes and wardrobes, whereupon they call it Guefda/obo. | | 
| || *% Thephlace. | 
| Roſemarie groweth in Fraunce , Spaine , and 
in other hotcountries z in woods, andin vntilled 
places : there is ſuch plentie thereof in Langue- 
| dbcke,, that] the inhabitants burne ſcarce anic 
other fuell ;they makehedges of it inthe gardens 
of Iralie and Englande , being 2 greatornament 
 vto the ſame; it growerh neither in the fields nor 
| gardens of the caſterne'colde countries; bur is 
- carefully andcuriouſly keprin pots, ſer into the 
ſtoucs andlellers,againſtche iniury of their colde 
|| winters, |} p . 
| Wilde Roſemarie groweth in Lancaſhire in 
| dijuers places, eſpecially in a fielde called Lirtle 
ede, amohgſt the Hurtleberries, neere vnto a 
| ſtpall villaggcalled Manelſley; there founde by a 
learned Gentleman often remembred in our Hi- 
ſtory(andrhar woorthily)maſter Thomes Hesketh. 
| i. %* The time. | 
| | Roſemarie flowrethtwiſe a yeere,jin the ſpring, 
and afrerin Auguſt, 
| | The wilde Roſemarie flowreth in Iune and 
' Ivlic, | #3 The nones. 

Roſemarie is called in Greek aCaron crparoanss: 
in Latine Ri/marinas Coronaria : it is ſfurnamed 
 Cpronaria, for difference fake berweene it andthe 
om Libangides, which arc reckoned for kindes 
of Roſemarie, and alſo. ewomen haue been 


Caſia Poetica L'Obely, | 
The Poets Roſemarie or Gardrobe. 


. &7 bf 
: 3 
F- 


it 


q | accuſtomed tomakecrownes and garlands there- 
of: in Italian Roſmarino roronario: in Spaniſh Romero: in French and Dutch Koſmarin. 
- Wilde Roſemarie is ied noforermis /pleſtris) of Cordus Chamepence, 
Fi | * The temperature. | 
d degree, andalſoofanaſftrin 
taking more of the mixture of 
|  Thewertnues. 11266 


te flowers thereof for al 
| for they dricthe braine, 


D Thediftilled warerof the | 


laſt, rakerh awaytheſtenchof themouth and breth, andin: 
therto,to ſteepe or infule for certaindaies,a few Cloues 


v b" 
| | ® 
I 4 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 11 
The Arabians and other Phiſitions ſucceeding,do write,that Roſemarie comforterh the braine, E 
the imemorie, the inward ſenſes, and reſtoreth ſpeech vnto them that are poſſeſſed with the dumbe 


paulſic,eſpecially the conſerue made of the flowers and ſugar, of any other way confected with ſu- 
gar,þeing taken cuery.day faſting. | 4 | 

The Aradians,asSer pro witnefleth, giue theſe properties toRoſemarie : it heareth, ſay they,is F 
of ſubtile partes,is good for the cald rheume which tallerh from che braine,driueth away windines, 
mcogoleth vrine,and openeth the {toppings of the liuer and milt. 

Trages writeth,that Roſemarie inldice inthe Germaine kitchens,and other cold countries.Fur- G 
ther he ſaith, that the wine boyled/with Roſemiarie, and taken of women troubled with the mother, 
orthe whires,it oe IE rarher if they faſt three or fower howers after, b 

The flowers made vp into plates with ſugar after the maner of Sugar Roſer and eaten, it cotnfor- H 
reth he hart,and maketh it meric,quickeneth the ſpirits, and maketh more lively. 

The oyle of Roſemarie chimicallydrawen,comforteth the cold, weake and feeble of A inmoſt I 
woonderfull manner.” _ vl 4 | 

Thaparpls of Thuringia do vſerthe wilde Roſemarie to proucke the defired ficknes. | wat 

Thoſeof Marchia vie to putit in their drinke the ſooner to make their clients drunke, and alſodo L 
put itintocheſtsand preſſes among clothes, to preſerue them from moths or other vermine. | 


.” - Of Vpright Woodbinde. Chap. 7. 
| © wb Thekindes, uy 
| T isknowen,thateueryprouince and countrie bringerh foorth his peculiar plants,differing from 

thoſe of other regjons,cuen ſoit farerh with theſe kindes of Woodbindes,which do very notably 
differ from thoſe of England.lralie.and Spaine,as followeth in their deſcriptions, 


I Perichmenum reftum Sabeadicws. 


2 Peric refiwn Germanicum. 


| 


; 


I112 BOOKE OE 


ir 
| ; 


long or, ro 
hicer,8 a lierle hai. 


colour, 
aredco 


3 Perichmenuwn ret fun Ceruleo. 


 Vpright W oodbin c with blew berries, 


-—— li 4 L " | £3 <TS 


ﬆ «, 
== 
.F\ AJ. 


lee 


DP A; 


3 Thisſtrangekindof W : rth in his Pannonicke Ob- 
ſervations, riſeth vp ofteqcin rmer doth : which diuidethit 
ſelfe inco many branches, coi 

clefts as the barke of rhe Oke; 


owne tooteſtalke, of abti tand ſhining blew co 
of a reddiſh colour, & ofaſharpe winie taſte, wheri 
woodic,d:ſpe:fing u ſelfe Far a $1 | 


4 This 


1 


| 
5 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | ny 
This kinde of vpright Woodbinde growerh vp likewiſe tothe en ofa man, and oftentimes 


more high,like to the laſt deſcribed,bur alrogither greater. The berries hereot are very blackgwher- 
in ſpecially is the difference. | | | 7 
5 Chan richmenwn. | | 6+ K-Skp 
Dwark.! Honiſuckle. | © Thedeſecriptyon. | 
| | 5 Tothekindesof \Woodbindes this plant may 
likewiſe be in Cf picture with this deſcrip 


—_ ten. I 


tion was ſent vnto Caſte long ſince,by thatlearned 
Do@torin phificke Malter Thomas Penny ( of our 
London College of famous memorie) itriſerh vp 
with a ſtalke of a fopre high: whereupon are ſer 
by couples faire broad leaves, onerightagainſt an 
other, ribbed with certaine nerues, likethoſe of 
Plantaine,ſharpe pointed,and ſomewhat hollowed 
in the middle like Spoonewoort :from the boſome 
of which leaues corfe foorth ſmall flowers, nor 
ſeenc or deſcribed by{the author : after which com- 
meth foorth a cluſtex of red berries thruſt hard ro- 
gither, as arethoſe of Aaron, or Prieſts pint, The 
roote is tough and fery flender, creeping farre 
abroad vnder the vppermoſt cruſt of the carth, 
whereby it occupieth much ground, 


v& 19 
growe inthe woods! and mountaines of Switzer- 


land, Germany, Sauoy, and other thoſe partesten- 
. ding o the Eaſt, Eaſt Northeaſt, and Ealtand by 
South. | 
I havea plant of the fuſt kinde in my garden: 
thereſt as yer Lhaue not ſeene ; therefore 1 cannor 
| write ſo liberally theteof asI wiſh 
| % The time. 


% The place. 
Theſe plants are ſtrangers in Englande, they 


They flower for the moſt part hen the others do,that is to ſay;inMay and Tune, and their fruite 
is ripe in September, | | *% The names. | 


Vpright Woodbinde or Honiſyckle is called Perichmenum ard and Peric/ymenum redtum,. or 
Vpright Woodbinde : of Dodonews Xyloſftewn : in high Dutch Yends kirſen, chat is to ſay, Comm * 
Cere{:,or Dog Cherries, The Engliſh names are expreſſed in their ſeperall ricles, It hath beene cal- 
led Chamaceraſms,but nor rruly, | uf 44 
| % The temperature and vertnes. | 
Touching the temperarure and vertues of theſe vpright Woodbindes we haue nocxpericnce 


at all of our ſclues,ncither hauc we learned any thing of others, 


Of Sene. .. Chap.$. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Oo ant bud tube ig Pigs 14) Mt An 4s ir ht nh get" 


| | | _  w*Thead:rſeription. | 
I Ene bringeth foorth ſtalkes a cubite high, ſer wirh diuers Franches : the leaves are long; 
winged,confiſting ofmany ſmall leaues like thoſe of Licorige,or of baſtard Sene : the Gow- 
ers come foorth of the bottome of the wings,of colour yeiloy, ſtanding vpon ſlender foote- 
ſtalkes; fromwhich after the flowers be gone hang forked cods, the {lame bowing inwards like a 


halfe moone,plaine and flat,in which are contained ſcedeslike ro <p or kernels of grapes,of 


a blackiſhcolour. The roote is flender,long and vnprofitable, which periſheth when the leaues are 
porhered tor medicine,and the ſeedes be-ripe, and muſt be ſowen againe the next yeere cucn as we 
_ [EP Cece 3 | | 2 There 


| 


'TrIRD BE Donor THE 


f Sene growing in Icalie, like t ceherineaqreh ſauin 
joinpurging that t had | het nk | 


'2 Sena ah | 


ralian Sene, 


LAY 


3 % 4 
G Y 
: NY 
; 
% 
> '\ 
R -, 


\ 
WY 
DIS 


PP. A 3 = 


Ne 
@ 
"\ 


4 ” Ll . 
| \ Ls 
Sd. - PA. 
$#1v i 


| -  #|The place 
This is planted i in Syria and], Ioin lcalie 
hardly groweth in ws 7) ain | lo | nic, nceithet in England: it proſpereth in hot regions, and 


cannot away with cold ' tis in Iralie ſowen in May, and continuethno longer than 


Autumne. The beſt is bro tght from Alexandria, aild ot of t Tg — were the firſt 
that found it our. FI | 


in Provence of- "OR 8 in Langnedocke: It 


5s 


vp! + The woes. eh 
The Perſians call it Abhes | ke his copith hath: the PAR Tack? Sena by which name 
it was knowen to: CAuar ihe t eG and ro thelacer Latines: : its. called inEngliſh Sene, 


| * The temperature. | 
Touching the reperaryre q f Senc,itijsof a meanec rem: "_—_— £.\.4 Ga nor cold, yet incli- 


ning to heate,and dric almoſt ih chethird degree : ir) s of apntging faculrie,and rhat by the ſtoole, 
in ſuch fort,asit is notmuch bubleſom + tothans nan hav ngmiall a certaine _—_ qua- 
litic, which it leaucth after the urging. 


F ver wes. 


A Irvoideth foorth degmatikeland chloe humor alſo gol and melancholice, if icbe helped 
with ſome thing rending totha end. 


B Iris aſingular purgg medicine in mapy ileal for all ag esand kinks. 

C © "It purgeth without violence or hurt, ef ecially f it be tempered with Annis ſecede, or other like 
ſweete {melling things added, of with gentle ; purgers, or ſoothing medicines. Ic ade be giuenin 
powder,but comnionly the infuſion therebfis vied. | 


D - The quantitie of the lg $a dram jo inthe infuſion fomerybuc or moe. Itmay be 


mixed! 1 any lquer, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. firs 

Itis inthe decoQionorin the infuſion rempered with c<1d rhings'in burning agues, andother x 
hot diſeaſes,in coid and Jong infirmities : itis boiled with hor opening imples, & tuch like; or elſe 
it is teepedin wine, in which manner as familiar tomans nature , itfraweth foorth gently bythe 
ſtoole almoſt withour any kind of paine,crude or raw humors. | _—_ 

Moſt of the Arabians commend the cods, bur our Phifitions the leauesrather : for vnleſſe the p 
cods be full ripe, they ingender winde, and cauſe gripings in the belly. For they are ofrentime ga- 
thered before they be ripe, and otherwiſe cafily fall away being ſhaken downe with the windge, by 
reaſon of their weake and {lender ſtalkes. | ; 

_Some alſo thinke,that Sene is hurtfull ro the ſtomacke,and weakeneth the ſame,for which cauſe G 
they ſay that Ginger or ſome kinde of ſweete ſpice is tobe added, whereby the ſtomacke may bee 
ſtrengthened, Li ewiſe Meſaes noteth thar it is ſlowe in operatian,4nd that therefore Salgem is to 
be mixed with it, Moreouer,Sene purgeth not [> ſpeedily as ſtronger medicines do, = 

Natwithſtanding it may be helped not only by Salgem, bue alſo hy other purging things mixed H 
therewith, that is to ſay, with ſimple medicines, as Rubarbe, Agaricke, and others, and with com- 
pounds, as that which is called Catheteon, or the Eleftuarie Daphatpeon, or that which is made of 
the juice of Roſes,or ſome other, according as the condition aud qualitie of the diſeaſe and of the 


ſicke man requireth, | | 
are windie and do binde the I 


-'" 


[ heleaues of Sene is very familiar purger vnto allpeople,buech 
body afterwards,very much diſquieting the ſtomack with rumbling and belching, For the auoidin 
of which inconuenience, there muſt be added Cinnatrome,Gingery Annis ſeed and Fennell ſeede, 
Raiſons of the ſimne, and ſich like that do breake winde, which will the better helpe his purging 


ualitie, b.-: 
þ Sene doth better purge when it is infuſed or ſteeped, than when it is boiled : for doubtleſſe the K 
it purgeth,and the more windie it becommeth. \ Bak 


mote it is boyled the le 

Take Borage,Buglofle, Balme,Fumitorie,ofcach three drams, Sehe of Alexandria very well pre. L 
pared,and pouned twoounces,ſtrowe the powder vponthe herbes,and diſtill them:the water that 
commeth rhereof, reſerue for your vie to purge thoſethat live delicately, being miniſtred in white * 
wine, Sugar, inconditedconfeQions, and ſuch dainty waies, wherein delicate and fine people do 
greatly delight : you may alſo(as was ſaidbefore) adde hereunto, according to the maladie, divers 
Purgers,as garicke,Mirobalans,&, | Foge? 

1 


ake of Sene well purged from mores and drofle,one ounce,infulc it ina quartof the beſt white M 
wine,of Endive water fower ounces,Ginger,Annis ſ&eds,and ſcraped Licorice,ofeach fower drag. 
let theſeſtand togithet ſixteene howers,ſtraine ir, and when you have ſodone,boyleir alittle; then 
take wo pound of Damaske Prunes, and mingle it with the reſt of your ingredients: this is amo 
excellent medicine topurge py people which abhor porions,and ſuch hke, w_— OO 
The powder of Sene afterit is well prepared two ounces,of the powder of the roote of Mechpa- N 
can fower drams,powder of Ginger,Annis feeds ,of cach alittle,a ſpgonful of Anniis ſeeds,bur a've- 
rylittle ng, and a modicum ot {mall quantitic of Sa/ zemme; this hath beene prooued a very fit 
familiar.medicine for all ages and ſexes. The patient way rake one ſpoanectull or two thereof faſting 
either inpotage, ſome {upping, in dcinke or in white wine. This 1s righrPtofirable todrawe both 
flegme and mclancholie from the breaſt and other parts. My 
The leaues of Sene and Cammomilt are put in bathes to waſh thehead. Oo 
Sene openeth the inward partes of the bodie which are ſtopped, and is profitable againſt all P 
gricfes of the principall members of the body. EF | . 
Take Sene prepared according to arte one ounce,Ginget halfea | 


| quarter of an ounce, Cloveg in 
number 12.Fenncll ſeed twodrams;or inſtead thetofCinnamom and Tartar,of each halfea draw, 


powder all theſe ; which done, take thereot one draniiin white wine beforeſupper, which dorh mar- 

uellouſly purge the head... _ | || " w it ROO PPT 
Handle Senc in manger.aboue ſpecified,thentakehalfe an ouncetthereof,which'idone,adtherto R 

threeſcore Raiſons of the {unne,with the ſtones pickr out, one ſpoonful of Annis ſeeds braied, boile 


theſe in a quart of ale till one halfe be waſted,and while ir is boyling pur inyour Sene: letir ſtand ſo | 
tillthe morning ; then {raineit,and purin a little Ginger: thenrakethe one halfe of thispotion, 
and pur thereynto two ſpoonefuls of firupe of Roſes;drinke thisrogither, lmeanethe onehalfe of 
the medicine at one time, andif the patient cannot abide thenext dayro receive the other halfe, 
then letitbe deferred vnril! che third day after, = TRE £247 - 

| | ne 


1116 THE RD BOOKE OF THE 
itorie (4s Ra/s afticmeth) dopurge aduſt humors, andare excellent good 
ſcabs,itch, and the ill n | oy eres 


If Sene be infuſed in whay and then boyled alittle, it bcolnatech ooh phiſicke againſt melan- 


cholie,clenſerh the braine, and purgeth it, as alſo the hart, the liuer, milt and lungs, cauſeth a man 
to looke yoong,it ingendreth|murth, taking away rrowzcleeterh1helight ſtrengtheneth hearing, 
and is very good agaialt ij TUCTS and cales ariting of PRO | 


Of baſtard Sene vere hens ſores, piling i well in cod, as farute a ſhall be declared, 

17 Colutes. | | 1128 | 
Baſtard Sene, | 

LF JESY "f 


"ND = Fes 


2 Clivres Seor piordes. | 
7 args Sene with Scorpion cods, 


EF TN 
4 - 4 
4A Ow —_ 


a: AS RA 
S= XL, \ ' . FAT, A © 


- . 
HAN Sat 


_ 


N 
(7) DEC .- 
= 7 
= - —_ 
0/89 v3 
ba w1\} 


+( 
"12 


Lo 


N Olateaand Senel Il: þ neefe the oadyete the other inſhape aidihew; that the ynskilfull 
,; Herbariſts haue & 197 d Colutes ta berhe tight his baſtard Senc i is a ſhrubbie plant, 


".,growing tothe fanme £an hedge uſh,' : his dds are ſtraight, brirtle 

and _ which bring clefly broken off, and as negligently prickr orftucke in A Gounde' 
- will cake rooteamidproſperar yrhat time of the yeete ſocuer itbe done; +5 or cur, orplanted 
in any curioos ſort whatſoever, | ed one will ſc: uy grow? theſe boughcs or bran- 
ches arebeſet with leaues like Sep: :nridaca), hot much ike Liquorice; among which come 
foorth faire Broomelike ye 4 ers, which eine into ſmall likethe ſownd of a fifb, or a lit- 
tlc bladder, which will make: jeracke bejn betweenc e fingers; wherein are contained 


many blacke,Aar edes,ofthe gr ingvpos qfvallrib & orfinewe within the cod: 
theroote harde,and of od >di ſubſtance. il 


| |. Fe 
4 : {| ; : f q 
i et 5 i in P % 

3 £1 ' = > 

| 1 


: > if 
at 1 +0 
=. i 
> 4 | 
5 bl 

1 . 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1117 


2 Baſtard Sene with Scorpion cods is a ſmall woodic ſhrub or buth, haning leaues,branches.and, 
gowers like vntothe former baſtard Senc, bur ſmaller inech te{petgwhen his ſmall yellow-flowers 
arefallen,there ſuccecd little long crooked cods,like the long cods gr huskes of Mathrolze his Scop - 
| proides,whereot it rooke his name :therooteis like the roote of theHoxerree, or tathet reſembling 
the rootes of Dulcamare, or Bittet fweete, growing narfirally inthe} ſhadowie woods of Valena in 
Natrbone,whereof I haue a fmall plant inmygarden,which may be called Scorpion Sene, | 


| 


Colutea ſcor joides humils. : 4 C ol ea ſeorbinides monitavia Clusg. 
: Dwarff: baltard Sene, © Mountaitic baſtard Sene, y 


oo | \ 5h 
FRIg F ' 5þ1 ; | o x * The deftription. 4 , " \þ þ4 21950 3%1> FÞ %*©H R wtrdery 
3 Theloweor dwarffe:Colwten of (Claſims deferypuen, bath arhicke woodit raore ,coueted with a 


yellowiſh barke, with manyfibres annexed thereto which bringerhifoorthy /yectely pewe ſtiootes 
 therebyirgrearly incredleth; ofa-qubite anda halte highs ſmonth, and ofa greeae <blbnargwbieres 
ono grow leaues compoſed of fixe or ſeauen leaues, and fomtimes nine;-fer vpon a-middlerib}: 
like thoſe of the commonikinde; of aftipricke taſte pvith | wesor biiingzthe lowers grow 
vpon ſlender fooreſtalks;long andnaked like thoſe of the Peafs, andofa yellow:colour',of a brite 
ono {inell atall , and yetrhar little nothing pleafane:after which cometfoorthlotig cods; wherein 
isconteined ſmall ſeede like thoſe of the Strafigle Fare. $1 STR: "1% 
4 This chounrairiebaſthrd Senc hath ſtalkes, lcaues, and 1001s like the laſt deſcribed: the lowers 
growe on the tops of the branches in maner of a Crowne , whereupon ſome haue called it 
Coronill ;in ſhape like thoſe of the Peaſe,and of agelow colour:the cods as yer we haue nor ſeene, 
and therefore nat expreſiedinthe figure. ++ habe 7 Hobo! ct durftain 
5 Thisfmall baſtard Sene growethilike aſmali{hrubcreepingvpon the ground, of the height of 
halfe acubite ,bringidgfoorth many twiggie branches, inmaner of thoſe ofthe! SpaniſhBroome ; 
whereupon do grow leaites like thoſe of Lentiles;or the Strangle Tare,, with manyſmallleaucs fer 
"pon a middle rib, forwharfatand full of inice;of the colour ofthe leauesatRue or —__ 
2 | 4 


* 


#3 $8 
On * 


3 & 
<2 : 
F-/ [> 

$:7 

7 


1118 THE THIRD nooks OF THE 


of an aſtringent and vnpleaſanc taſte : :the flowers prow at the tops of the branches, ofa yellow co. 
Jour : in ſhape like thoſe of the ſmalleſt Broome z after which come little crooked cods like the 
clawes or toes of a Birde, whercin is conteined | ſornwhatlong,black,and of an vnſauory taſte: 
the rooteis long,hard.toligh, and of a woodie v5 1s ar | 

6 Thereis all found another ſort heetedf. differing from the former , ſauing that this 
plant is greater incachreſpe,wherein cpecly ially confiſterbrhe difference. | 


4 | 


five Coronille, | | 6 Colareefae ale V ulenting Clusg 
| Face, | | The aa Senc of Valencia. 


| *% The | 

Coluteaor baſtard Sene / WET in divers gar ag li vw of ſeeds it quickly commeth 
roperfetion,inſomuch tharif a ſticke nan, be broken off and thruſt i into the grounde, irquickly 
raketh roote , yea alchough itbe done in the middleof fommer, orat any other time, cuen as the 
Kicks of Willow or Elder , z a5 my! ſelfe haue often provid ; the wide bring foorth lowers and 
fruirerhe next yeere after. I 1116 ' 1 

The ſecond with Scorpion cods grewerh kikeviſein wee; hetwolaſt do growindiuers 
barren apart wþ Kenr __—_ a Cancetburi, andabour Sourhficere;1 haue 


3% WO 


$ 4 


| | - 
wes ane fondle bene hatent bring foorth ripe 
Thisſhrub is called 1 + SPEIR A Greek lawne with thedj r kane fevild fillable: 
in Latine as Gez4 expoundeth ir, Coleutes, or Colutes : in high Welſch linſen: in French 
Baeuenaudier : they are geceiued that chinke ir to be Sena, or any kinde thereof; although we 
haue tollowed others in giuing it toname Baſtard Sene, which name is very 'vnproper to it :in low, 
Durchitis called Seng Rs Mi PI i} Engliſh, 


HISTORTE OF PLANTS. Very 
This Colutex or baſtard Sene, doth differ from thatplane wwne with» in the ſecond ſyNable, of 
which Colytea T heophraſius writeth in his thirde booke. | 21 
% The temperature and vertues. | 
Theophreftus, neither any other of the ancients hanemade mention of the temperature or facul- A 
ties in working of theſe plants, more then thar itis goodro fatren cattle , eſpecially ſheepe , asthe 
ſame authour affirmeth, | | | 


Of Licorice. (hap.1o. 


I Glyeyrrhiza Echinzes Diofeoridis, * 2 Gheyrrice onlagrs, 
Hedgehogge Licorice, Common Licorice, 


RM 4Q,)IO YEE 
= = F 


andthe branches;cluſtering rogithe 


pleaſant raſte, 
2 Thecommonand vi 


1120 THE THIRD BOOKE: OF THE 


the wilde Vetch called Opobrychis, or Galegs : the codsare ſmall and flar like vnto the Tare: the 
rootes are of a browniſh colour without,and yellow within like Boxe, and lweerter i in taſte then the 
former. | - |. *% The 
Theſe plants do grow i ſundry p laces of Germanic wilde adi in Eranibe and Spaine,; but they 
are platted 7 51; in England, mc I baue plentie in wy garden; the poore people of the 
north parts of England ddmdnure: it with great diligence, whereby they obtaine | greas plenty ther. 
of, replanting the ſame once inthree or fower yeerts, 
|  * Thezime. 
Licorice flowreth in lay and the ſeedeis ripe.in September. 
| wThenames. 
The firſt i iscalledin Greek yuawiie: in Latine Dulcisradr x, or fivecte Rdore' this Licorice isnot 
knowne cithegrothe Apothecarics orto the vulgar peoplezwe call it in Engliſh Dreſe.his Licorice, 
Ir is moſt cuident that the other is Gleyrrbtz4,07 Licorice: the Apothecaries call it by a corrupe 
worde Liquiritra :the Iralians Regolitia: the Spaniards Regaliza, and Regaiitia: in high Suſhots 3, 
Syſzwurtzel: +21n French 9 7-Sans'x. FaPi Reglsſſe : mlow Dutch Calitfſichout, ſiethout : 
in Engliſh common Licorice : P/zycallerh it Scyth:cx herbatitis named orkkr of the countrey 
Scythia,where it growerh. | *+ The temperature. | 
The nature of Dzoſeorgges his Licorice as Galen ſaith,is familiar tothe temperature of our bodies, 
and ſeeing it hath a cerratne binding qualitic adioihed, rhe temperature thereof ſo much as is hoe 
and bincing,isef] peciallyof a warme qualitie, commingneereſt ofallro a meanc temperacure; be- 
- fides,for thatitis alſo ſwecre,iti is likewiſemeanely moiſt, - | 
For as much as the roote of the common Licorice is ſweete,it is alſo enperacely hotand moiſt; 
notwithſtanding the barke thereofis ſamerhing birrer andhor, bur rhis mult be ſcraped away z the 
freſh roote when it is up of juice doth moiſten more then the dry. 1 
i | %Thevertues. | 
A Therootof Licoriceis good againſt the rough harſhnes of the reel andbreſt; zit openeththe 
pipes of the lungs whenthey be ſtuffed or oe" & po the _W & bringeth torch flegm, 


SUCH Ghorihize. FO. | 
The iuice _ {COFIce., * | | The luict of Liddwidd made according to he 
amy and hardned into a lumpe , which is called Swcciss 
| Liguiritieſervech wellf rhe purpoſes aforetaid, 
| being holden vader theyoone, and there ſuffered 
to melt, 
| Moreoverwith the Ivice of Licorice, G inger, 
and other ſpices,there.is made a certaine bread or 
cakes, called Ginger bread, which if vetic good 
againſt the) cough , and all the infirmities of the 
| Iingsandbreſt: : whichis caſt intoMouldes, ſome 
| of one faſhion,& lomeanother, according to the 
| Fancie of the A othegarics , as the piQutcs ſer 
foorth do ſhew for example, 
| | *TheIniceof Licoriceis profitable again!! 1c 
| hea ic of the ſtomacke, and of themotith. 
The ſame is fruak with wine af Raifons againſt 
the infirmities of the liver and cheſt, ſcabs or ſoics 
| of the bladder and diſeaſesof the kidncies. 
| Being, meclred vnder- the toong it quencher}; 
thirſt; itis good for greene woundes being laide 
| thereupanyand forthe ſtomacke ifitbe chewed. 
_ | The decoRtion of thefreſh rootes ſerueth for 
the ſame purpoſes, 
| . pin pies moſt finely powdred,| isa f1n- 


_ gular good dy tora andaweb ofthecic,if 
«be ones oy EYE 


Dioſe Coriae's 


; Fg 
HISTORIE OF PBLANTS. 1121 

D /oſcorides and pling alfo report, that Licorice is good forthe ſtomack ,and vicers ofthe mouth, H 
being calt them, - | 

Iris againſt hoarſenes, difficuſtie of breathing, inflanimaridn ofthe lungs , the plcurific, I 
ſpierin a bloud and matter;conſumpribn,rotrennes of the _ all infirmitiesofthecheſt , and 

rugg 

I: wkert awaic inflamedittions, mite ateth and rempereth theſharpaes and falmes of —— K 
concoRerh rawe humours,and proc Ws cahie ſpirting, : 

- The decoionis good for ek kidneies and bladder that nocynlotrared,” 22 0D 

It cureth the Rrangurig gud generally all infirmitics that proceede of ſharpe, fale and bing L 
humours. | : 
- Theſe things concething Licorice" Tath als Theophre tas, whowenerh, tharwidhthis and: N 
with cheeſe mace of mares milke,the- Seyrhians were reported tO beablero tive acleuen ortwelue 
daies: The Scythian root is good for ſhorrnes of breath, for a drie cough and yuonry for all iafir- "yn 
mities of the cheſt. +» 

Moreouer,with hony healerh Haves, it alſo quencheth thisſif tbe helde in the mouth, for 
which'cauſe they ſay how the Scythians do live a eleucn orwelue daies,with that and Hippace, 

| Hippaceis cheelc as Hippocrates witneſſerh,made of mares mitke.. | 

Plane his 25.booke © flap. — thought otherwiſe then janet it is an herbe ſo cl. 


- Of wile Trfil or ſhrub Trefaile, Chop M. 


| * Thekinaes, 
Ts Herebe di diuets kindesor ſorts of the ſhrubbe Irefoile, the which mighreery well hauepaſſed 
the three leafed graſics,had it not beene for my promiſe inthe Proeme of our firſt part, 
thatin thelaſ booke of our For the ſhrubby or woody plants ſhou'dbe ſer foorth,euery One as 
neere as might be in kinred and ppigpoqurbood. | 
T' Cityſme. 4 Cirgjin, 
AP ir hrub Teh, ©--.. The econd ſhrub Trefoile, 


OO qrhedfs, 
or ſhrubbic Trefoilegis altogither hoarie,or of a whitiſh colour like 
the forme of a ſmall ſhtub,or woodie buſh, two or three cubirs highs 
| hes or armes, ſerfull of Jeaues like the ſmall Trefoile, or 
galwaicsrogither ; which being bruſcd berweene the 


- 2 Orrifin loanfall | | | 
: Ceca fn Trefole i. 
\BJE+ Pa \ > _—_ W- 
7 


« p X \ - 1 # | X 
4 0, { W : T; . 4 | N 
ae WY : 5 $7 55, | a f 
n \ c 
i it. 1 10 PZ | SARS N/A | | 
: « I DT 4 y L ; ; F ' Q& v Fi. © 1.95 Lf 2. 7 - 
_ . © , FP A k = 
” / Wy A * : - IQ | | | rl 
| 21 Wo / $ F 4 \ - YI a - JIA. 7? FR. 
, - hy AX \N V « f 
5 = [ f "2 * " "£ *$ . = 
A # by "_ ; R_—_ Sf 
- . 4 A. - | ; 
, = f £ , 


>4 
"£5 y ; ' 
| ESSE. 
4 xy 2 
| W, # WW f 
"4 W* 3 ff » \ | 
F \ +. f 7 ; 
- f 
= ,/ 

k —_ 2 
4 | 4 
- } Zo P 
þ T - 
= £ f 

- =. L L 
\ =p \f | 

P- 'O | < 


3 
de 


nde vp of 
compact 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1123 
compa into one head or ſpokie tufr,ſomewhar greater then the former : the cods arealſo greater 
and more hairije: the roote growerh very deepe into the;ground , whereunto are adioined a fewe ti- 
bres: irfalleth out to be more hairie or woollic in one place then in another, and the more hairie 
and woollie that itis , the whiter it waxeth: for the roughnes bringerh it a certaine whitiſh co- 


5 Cytiſics INcans. | | 6 Cytiſues Pingatee. | 
Hoarie ſhrub Trefoile. inged ſhrub Trefoile. 


& 
z: 


* Thedeſeription. 


5 Thefiftkinde of Cyti/a@ groweth to the height of fiue or ſixe cubirs, having many ſlender twig- 
gie branches like Broome, ſtreaked and very hard,whereupon grow leaves very like Fenugreeke, yer 
rather reſembling Rue , three togither: fromthe boſome of which, or þetweene the leaues and the 
ſtalkes, come foorth yellow flowers, verie like Broome , Spartwmn or Peaſe, butſmaller: the cods be 
like vato Broome cods, of an aſhcolour , bur ſlenderer andflarter: in the ſeuerall cels or diviſions 
whereofare contained bright ſhining ſcedes,like the blacke ſeedes of broome; allthe whole plane 
is hoarie like 2hamnus,or Halymus. | CR 9% 

6 The ixtkinde of C5z;/w or buſh Trefoile;groweth tothe height ofa tall 
couered ouer with a blackiſh barke , and a fewe boughes or 
leaueslike the common Trefoile,but ſmaller, proving alſorhree togither, whfreof 
of therhree leaues,is twiſe as long as the two ſide leaues3the ypper lid is greet 
lower fide ſomewhar reddiſh andhairi : the flowers growalong the ſtalksalmolt from t 
tothe top,of a golden yellowecolour , faſhioned like the Broome flower, bur greatert} 
the reſt of his kinde;and of a reaſonable good fatiour :the ſeede hath the pulieraſte of Cicey. 

'B 5 Fs ”. f "> 94% 6 4» . . LEY 


bortotn 


aty of 


& 


FL 


Loh |7 Ovifi 


? 
bs 
> 


— fl 


j: 


1124 THE THIRD 


Coti/uas 7.Cormnt ts. | | 8 Cytiſ, 8, 
f - ne rwbaer ſhrub Trefoile. | | 1 Lhe 8.ſhrub Trefoile, 


\9 


9 Ortiſes adulterinnsine Alyſon raven 
Baſtard ſhrub Tre(le . 
' 7 Theſeyenth kindedfc Cytr fharh many rough 
and hairie branches riſing from a wocdie roote, 
 fower or fiuecubits high; which are dinided into 
ſundry ſmaller branches, beſet with leaues like 
' the medojv Trefoile : Be which come foorth 
 yellowe flowers like Broome, that turne into 
: crooked flat cods, like a fickle wherein i is contat - 
ned the ſeede taſting like Cicer, or Legwnen.: the 
: wholeplanr is hoarielike Rhemurus, and being bro- 
: ken or bruſed ſmellethlike Rocker. 
8 Thiseightkind of Cyrsſaw which P ena ſercech 
 forth,is dqubtleſle angrherkind of Ca panes 
| bling the former in leaues; flowers, and cods, fa 
- | uingthat the {mall leaves (which are alwaicsthree 
 rogither ); area little ſnipt about the edges: the 
. + wholeplantisflenderer , fofter, and greener; ra- 
 theire enfbling an bebe chenaſbrid: the rootc 
| is Tal w_ 2 © foil, 
'9. This ar or misbegorren bro C | 
jb or.rather the fiſticared/ or fallified Ove 
"MS weth vpli $a rub burner of any v 
|  TaneeJanng renders mer and anplanc 
| | | whereon Ine 1 > verde 


| Un {talke; contrary ro allthe 
yp cm growe m_—_— the ſtems like thoſc 
|of ok ſtocke {=} nga a yellow colour: the 


roote is rough and weodie, *% The 


1 


I A Oh Io Ne oe eee Le ws fret 2s * Ws oe 
> J= 
— 
W e 


he” 


HISTORIE OF FUANTS t125 


| * The place. ' 

| Theſeplants- were firſt trongtte i into Italy and Greece from one of the lies Cyclades, called 
Cyntho or Cynthuſa, and fiace founde 3n many places of Fraunce , as about Montpelier, 
Veg wn Jie other places ; they are ſtrangers i in Englande,though they grow very plentitully in 
Sand as] it is reported, whereot I haue rwo ſorts in my garden: that is tofay Cyriſus maranthe, 
or the horned C52iſws,and likewiſe one of the — har is tolayghe third inmumber, | 

| w* Thetime. 
| Theſeplanes for the moſt ſpares flower in Lune and Ivly, and ſomewhat after: theſeede is ripe 
[ The names. . 

Thi GiwcianuriTacides agcallthis ſhrub woes, of Cynthuſa, ab land before matkoned, in 
which place they are in great eſtimation ,for that theydo ſo woonderfully feede cattle,and increaſe 
milke in their dugs3 nouriſh ſheepe &goates which bring yoong ones.good for ſtore and increaſe: 
one author doth call theſe plants in Greeke Kv%, thatis in Late F ecxrdrum famun, ferti] or fruit- 
full Haic,forch#rhekindes heereof cauſe rnilke to increafezmakerh good bloud and ijuicesa 
reth ngnand mulriplierh the naturall ſeede of generation: they may be called in Englith mulke 
Trefoile,ot theitore of milke which they increaſe. | 

|| wt Thetemperatare. | 

The leaues of milke Trefoile do cool as Dtoſcorides wiiteth , thev FA ace ſwellings in the be. 
ginning if they be ſtamped and laid to chem with bread: the decoRtion therof drunke provokerh 
vrine: Galenteacheth , thatthe leanes of Milketrefoile haue a digeſting or waſtihg qualitic, mixed 
with a waterie and temperate facultie,as have thoſe of the Mallow, 

_ w Thevertuts,) 

Women faith Colwnells, frhey want milke muſt ſteep dric Mitkerefoltein faire water,& whenitis A 
thorowly ſokedgthey muſt the next day mixe a quart or thercaboursvf theſame preſſed or ſtrained = 
foorth with a little wine,andfo letir be giuen vnto them todrinke, and by chat meanes they them. 
ſelues ſhall reccine ſtrengrh,and their chil uldren comfort by abundancebfmilke. , 

Hippocrates reckoneth yp Milkrrefoile among thoſe things that increaſe milke,in his booke af the B 
nature of women,and of womens diſeaſes. 

Alſo ©Ar:/tokgachus of Arhens in Pliny ;commanderhto giue with wine the dry plant, and the C 
{ame likewiſe boiled in water, to nurfes to drinke when their milkeis gone. 

Democratueand Ari do promiſe thar you ſhall want no Bees, if you haue Milke Tre- 
foile for them to feede on: for all writers with one conſent do conclude as Gelemfaith , that Bees do 
gather of the flowers of Milktrefoile very great ſtore of honie. 

Columella reacheth that milke Trefoile is notable good for hens "bes! goates, kine, and all kinde E 
ofcattle,which grow fart byeating thereof ,andthar it yeelderh vere great ſtore of milke. 

The coplc Boetica and Valentia ( where thereis great ſtore of ; &) doe vie irvery much E 
=p c 'worme tohang their web vpon after they haue beene wellfe wich the leaues of Mul- 

$ 
Milke Trefoile is likewiſe a marueilous remedic againſt the Sciaticaznd al other kinds of gouts, G 


of bed milke Treo Gigi : 


- 


+ the hinder 
Trgmenms Glas which ſome be like ro the 


pi % : 


l ; KY | | ; 
3:Þ _ 914536 2I&Y © w_ + hedges. <p 
*:;+ 


1126. THE THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 


ofcolour pallzer lee cnt thoſe of Broome, otherwile all alike : : intheir places ow vpſlender 
cods,long,narrow, and lefler than the cods of "Broome 3 zin wi Ky doc lelictle b lcedes: the 
roote is long and groweth deepe, and oftentimes 

2 The ſecond kinde of baſtarde milke Trefoile is like vnt9 = [Rae F in pal ſtalkes and 
twigs, butthatir is lowetand more downie z neither do the talkes thereof ſtande vp ,, butra- 
ther incline to the one fide: the leaues alſo are ſomewhar greater , but yerleſſer fu thoſe of the 
| medow Trefoile: the flowers likewiſe be cloſclict ioined togither, and compatted asit were into 
alittle head, and be alſo ſomething greater : the coddes in li e mancr area little bigger and hairie, 
The roote oroweth > in the grounde,being diuided into a few ſprigs zit to on happeneth 
to grow in one place mote hairie or downie than in another : the more hairic PE 4 is, the 
more » TER ae K8 | Þ | —_ hajcinesdethalle eighteen cola. 


\ 


* >fudbey | tes, 2. 5ſms 2. 
The ate nb Tee Theſecond alta Tf, 


Pd 


| Wh wymar ax) up wry leaues ofa fai ===q, : the flowers are cloſedt 


ther, long, white, orelſe io wlay, hauing the finell ofhonie: 
ſhrub ir ſelfe is alwaies greene both ſommer | 

4 The fourch ſhrubby is likewiſe ne of he nite ſinde| in face and ſtature like the 
manured Cyts/ae.It grow! 

on whoſe branches do gro 

greenecolour: the flowers g 

| yellow colour: Ws} 6 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1127 


4 Pſeuddeytifin hiv ſatue, 
Mena rree Trefoile. 


|. -- % The | 

Theſe kinds of Milke Trefoiles arefounde in v rH ſo calledinour age, which in times paſt 
was named Marcomannorwn prouincra, and in the ypper Pannonia, o called Auſtria, neere_ 
vnto high waics,and in the borders of fieldes; for they ſeeme after a fort to ioy in the thad % 

uh Thetime, | 

They flouriſh elpeciallyi in Iuneand luly. | 

| w% Thenames, 

Itis euident inough that they arc haſtardkindes of Milke Trefoiles , py therefore boom may be 
called, and plainly termed Pſeudocytifs or baſtard Milke Trefoiles,or oxi ſpiueftres, that isto ſay, _ 
wilde Milketrefoiles. | | | 

+ The remperature ana Vertues. | 

What temperature theſe thrubs are of,or what vertues they have we knowe not , neither haue A 

weas yet found outby our owne Farrience anything , and therefore) referred to the other Milke 


Trefolles. 
0 the Venemons tree Trefoile. Chap 3. 


| | %Thedeſeri Won 

I He venemous tree Trefoileof Montpehcr, hath many tough nd pliant ſtalks,two or three 
cubirs hi ghzdiuided i into ſundric finall rwiggie ns: beler with leaues three togither, 
placed —_ ioint to ioint by ſpaces, ſomewhathoarie, verie like vnto theleaues of Cyriſas, 
orRue : among which come foorth many ſmall moſhe flowers, wuft faſhion, in ſmall bundles like 
noſegaies, and very like the flowers of the Oliue or Oke tree, which turne into ſmall roundiſhblad- 
As it were made of parchment ; whercin'is conteined blacke ſecede like wilde Lotms, but in taſte 
like the wilde Tate ; the "hole play of arvaliuels engl wnpetny is thicke , and of a woodie 


TI TE | Dddd 2 | 2 The 


uw ORE OC 5 2 BOD 2. GEO EI 21 6 


like thoſe of the Peaſe, apd of ayellowe 


The venemous Trefoile of Montpelicr. 


- 
> 


a Py "oS :- 
SF W- | 

- | 
#/ 04) D F 
SY 
\ *%, 


D 
oo 


ITT : 


JJKY if 


v: \ ; 
3b, > 
a = [ 
F 
LY F 
of = 
l F 


<< 


Theſe venemous Trefoiles growein Narbone, onthe barren and ſtonie craggie mounraines, at 
Frontignana,and aboutthe ſea coaſtes,and are ſtrangers in England. 
iy | w%Therime., | 
They flouriſh from Maie tothe end of Lune, | | 
Dorycniur, or 3:46:49, is that poiſonous or venemous plant wherewith in times paſt they vſed fo 
poiſon theirarrow heads,ot other weapons, thereby to do the greater hurt vntothoſe whom they 
did affaile or purſue, whereupon it tooke his name: great controverſie hath beene among Herba- 
riſts what maner of plant Dorzcniam ſhould be , fome ſaying one thing, and ſome another : which 
controuerſies and fundry opinions are very well confured, hy the true cenſure of Rondeletiue, wito 
hath for a dcfinitiue ſentence ſer downe the plant deſcribed for the true Doryenium,and none other, 


which may.be calledin Engliſh venemous tree Trefoile, 
| 188 \*%* The temperature. 
Derycniwn is very coldewithout moiſtning, | 
Venemous Trefoile hath notone good qualitie that I'can readof, bur it is a peſtilent venemous 
plant,as hath beene ſaid inthe deſcription, | | | 


| : 


Of the ſhrub Trefoile,called alſo «Makebate, Chap.14.. 
eb $ & ſhrubbie plant called Polemynium, hath manic wopdic twigs, growing to the height ©! 
. © | fower or five cubirs, hauing finall twiggie branches, of adarke greene colour , garniſhes 

hf ; [4 31 wilt. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1129 
with fall leaues ofa deepe greene colour , alwates three joined togither vpon little foore ſtalkes, 
like the Cyt#/a b uſh,or the fielde Trefoile,bur finaller; the flowers be yellowe, and rounde, dit:ced 
into fiae or ſixe parts, not much vnlike the yellowe Jaſmine , which hath cauſed many to cal! it 

vellow Iaſmine,cuen to this day: when the flowers be vaded, there ſt:teceede ſmall romide berries 
- &bigge as aPeaſe,of a blacke purpliſh colour whenthey be ripe , which being broken will ie «x 
colourthe fingers like Elder berries: within theſe berries is conteined a finalitlar ſeece, like vary 
Lentils : the roote is long and ſmall ,; creeping hitherandrhither vnderthe ecacch , putting tooth 
newe ſpringes or ſhootes in ſundry place $s,whereby it woonderfully increateth, | 


. 
k 2 


Polemoninm ſive Trifolium fraticans. 


Shrubbie Irefoile, | * Theplce, | 


Ir groweth plentifully izrthe countrey of Mont” 
pellier ar Newe Caſtle vpon the dric hils ,” and 
tiot bankes of the Olive fieldes, andin the {to- 
nic ficldes and wood of Grawuntium: it groweth 
in my garden, and in other Herbariſts gardens in 
Englande, | | | 

| % The time. | FE 

It lowreth in ſommer: the ſeede is ripe in Au- 
rumne 3 the ſhrub ir ſelfe 1s alwaics greene, and 


'| 


b5 


hath a laſting roote. | 
% The names. 

Moſt do call it Cyt-ſws,burt we had rather name 
it Tr:fol,wn frut ens: for it doth notagree with 
Cytiſus or myk Trefoile.asin the chapter before 
it is plaine inough by his deſcription, vnleſlc ic 
be C1t-ſus Marcell, or Marcellus his | milke Tre- 
foile , with which peraduenture it. might be 
thought to haue ſome likeneſſe , if the lowers 
which are yellow wese white, or galbinews,thatis 
tolay blewe., _ | 

There be divers alſo, that rakethis Trefoi!e ro 

be Polemonijwn , foraſmuch as the leaves heereof 
ſeeme to be ſomewhat like thoſe of common - 
Rue, but Polemonium hath not the leaſe of com- 
mon Rue, otherwiſe called Herb-gtace z bur of 
the other, that is toſay, of S. lohns Rue: it is cal- 
led in Engliſh ſhrubbie Treſoile,or Makebate. 


| br, | *% T he temperature. F - 
 Polemoniam is of temperature dry in the ſecond degree with ſome acrimonieorſharpnes. 
| Fo *% The wertues. | { 
' This ſhrubbie or fruricall plant; hath fo many ſingular and excellent vertues containedin it,that A _.. 
ſome haue called ir bythe name Chindanemigther is,hauing an hundred propernies. | 
ltis very effecuall againſtthe ſtinging of Scorpions,and( as ſome write )ita man holde itin his B 
hand.he cannotbe hurt with the biting of any venemous beaſt, | | "hi 
Being taken in vineger it is very good for thoſe thatareſpleenerike,and whoſe ſpleenc or milt is C 
affeted with opvilations or ſtoppings. | 
Ifthe roote be raken in wine 1thelperh againſt rhe bloudie fine provoketh vrine being drunke D 
with watex,ſcoureth away graucll;and caſerh the paine andache called the Sciatica, | | | 
The plant Papauer ſſumewn,callcd Spatling Poppic, is called of fome Chiliodynam: whether E 
Do/corrdes did actriburethe hundred vertues rhereunto or to this planr (calicd among the learned 


in Montpelict) Polemcrgum relieth diſputable, D ddd : O Wf 


: 
; 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


11H. Of Broome (hap15. 


| 198 | w»* The kindes. | | | 
There be diuers ſorts of Broome,diffcring in divers ref] peds,as ſhallbe declared. 


> 


i" 


1 Genifla. || | | 1 2 Karum Geniſt e. 
Ti 3-1 | | | BroomeRape,orOrobanch, 


We 
— WW) ba, N 5 
- PIN 
CEW 1 
> V. 

”—x 


7 


- 
. ANY, eV 
fo \'V7 t3Vz3 
> x +a R 

4/ AN ND 


tt 


AS j Lifts _ 
x7 MY Va/I 77a % 
- DE ron <,} 
FAYE NA 
GEN SIE YI ates x © 
(4 LL } 


Tr 
' WS 
V3: 


"1 | "i 
He | 1 1] ' *% The deſcription. Ss: | ; 
I Roome is a buſhorſhrubbie plant,jt hath ſtalks or rather woodiebranches; from which do 


ſpring ſlendertwigs,cornered! greene,tough,andthar be eaſily bowed, many times diuided 

into ſmallbranches : about which dogrowelittle leaues of an obſcure greene colour, and 
brane yellow flowers zand at the length flat cods , which be gripe ace blacke, as be rhoe ofthe 
common Vetch, in which 'do lie flar ſeedes,hard, ſomething browniſh, and !efſer then Lentils: the 
roote1s hard and wood ſending toorth diverstimes anothe plant of the colour of an Oken leaic, 
in ſhape like vato the baſtard Orchis,called Birds neſt,hauinp a roore like a Turnep orRape, whet- 
upon itis called Xapwn Gemſte,or Broome Rape. | | 
2 Thisis acertame by|bed plant growing vnto the rootesof broome, bigge belowe, and ſmaller 
aboue,couered with blackiſh ſcales, & of a yellowiſh pulpe within : from which doth rilc a ſtalke a 
ſpanne long,hauing whitiſh flowers abour the tgp,like almoſt to thoſe of Dead Nettle :after which 
growe toorth long, thicke and round hutkes,in which are conteined very fine ſeedes, and good tor 
nuthing :the whole plant is of the colqur of the Oken leafe. | | 


| 
| 3 Geniſla 


- 
* 


OF PLANTS. 


HISTORIE 


4 Geniſta OO 
Small leafed Broome. 


| | Thedeſeription, .: 
3 The Spaniſh Broome hath likewiſe woodic ſtems,f1 fromwheneeg cowe vp flender planes twigs, 


which be bare and naked without _ atthe leaſt hauing bur Foe ſmall leaues , ſet heereand 
there farre diſtant onefrom another, with po flowers not much vnlike the lowersof common 
to 


Broome, bur greater, which curne: long AP = ne 5 Ss and flac ſeed: 
theroote is tough and woodie, 


4 Smallleafed or thinne leafed B oome,hath man many a prewny outofthe grougd, 
which grow into hard and tough ſtalks; whichare inovuerme IN, whereon 
do grow vefy ſmall thinne leaues ofa whitiſh ology whgeopchs ic called bs Geniſta alba, 


white broome: the flowers grow at the top of the ſtalks;in ſhayel like | thoſe of the common Broom, 
- burofawhitecolour,whereinit differeth from the reſt of theBroomes,” ” 

\ $5. Engliſh Dwarffe Broome ha many iggie branches very greene grerne, tough, ſomewhat raked 
ot comered, leaning toward the ground : whereon do leaues ſer without urder ; ſometimes 

two togither , and often three or fower growing faſt togither;; like: wnto the common Btoome, 

preene on the 'vpperſide,hoatie v of a bitter taſte: among which leanes come foorth 

yellowe flowers like thoſe of common broome , butleſſer , of lirtle or no finell at all: after which 

perm eoliond fanaghertinies , wherein i is conteined ſmall ſeeder the  roote is tough an and 

6 The Dwarffe Broome of Hungarie hath Rakes md yellowe flowers; lke thoſeofrhe laſt & 
ſcribed: the leaues heeteofare wTruIS omg an cnet moc in number 2 the whole plantis 
SS wa: hr the 1: 

| T | Ddddq4 5 Chonegenifts 


1132 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


5 Chamegeniita Anglics. | 4 6 Chamegeniſta Pannonica. 
"EnglhD Dau B Broome. FE Dwarfte Broome war Hungarie, 


Wo $i OT ARA ON ng AH rattle 42, 7, 


V3 


|} | 4 The | 
Thecommon Broome agorot almoſt eucry where in indry | pm and. Jowe woods, 


San aſtrangerin England; 
Roper writing thus, 


* 
—_ +" , 


- ebroamegthqrgravesin Gelladdwlats, ---.-7* | 
heeadof April Re aca doanalacs ofthe dontritre be 
or Maie are tO 
vi aftewards being  eyoongbodot meer 
en ww ws eli hone ON ade deryein gue 
ccre | Ipcclally 1n | une," 1 
"The Span Bron ot] Faparſpant ene longerin fowring,.. 
Thishyab ial TA, ine Gents, Ka 6 rar onde fealian Genef 
p OT- auc it :1n 47 in 
Spandth ewile GenoramCnfire -] _ Dior Pfrimnien: in ons ch =! in French 
Ivyf; cn SaghhÞe Ih (th bas a3þ.2 dead oijeg':l * 
[1 T 7k | VOrrnes. þ;3. wr SIrFE2 
A The tvigs, toned ſerdes context yt une deper oa hs 


MPH 


HISTORIE -' OF PLANTS. t1;3 
a thinne eſſence,andare offorce toclenſe and open, and eſpecially the ſeede hich i is drier and not 
ſo full of ſupertluous moiſture. t þ 

The decoQtion of the twigs and tops of Broome doth <lenſe hd] open the liver, mile, and kid- B. 
neies. 

It draweth vey by ons wowy —_— and —_— js wholeſome by thoſe thathaue C 
dr 4 made with wine, bur betrer for ys thw - 
ar $4 ay rupedinroY forthe ſame purpoſes. _ moe: #-D 

Hy isalſo made ofthe aſhes of the ſtalkes and branches dried a | burnt,a lie wich thin white E 
wine, a5 Rheniſh wine, which is highly commended of diuers for j e greene ſicknes and dropfie, - 
and this doth tily expell and driue foorth thin and warerie humors rogither with thevrine, 
and thatby thebladderz but vithall i it doth by reaſon of his ſhorpe \quolitic anon hurt and 
fret the intrailes. 

Meſues faich,thar therei isinthe "248 and branches a cutting moiſture;but full of excotments, E 
and therefore it cauſeth vomite: and that the plant doth in all his pattes trouble,cur, artenuatezand 
violent| purgedy voritcand ſtoole, flegine and raw humors out of the ivints. 

But tele are not written of Broome, but of Spartum, wickripe by vorite, after the G 
manner of hoon Ah both Dis ſeorides and Plinje do teſtifie, | 

Meſues alſo addeth that Deen od kreake the ſtone ofthe kidneies and bladder, and ſuffererh H 
not the matter whereof theſtone is made tolic long,or to becomeal 

The Ry or little flowers preſeruedin pickle, and eaten as 2  afallad, ftir 'vP an appeit tol 
meate,and x wr e ſtoppings ofthe liuer and mult. 

g 


Theſame fully blowen, ſtamped and mixcd with ſwines greace, do caſe the} paine of the K 
oute, 
; And eMeſues wrireth, War this tempered with honie of Roſes, or withan eg,doth conſume away L 
the Kings euill, 


The rape of the Wide or Broome rape,being boyledi in wine, is commended againſtthe pains M 
of the kidneies andbladder,prouoketh vrine,breaketh the ſtone, and expelleth i it, 

The juice preſſed foorth of Broome rape health greene wounds, andclenſerh olde and filthic N 
vicers: the later phiſirions do affirme that it is alſo good for olde venemousand malitious vicers. 

That woorthie Prince of famous memorie Hemrze the cight King of Enghand, was woont ro O 
drinke the diſtilled water of Broome flowers againſt ſurfers,and diſeaſes thereof ariſing. 


Sir 7 homes Fitzharbert Knight,was woont to cpre the blacke jaundies with this drigke onely. P 

\ Take as many handfuls (as youthinke good) of the fe dried leaues of Broome gathered and braied Q_ 
topowderin the monerth of-May, theritake vnto 0h handfullof the dried leaues, one ſpooriefull 
anda halfe of the ſeede of an braicd into pawder wget ſe rogither,and let thefickerink 
thereofeach da . a quantitie firſt andlaſt,vncill $a fn The medicine muſt be continued 
and ſo long wed, vnrill.it-be quite exnnguilbed; 4oric! is2 diſcaſenoxvery bigdentycured, but muſt 


by litcleand little bedeals withall, 4 71; + - - + 
Orobanch or-Broome, rape fliced andp t inigoyleoliv, roinfuſe or: macerate inthe ſame, as R 
ye do Roles for ople of Roſes,ſcowreth an h away all ſpots,lcn yeqrile freckles pimples,pwheales 
and Pome from the face,or any part of the body,being angointedtherewith.,: 
2ilbqGea Go mas oy ichmaybe caten either mama ogh. i 4d, in mannergs we.vſcxo S 
the {pxigs ory ff dſparacme. | 


' Thedowers and ſcedes of ry Broome are good to with Meadeothonied water T__ 
inthe quantiric ofadram, to cauſe.one to vomite wich great force and violence en 4s whitc Hel- 
Ichor,orneefing powder " 

lf oh: taken alortl # bak the cbelly, driving foorth grear quan of w wateric 6 nds 


Os \ 


- Of be rome or previcing Weeds. Cp 16, " 


7 


| 0-0 tb. The binders co (oat 
T Here be diver af Grome weeds an Etc oal owreounreyand others 
Torn: ; which here are ſtrangers; 1 har __ 


2 Genittells | 


1134 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


1 Geniſtels rintforia. | Py: : Geniftels infetoria. 
Greeneweede or Diers weeds. | oor Piers weede. 


W- 


2 


*+7he iption. 
His baſekindeb pf f Broome Ca The hr weede or! wed bt et_w bran- 
Yoo nmnc edirig from a woodie roote : wheteon do p great ſtore of leaues, of a adee 
greene colour, ſomewhat long like thbſe of Flaxe: [The flowers growe at the top of 
branches not much vnlik the leaves © Feopinnr.o my ſmallerz of an obo ap nj faire yellow colour, 
which rurne into ſmall fl reods,whe tained ali | 
2 CaroluwCluſinsTerteth foorh anoeblr kind whic enema Geni atimiteris; 
being another ſorr of Jie! yi it vpon whoſet ranches do 
 growe long and ſmall leau like Flaxe erſi 
on the other. The flower owe atthe 
former : the rootes ate thicke and woodie, | j 
3 © Ca#oliiCluſrusſerterh foorth twokindes of Beboe, which a relabdeiwag Greening 
weedes or Diers weeds img are: away Plinie and Dioſcorides tobe of thatkinde, The 
firſt is x lowe and baſe pla I ground,whoſe long branches areno- 
chingelle, buras itwereſſtalk is roy. icke/ih themid{t, and thin about the edges, 
. and as it were divided wi ſpall nickets at which place it yy pd to continue the ſame leafe vn- 
totheend, and ſofrom le: : to leafe, (che hornet gta alt which do as'it were 
make one ſtalke ;and hat h no other leaues ,fauingthatin forge of _ nicks « or divifions, therecom- 
meth foorth a {mall leafelike a little eare. Ar theendof thoſe fat and leafed ſtakes come foorth 
the flowers, muchlike the Aowers of the common Greening weede, burleſſer; and of a yellow co- 
Jour,which turne into {mall cods.The roores ate very long,rat Sh and woodie fullof fibres,cloſfing 
atthe top of the roote,from whence they rocecde as from one body. 
4 This kinde of Greene weede called of ſome Chameſtartium, hath a thicke woodie roote : from 
rt re a ee peeces ſer rogither hike a paire of 
RP (i I wa; han I wordy wed) re onthe vpeil 


+ HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 135 
and whitiſh vnderneath, very tough, and as it were ofa ruſhie ſubſtance : among which riſc vp very 
{mall naked ruſhie ſtaſks3 on the top whereof groweth an care or ſpike of achathe matter, hauing 
here and there in the ſaid care Giuers yellow flowers like Broome, bur very (mall or little, 
3 Geaſliells pinnats. . "4 4 Geniftella elobnl:te. 
Winged Greene weede, | | Globe Greene weede. 


5 Geniſtella Lagepoidis maior. 5 Geniflilla Lagipoidis minor. | 
Hares foote Greene weede, Swal Green weed with Hares fgote flower, 


2 % 
5 / / 


2136 THE THIRD BOOKE/ OFTHE 


8). _ | Thedeſeription, | 


4 


which riſe vp divers long, flat leaues , tough and very harde , conſiſtingas itwere of many little 
leaues,ſerone at he cnd another , making of many oneentrire leafe, +, an colour -; among 
which come foorrh diuers naked hard ſtalkes, veryſmall and {tiffe,on the tops whereof ſtand ſpikic 
cares of yellowe flowers, like thoſe of Broome, in ſhape likethat greatthreeleafed grafle, called 
©Alopecuroides, ot like the Foxetaile grafle: after which come flatcods, whetcin is incloſed fmal! 
ſcede iike ro Tares both in taſte and totme. | | | | 
6 This differethnot from the precedent, in ſtalkes, rocres;/and !eaues: the lowers conſiſt of a 
flockie ſoft marter, notwnlike aſhe cuft of Foxeraile, reſembling the lower of Lagopus, 
called in Larine Pes Leperis,or Hares fopre, wherein it chiefelydiffereth from the other of his kind, 

The firſt being our common Diers weede,g: Lan th in moſt ferrill paſtures and ficlds a!moſt cue- 
ry where, The reſt are ſtrangers in England. | [it \ * 
1108 | % Thegime, | | 
pinningof Tuly to the end of Auguſt, 
4 | *+£T he names: | | F 

Theficſt of theſe Greeneweeds is named of moſt Herbariſts Flos Tindrim , but more rightlic 
G:miſta Tinftoriz:of this/Plinyhath made mention; the Greeneweedes faithhe, do growe to dic 
ciorhes with : in his 18 booke 1 6.chapter. lcis calledin high Durch 5 erblum«n, and Acierbzem ; 
in Italian Cerrerta,and Coſ«ria,zs Mathiolus writeth in his chaprer of Ly/anachia, or Lovlcitrite: in 
Engliſh Diers Greening Weede, Baſe Broowe,and Woodwaxen, 

The reſt we referte tatheir ſeveral] ticles, 

Lu Thetemperatwe and vertues. LD 5 

Theſe plants are like vato.common Broome in bitcernes ,jand therefore are hotand drie inthe 
ſecond degree : they are likewiſe thought to be in vertues equail; notwithſtanding their vic is not fo 
well knowne,and therefore not vied atall,v-here the other may be had: we ſhallnotneedc to tpcak 
of the vic that Dicrs make thercot,beig a n:atter impertiuentto our Hiſtoric, 


5 Thefift Greeneweede hath a woody —_ roote with certaine ſtrings annexed thereto : from 


' 


They flower from the | 


: 
; 


Of Spaniſh baſe Broomes. | Chap.17. 


+» 7 he Lindes. 


ere be divers ſorts/of baſe Broomes whoſe ſeuerall ticles and deſcriptions, ſhall ſufficientlic 
. 2 diſtinguiſh theſame. * | | ; 


' 
| 


| & The d-ſeript ion. 


He firſt ofthe baſe or baſtard Broomes growing naturally in Spaine , hath a woodic roote : 
from which riſe vp twiggic brariches very ugh pliable, and of a my colour; 
whereon are ſerilong fat leaues without order , and farre in ſunder, like thoſe of Flaxe: che 
flowers growe at the tops of the branches,of a golde yellow colour, in ſhape like thoſe of our com- 
mon Broome , but greater; after which come Jong cods} wherein is the ſeede like the other 
Broomes. SEES | 6: he Te | 
| 2 This naked Broome growerth vp tp the height ofa man:[the ſtalke is rough,and vid of leaues, 
very greene and pliant;z which diuideth it ſelfe into divers rwiggic branches, greene,and tough lie 
ruſhes: the lowers grow along the ſtalks like thoſe of Broome,bur of a white colour, wherin ir dif- 
fererh from all the reſt of his kinde. ASE | | þ 
2 This kinde of baſe/Broome &iffereth not fromthe precedentin any reſpeR, fauing thatthis 
plantis alrogither lefſerpyherein conſitterhhe cſpeciall difffrence, = pens 
x: | : ; 1 


| 
' 


HISTORTE: OF: © PLANTS 137 


ome 


/ x: Pfendoſpar 
Baſtard _"_ 


| 


3 PſendoſÞ ty Flt 
The nr _—_ 19,2 


Er 


| The pace. 
-Theſe growe in the prouinces of Spaine, nd 


are in one place higher and more buſhic,and in an 
other lower, 


T# * The rims, 
ic timeanſwereth the other Broomes. 
*- The nimes. 


This baſe Spaniſh Broome iscalled in Grecke 
o=27»: the Latines vie the ſame name, calling ir 
ſornetimEs Spertum,and Spartiamn : in Spanith Re- 
tama* in Rh bean Bree k and baſtarde 
Spaniſh Broome, 

* Thetemperature and Ver tes. 

Both the feedes and juice of the branches of A 
theſe baſe Broomes wherewith they in Spaine ar 
| other hot regions do tie their vines, doe mightilic 
diawe, as Galen writeth, 

Dieſcorides (aith,that the ſeedes and flowers be- B 
ing drunke in the quantitie of a dram, with mcade 
or honied water,doth cauſc one to vornite firong- 
ly,cuen as the Hellebor, or Neczing powder doth : 
bur yer without jeopardie or mx of. life ;. the 
ſcede purgeth by ftoolc. 

The ivice which! is drawne from ontof thc bran- C 
ches ſtceped in water,being firſt bruſed, is a reme- 
die for thoſe —_ tormented with the Sciati i, 

an 


1138 THE THIRD! BOOKE/OF THE 
and for thoſe thatbe troubled with the Squincie , if a draught thereofbe drunkein the morning ; 
ſome vle to ſteepe theſe branches inſea: ; and rogiuethe cin agliſter, which purgeth forth 


3 


bloudie and flimie excrements. 


%*%, 


HP 7 'C 
YOOME. ' 18. 
4 B- 
l -E 
z? 138 


: 


roong , by ſundry names accor. 
growe, in ſome places Furzes , in 


's 
# 
I 
5 
7 
. 


; . &" 
| : | i d\ ASE) + 


'N 


=_ 


= 7; =... Ye 
>A 


| 


Z He Furze buſh is plant alogither a thorne , fully armed with moſt ſharpe prickles, with- 
{| outanylcaues atall,;exceprt in the ſpring onely,and thoſe very fewe and little , and quicklic 
falling away : itis/a buſhie ſhrub , oftentimes riſing vp with many woodie branches to the 
height of fower or fine cubirs or higher, according to the nature ofthe ſoile where they growe :the 
ereateſt and higheſt that Idid euerſee do growe about Exceſter in the weſt parts of Englande, 
where the grear ſtalkes ate deerely bought , for the berter ſort of people; and the ſmall Thomey 
ipraies for the poorer ſqrt : from theſe co braunches growe little flowers , like thoſe of 
Broome, andof a yellowe colour , which in hor] egions vnder the extreme heate of the ſunne, 
are of a verie perfe& red colour: in the colder countries of the eaſt , as Danzicke , Bruf- 
wicke, and Polande, there is not any| branche heereof growing , except ſome fewe plants and 
ſeedes that my ſeife haue ſent to Elbing, otherwiſe called Meluin, where they are moſt m_— 
| | 4 | : | 


1% FN at oa 


HTSTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1139 
kept in their faireſt gardens,as alſo our common Broome,che which I have ſent thicherlikewiſe -be- 
ingirt delired by diuers earneſt leteers :the cods follow the lowers; ef the Grauer hath omit- 


as a Germaine who had neuer ſeenethe plant it ſelfe,but framed the figure by hearſayzthe roox 
is ſtrong,tough,and wooie, | 
2 Tothis maybe ioinedanotherkinde of Furze,which brin geth boonth certaine branches that be 
very flender,ſerround abour ar the firſt with ſinall nd lirtle harmelefle prickles, which after 
they haue been a yeere old, 8& the leaues gone, they be armed onely with moſt hard ſharpeprickes: 
the flowers heereof are of a pale yellow colour, lefler then thoſe of Brgome,y et of the ſame forme: 
che cods areſinali,in whickdoUe linteromd recdiſh ſeedes: the roote is rough and woodie. 


3 Geniſtaſpino/a « floje albs. 
White tlowred Furze, 


WD lon 
( Wo let. BR. 


gn 


\þ,- - Weg! i} KeALz 
/ PF AV \ 's 1 1 Uk 


196,00 8 


07 010 


*The deſeription, | | 
4 Wehaueinour Ws grounds of the north parts of England allother fort of Furze, bringing 
foorth the-hke prickleythornes that the archers haue; the onely difference conliſterh in the >. 4K. 
ws flowers zfor the othets bring foorch yeilowe owers, and thoſe of this _ are as white as 
We.” , 

4 Thereis anorher vpon our barren Heathic groundes of theſe ſoutherly parts which growetl 
loweandgloſe ro the d; for the moſt part the buſh iitſelfe groweth round like a cocke ofhaic, 
in flowers andrhogni = y EE it differerh nor fromthe NG 

5 This ſmall omen of Furze, growing vpon Hampltee: Hearhneere London, and diuers other 
barren grounds where in maner bin elſe will grow; hath many weake and flexible branches of 
awoodic badarpe whereon dogrow EONS like thoſe of Time: among which are ſetin num- 


ber inknice mo rickles like needles, whereof it tooke his name: the flowers grow 
Ong tops = cbs rheich oiheoome ,audofapale poliove colour: the roote is tough 
an woodic, 


6 The 


. 


4 
| 


age | THE. THIRD BOOKE [OF THE 

ſt '*%* The deſcription. 
6 Theſmalleſt of all thi " WEL PER Hes; =. qr" OO or ſcorpion Furzs, as the word 
Nepa ſcemeth ro import tit is a ſtrang ins England,jt hath beene rouched of the ancients in name 


\ 


onely,which fault they habe beene all and eucryof _— ro becomplained of, being ſo, breefe that 


nothing can be gathered: rom their delcription: and theref c nap what might hecreof be 
aide to a further confi rat | | 


Needle Furzes or pt $, 


5 Geniſta aculeats.. | | 6 IR ming for Nepe Thepbrfs 


> | 

DA 

” 
” 

pe Is 2249100” 48" NR, 13S 1a; 


4 The 
Thecommon fort heerbof are very well CINE arc in EEE. and fieldes in moſt places 
of England. Thereſt are likewiſe well Cos torhoſe that curiouſly obſerue the difference, 
| * Thetime. | 
They flower from the beginning ofMaie tothe end of bs IE: 
F ly called FE inbigh Dur b Gaſpeldozen: in Engliſh Farze, Fur 
urze is common ca ea Genfta [Proſe : 1! cn Oa inEn > 
zen buſhes, Whine. Gotfle,an if pine drcdrs, p f 
This thorney Broome is taken for Theophya aſtuu his Seorpiuswhich Gaza nameth A ep:the name 
Stor prizes in Plone is m9luwsy, that is to fay,ſfignifying many things,and common to certaine plants: 
"_ this Scorpiarot which he hath made mention in his 25,booke 5.chaprer, ferting downe 
aſi ms his words, where he maketh _Mconrtum Theliphonon to be Scorpize, inhis 23. booke 
= o.chapterz and likewiſe other plant vnder theſfame ritle,bin vproperly, 
| | * pt nog awed VEYEWes.. 
There is nothing written i in Theep aſtiz concerniug the faculties of. Scorpites ſpine ſia, or Furze * 
Flinje ſcerueth to artriby ure vnto itthe ſame vertues —. $ om hath: notwithſtanding the later 


t of complexion: the { $ are vicdin medicines againſt che 
ſtone,and ſtaying of thi ikke. 


4 


| BG | | | of 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 114 


| #6 | ; Fl | | 
Of Cammock Furze, Ret Harrow,or petieWhinne. Chap.ig. 
| | + The hindes. | 
Here be diuers forts of Reſt Harrow, which fome haue infertedamong the ſmooth Broomes; 
T others among thoſe with prickles,whereof ſome haue purple flowers, and likewiſe full of pric- 
kles; others white flowers,and ſharpethornes; ſome alſo purple flowers, others white ,and alſo yel- 


Jowand cuery ofthem voide of prickles. 


1 Amnonis,ſie Reſt Rouis, | 2 Anonis floxe albe. | 


C5 - ; _ ot 
| SENG *- f 


Eee.” | weThedeſcription. vs | 

1 Ammock or ground Furze, rifeth vp with ſtalkes a cubire high, and often higher, ſetwith 
divers iointed branches, tough, pliable, and full of hard fhatpe thornes: among which do 
grow leaues,in forme like thoſe of Saint Tohns woort, or rather of the Lentill, of a deepe 

ereene colour: fromthe bofome of which thornes and leaues come foqrth the lowers, like thoſe of 

Peaſon,of a purple colour; after which come the cods,in which do lic far ſeeds t the roote is lon 

and runnerh farre abroade, very tough and hard to be torne in peeces with the plough , infomuck 

that the oxen can hardly paſle forward,bur are conſtrained to ftande ftjll; whereupon it was called 


7 Wehauein our London paſtures, and likewiſe in other places, ol eofthe Reſt Harrowes,not 
differing from the precedent in ſtalkes, leaues, or prickles; the onely difference is, that this plane 


* o - $ 
' 


3 Reſt Harrow without thomes hath atough,horie,rough ſtalke, di 


flowers,ofarcaſonable good ſinell : the roote is very tough, long,and woodie, | 
Mu: | | Eece 1 | | 4 The 


| 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
4 The yellowe flowred! apt isa intheſe parts , itis qnely ſounde inthe colde 
caſterne countriesfor oug| ethat [can] arne:it differethnorfrom the laſt de{cribed,ſauing thatthe 
herein ir _— from allche other ofhis kinde. 


4. Anonis far na lutea. 
-Ycllow Rel Harrow. 


V4» 
*> < 


©. d —” F =* 
% _  # £6? k. ied A x 
\*- wv d *" $6 : Yue! . 
OS. EE «2 7 ES as 
\ ; 
N= ME 


OV 
> 


| Theſe grow in earablegrounds, in fexrill a+ wa and in the borders offieldes, in a far, fruitefull 
and long laſting ſoile : |it is ſooner founde then deſired of husbande men , bicauſe the rough and 
F lome vatothem, by reaſon "FI tale the plug) and make the Oxcn 


[| *T bitime. | 
They ſende foorth new comes in Maie : they are full Sal in hs ne, and then thoſcqhat 
of nature are pricky,bef * leſt of ſharpethornes: they flower in luly nor 

li i *% Thenames. 

Cammockis called i ! Gricke* aravls, or toric, and likewiſe in Ling Anon, and Ono :of Her- 
bariſts commonly Arref{4 bours & Remora ararrtbicaule it maketh the oxen whileſt they be in plow- 
ingtoreſt or ſtand (!; jc 15 alſo called _£eare/s,of the ſtiffe and harps thornes which pricke thoſe 
that paſſe by :in Frenc|} Arreſte benf,and Boutrande, 

Crateuanameth it rus, in high Durch Stalkravt : + in  lowe Durch PIOAgnaaerE 2in 
Italian Bunag3: in Spai is Gattithos{ mn French Arrefte Benf, oy wh Mar ance: in Engiuh Cam- 
mock, Reſt arrow, pefie Whinne,ahd ground Furze, | 

| | The temperature, | | 
Theroote of C ammock; ishotin Phy third degree as Galen A cute alſo andmaketh chin. 
*% The vertues. | 


- HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1143 
The root boiled in water and vineger,alaieth thepaineof che teceth,if the mouth be often waſhed B 
thereivith.very hot,', . ,- || 1446 | boys | Mi $ 
Pleny reporteth,that being boiled in Oxymel,or the ſyrupe made with honie and vineger till the C 
one halfe be waſted, ir is giuen to thoſe that have the falling ficknes; Mathiolus reyorteth that he 
knew Aman v9 of a yupture by taking ofthe powder ot this-raote, for many monethes togi- 


ther. | | | SA | 
- Thetender ſprings or ctops of this ſhrub befareche thornes come! foorth, are preſerued in pic. D 


: 


kle,and be very pleaſantfauceto becaten with MEAte as a fallade,as 


[30G + L 23.249 SS | 4 & | ' ; "Y ; A 
.., Of Gooſeberries,or Feaberrie buſh.” 'C 


t 


120: 1:5 #T he kimdes. 


| 


Here be divers ſorts of the Gooſeberries ſome reater,others leſſe 
and ſome ofa redcolow: the figure of one,ſhall ſerue for therelt, 


FVua Criſps. © 
- || .- Goole berries; - 


*% The 


8} fower cubits 


do growe leaues , 


heere and there;zr 
but waxing alittle 


they beripe, in wh 


a whitiſh colour: 


There is anoth 
bigge as a ſ{wall'c 


Z—& g V A 
AA06S le 
{19% þ FORT) op 


ſharpe prickle 


ches, {lender , wo 


ſhes into diuers par 
a verie greene colo 
of a whitiſh green, with ſome little purple daſhr 


ofa winie 1wice, fa 


without ſtrings ann 


ſcorrdes teacherth. 


hap:20. 


ome rounde, others long, 


cription. 


T” He Gooleberrie buſh is a ſhrub of three or 


igh , ſet thicke with moſt 
$ :it is likewiſe full of bran- 
odic, and prickly ; whereon 
rounde, cut with deepe ga- 
es like thoſe of the vine, of 
ur: the flowers be yery mal, 


fruit is round growing ſcat- 


teringly vpon ns at the firſt, 


yellow through maruririesful 
mrhing fweereintafte when 
ma is conteined hard feed,of 

he roote is woodie and not 
exed thereto, | 
xr whoſe {ruite is almoſt as 
herrie; and veric rounde in 


| I forme: as alſo another of the like bignes of an 

NET inch in length; in taſte and fubitance agreeing 

Ns \»*; | with the common ſotr. | | 
>. Ve hauc alſo jn our London gardens ano- 


ther ſort altogithe 
is veric ſmall, lefſe 
kinde,bur of a perf 
fereth fromthe ref 


r without prickes,whoſe fruit 
by much than the commgn 
et red colour, whereia it 
t of his kinde, 


Gi: 


Theſe plants 
. * 
% The time. 
ning of Aprill or ſooner the 
*% The names. | 
d writers,who as we deeme 


dens,and elſe where in great abundance 


 Theleanes come foorth in the begin 


 Thisſhrub had no name among the ol 
it not: the later writers call it in Latine Gy oh 
no, "pinch , and Ya4Criſpina: in high Dutch Kruſelbirr : in] 


Ecece 2 


Gooſcbcrie buth and Feaberrie Buſh in Cheſhite,my nati 


T he place. | | 
o growe inour London gat- 


T9 is ripe in Iuneand luly, 


kneweir not, orelſe eſteemed 
\ cm 8 oftentimes ofthe berries YVua Criſþa.Vua ſþr- 
we Dutch Stekelbeſien:|in 

Spaniſh Yes Criſþa, or Eſþina: in Italian Yue fpime:.in French Gra : in Engliſh Gooſeberrie, 
ue countrie, 


% The 


144 woke TatkD: 860! pOOKE o TRE 


The betries ofthizbulbÞ before chey pe ae ad arj andthtineelaer end ofthe 
fecond PEP Us di nding.”” ett: | 
0 | FM oat 
A Thefrvitis Wedinuiy imce meat, 20300 chr vitnCortereembena tell 
__thenmylelte. 

B Theyarevſed in brodhes in feed Verdi which maktahth | 

raſte,bur is greatly profitable ro 1 tc trowbled with ti hot burry 
C Theyarediuerflycaren,but howloey 

they nouriſh nothingorye 1 

D They a the menſes nb J: 


E The ripe berries as th : wires pally are ſomthing hor, 
and ycelda little more nol \ 5 * Shaver? ry t at be not cpegnd a not crude or rawe bur 
theſe afe ſeldome caren or vied as 


IC : Gooledemih, cooleth all aſs; Erpjpets andSaint Aittho- 


They prouoke apperiti .\hdcoole the vehement heat of the ſtomacke and liver, +. 
The yoong andreudet leaves ie rn ina fallade ; __ ow and driveth foorth the 


one apfgnorl. | | 

of Barberes Chi. um. ? 
15155 1:6 Bp blades.” 22, 14.4 ; 
There be diuers forts ofBeria ſms greater, others eat hays withour ones 


Sprna acide fiur Oxyacanthe. 
1 he Barberie buſh; | | 
| '- He Bat 
NR : 


| ly thomes; the rinde whereof is 

| a wood it ſelfe yellow: the ans he 

| greene, {lightly nicked about the 

_ andofa ſower raſte: the flowersbe yel- 

lowe, ſtanding in cluſters ypon long ſtems: in 
their Places _ vp long berries;flender, red 
when they be ripe, with a little harde kernel! or 
ſtone within; of a ſower and ſharpe taſte : the 
rooteis yellowe, diſperſerh it {cltc far abroad, 
and is of a wogdie ſubſtance, 

We haue in our London gardens another 
ſort, whoſe fruiGis likein forme and ſubſtance, 
bur oneberrie is as big as three of rhe common 
kinde,wherein conſiſteth the difference. 

We have likewiſe another withour any ſtone, 
the fruire is like the reſt of the Barberies , both 
in ſubſtance and taſte. 

| %? heplace, 

The Batberie buſh groweth of it ſelfe in vn- 
toiled places and defart grounds,in woods,and | 
the borders of fieldes, efvecially about a Gen- 
tlemans houſe called Maſter Mozke, ewelling 
in a "yes called ler wo miles from Col- 

brooke, 


| 


$ 
. 
ſ 
i 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, ng3 
brooke, where moſt of the hedges are nothing elſe bur Batberie buſhes, |. 
They are planted in gardens in moſt places of England, | 


| % Therame. hn 

Theleaues ſpring foorth in Aprill : the flowers and fruit in Seprember 
| | | | wu Thenames, | 

Galen callerh this Thorne in Greeke 3Z-«:z»9e, who maketh it to differ from 3Zv2xa»%%5, in his book 
of the Faculties of ſimple medicines; but more plainly in his booke of the Faculties of Nourith- 
mentszwhere he reckonerh vp the tender ſprings of Barbaries among the tender ſhoores that arc 
to be catenſuch as Oxyacanthm or the Hawthorne bringeth nor foorth, wherein he planly made a 
difference betweene Oxyatantha the Barberie buſh,and Oxyacanthus hors tree, 

D toſcorides hath a mention of this Thorne,for that which he callerh Oxyacantha inthe Foe- 
minine gender,is Galens Oxyacanthw inthe Maſculine gender, | 

Auicen ſecrreth to conteine both theſe ſhrubs vader the name of Amytberis , but we knowe 
they are neither of affinitie or neighbourhood, although they be both/prickly. 


The ſhrub it ſelfe is called in ſhops Barberies of the corrupred name Amyrberis: of the later 
writers Creſþ/25: in Iralian Creſþ/mo:in Spaniſh Ein de majueles* in high Dutch Paiſſelbeer ; in 
lowe Durch Sauſeboom ; in French E ſpine vinette : and thereupon by a Latine name Spiniumeta, 
Spins acida, and Oxyacantha Galeni. HY | 


c 
. 


| [1 WR he t rature. $4 
| Theleanes and berries of this thogne are old end driein theſecond degree: and as Galen alſo 
afirmerh,they are of thinne parts,and have a certaine cutting qualitie, | | | 
| | _ %* Thevertues, [ 

The leaues are vſed of diuers to ſeaſon meate with,and in ſteed of afallade, as be thoſe of Sorell. a 

The decoQtion thereofis good againſt hot burning and cholerickeagues tit alaieth rhe heate of 
the bloud,and rempererhthe ouernmuch heare of the liuer, | ER 

The fruite or berries are good for the ſame things,and be alſo profitable for hot laskes ,'and for C 
the bloudy flixe,and they ſtaie all manerof ſuperfluous bleedings, : He 

The greene leaues of the Barberie buſh ſtamped, and made into ſauce, asthat made of Sorrell, H 
called greene ſauce,doth coole hot ſtomackes, and thoſe that are vexed with hot burning agues, * 
and ptocurerh appetite. | | 1] | # 

The conſerue made of the fruite and ſugar, performeth all choſe things before remembred, but E 


with better force and ſucceſle, | 


The rootes of the tree ſteeped for cerraine daies rogither in ſtrong 
tree,and the haire often moiſtned therewith maketh ir yellow. | 


Of the white Thorne,or Hawthorne Tree. (hap.22. 


Here be two ſorts of the white /Thorne Trees deſcribed of the later writers,one very common in 
moſt parts of England: there 1s another very rare, and not founde in Europe , except in'fome 
fewe rare gardens of Germaniez which differeth nor from ourcorpmon Hawthorne, taving that 
the fruit hereofis as yellow as Saffron: we haue in the weſt of England one growing at a place cal- 
led Glaſtenburie , which bringerhfoorrh his flowers about Chriſtmas , by the report of diners of 
good credire,who haue ſccue the ſame; but my ſelfe haue not ſeene/itz and therefore leaue it tobe 
better examined. - | y 


te,made with aſhes of the aſh B 


| | | % The deſcription. | | | 

1 "T"Hewhite Thorne is a great ſhrub growing oftentimes tothe height of the Peare tree: the 

{4 rrunke or bodie is great :the boughes and branches hard and woodie,fſet full of bong ſharp 

thornes : the leaues be brgade,cur with deepe gaſhes into diuers ſections, ſmooth, and of 
agliſtering greene colour :the flowers grow vpon ſpokie rundles, iÞ pleaſant ſweete fmcll, fome- 
times white,and often daſht ouer with alight waſh of putplez which hath mooued ſome tothinke 
ſome difference in the plants: after which come the fruite, being round berries, greene atthe firſt, 
and red whenthey be ripe z wherein is founde a [$ft ſweere pulpe, and certaine whitiſh feede : the 
roote groweth deepe in the ground, of a hard woodic ſubſtance. || # | 

| | Eeee| 3 2 The 


f = ; | | 
2 : . / | 
> y 


1146 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

2 Theſecond and third hae beenetoijched in the firſtrirle , notwithſtanding I have thought ir 
not vn to infert in this place aplant participating with the Hawthorne in flowers ang fruite, and 
with the Seruice tree in legues,and nor wilike infruitallo, | _ | 


x 


1 Oxyxcambas. | pes 2 Aria Thoophraſti. 
The Hawthorne tree, | Cumberland Hawthorne, 


* oi i% The deſeri; tion. I” | 
Theophraſts hath ſet foorth this tree vnder the name of #14, which groweth vnto the forme 
of a {mall rree,delightingto grow in our ſhadowie woods of Cumberland and Weſtmerland, and 
many other places of the North countye, whereit is to be fotindin grearquantitie : burieldome in 
Spaine,Italic, or any hotfegion. This = is gatniſhed with many {mall branches beſet with leaves 


like the Peare tree, Or rather like the Aller leate,of a darke greene colour aboue and of a skie cclovr 
vnderneath : among theſe leaues comeifoorth tutts of whute Gowers,verie like vnto the Hawthorne 
flowers : after which \uceeede ſmall red berries ike the berries of the Hawthorne,& in taſte lke the 
Neapolitane Medlar: t php = faculties wheceotare not yet knowen, 
1's | %* 7heplace., Web ies; | 
The Hawthorne groweth in woods, & in on neer vntg high waies almoſt everie where. The 
ſecondis aſtranger mn En land, T helaſt groweth at Glaſtenþure Abbey, as it is cred|bly reported 
Vnro me, 1 } | ; 

The firſt and ſecond flower in May,whereupon many do call the tree it ſelfe the May buſh , as a 
chieferokgn of the comming in of May: the leaues come foortha little ſooner : the fruite is ripe 1N 
the beginning of Seprember,and is a tpod for birdes in winter, Þ 

Dizſeorides deſcribeth thi s\hrub, ah nameth it 3Zv-xgr%e,/in the Feminine gender : and Ga/enin 
his booke ot the Faculties of ſimple edicines, vdrar0es, in the Maſculine gender ; Oxnracanthus 

| ſaith he, isarree,and is like to the wildt Peare tree in forme,to be allo the vertues nor vnlike, &c.of 
Oxyacantha Do ſeorrdes yrneth thus:It is a tree like ro the wilde Peare tree, very ful om z&C, 
14 | ? | q e74p0 


* 


HISTORIE OF! PLANTS t147 
Serapio calleth it CAmyrberis, and forme faith" Diaſcorides would haue it called 7v:/-, but the name 
Pyrina ſeemeth to belong to theyellow Hawtharne;.itis called in high Durch Haogdazen in low 
Dutch Panedozen *: inTralian Babwwarcin Spaniſhi Per/iters + in French CAub-e ſpine : in Engluth 
white 1 horne, Hawthornertree;andotiowe Lindoners May-buſh. | | 


© 041121014 oe Theremperature. 
The fruit of the Hawthorne tree is verie altringent. | 


|  *%*Thewvertue. | | 

The Hawes orberries of the Hawthorne treaas-Dugſcorides writerh, do both ſtay the laske, the 
menſes,and all otherfluxes of blood :fme auchors write that the ſtones beaten to pouder and gj- 

ven todrinke,are good againſt the fone, | | | F. 

| 2.553 PURN ANIELISTLY 2! 


: v ? id Of | byes 3 ey , NY | | | 
"4 Df Goates Tharne, Chap.24; RATS 
1 Trag «antha ane rms Hitch 1111. = ® Spine Hireiminor, > 
Goates Thorne, 1 JSULE- 3s 747 : 20 % >. Bil 1 Goatcs i hone, % | & 
= t 


/ LA 4. 
| £ | 
» ; F . 

. . / ; "i 4 —_ 

" x" ) AF - ” ; | Þ. ' 
oy kv . oy 

£ i ».. \ '* N _ 

Wk \\ 2 > A /4 p 4 A> - .. 


| ( As w — . z 
| = a $2. FHF 
—- Y% j = ” a1 4 


=o 


j | 
& : : , : 
\ " #2 \ .n 5 , £ > ; 
. % # : i % ; 4 . l | - 
F F . F 4.3% EY 0 4 . 7 #/ - 
E P # ma n "s / IU > 
: _ 4 k " « 
5 # 4 a : \ | < 
% y £5. —_ _—_— "3 "I Y "3.4 * \\ (YN 
IN \.\* > I, F 6 . \ 
\ 4 * . Y Fs Y l \ 
4 C3». i \ ih Fi ol 
4 a % y 


I 

==. 19% 

—_ g ” $ f> 
» - i 

\ . *S \ 
"4 >. 4 
\y J 

» 


> 
\ 


vl 


——  — 


7 
Jo, 
\ —_ s 
% _- » 
$"#: PP, 
. £7 3 


x -4 * *% The acſcription. = | PHY . 
1 *T* Hefirſt 7 ragicantha or Goates Thorne, hath many branchie boughes and twigs, ſlender, 

| © andpliant,fo ſpread abroad vpon every ide, that one plant doth ſometime occupie a gicar 

©. ſpace orroomein compaſſe; theleaues are ſmall, and in ſhape like Lentil leaves, whitiſh, 
and ſomwhar moſlic or hairie.fer inrowes one oppoſite againſt anather: the lower is ike the blot- 
ſome ofthe Lentill, bur much lefler, andof a whitiftycol-ur , and ſometimes marked with purple 
lines or ſtreakes : the ſeede is inc loſed in {mall cods or husks, almoſt ke vnto the wilde Z2tawor 
horned [refoile: the whole planton eucry ſideis ſerfull of ſharp prickly Thornes, hard, whute, and 
ſtrong+therootes run vader the ground like Licorice rootes,yelowe within, and blacke without , 
tough, limrmrier, and hard ro breake : which being wounded in ſundty places with ſome iron toole, 
and laideinthefunne;at rhe higheſt andhorreſt time of ſornmer, ifſuerh foorth a certaine liquor, 
which beinghardned by the ſame,isthargumme which is calledin ſhops Tragacantha and of jome 
though barbarouſly D7agagazt. «0 Þ A 


Ecee4 ||| | 2 The 


7 

; . 

| | 

= | | 
H 


1143 THE THIRD' BOOKE/OF THE 


2 Theſecond kinde of Tragacentha, is alſoa lowe and thicke ſhrub, having many ſhootes gro- 
wing from one turfe,of a white or grayiſh colour, about a cubitehigh, ſtiffe and woodie:the leaues 
arc hke the former, $& garded with moſt fliffe prickes,not very ſafely to be touched:among the thor- 
nic leaues come foorth many lowers in ſmall rufts like Geniſtells, bur thatthe, are white; the cods 
are manygſtraight and rhoxnie like Geniſlella, wherein are many ſmal white and three cornercd ſeeds 
as bigge as Muſtard ſeede, | | | | | Fe 


3 Poterion L'Obelq,foue P| p la ſpino k Comer. | i 3 at 
Burner Goates Thorne, | 5 3%%| or vt * The dbfeription. 


3 The Grecians have called this plant Nog, 

— bicanſeir is gpod for the linewes : itſhould ſeeme 
WHT  \ 'thatittooke the name Porerion of Potrix, bicauſe 
(YA ir loueth a watcrie or fennie foile : it hath ſmall 
branches and leaues of Tragacantha growing na- 

 rurally inthe rra&t of Piedmontin Irahie, Itſprea- 

ceth abroad|like a ſhrubbe : the barke or inde is 

blackiſh & dry without great moiſture, very much 

- wfithedor wrinckledinand our, as thatot 2y eps 

or Corruds : the (harpe prickes ſtand ths ver 

as Treg he; bur confuſedly, and are finer and 

three times leſſer then thoſe of Tragacentha, gro- 

wing much after the maner of Zenticnla or Aſtra. 

aus : the ſeed is ſmall and red like vato Sumach, 

grlefſer. | | 


| Thephace, | 

Petri Belloniusin his rſt booke'f Singulari. 
tiesre , thatrhere is great plentic heercof 
growing in Candie vponthe tops of the monm- 
raines:T heophraſtze ſaiththatit was thought tobe 
no where butin Candie, but noweitis certaine 
thaticis foundin Achaia,Peloponelus,and alſo in 
Aſia': it doth alſo growe in Arcadia, which is 


= 


F ; 
{ 
NM 
if 
% 

oy 
% 


«6 —_ 
&« T = 


| BY | | . 
They flower and floutiſh in the ſurmmer monerhs, Ihaue ſowen the ſeede of Poterionin April 
which Lrecciucd from ;" wy. Camerarizs of Noremberge, that grew in my garden two yeres to- 
gither,and after periſhe! by ſome milchance. | | | 


4 


— 


K|- | | 7: The names, * | | 

Goares Thorne is called in Greck 7424858, and of the moſt Herbariſts likewiſe Tragscentha, we 
may call itin Latine Spa Hercr : in French Barhe Renard | andin Engliſh for want of a berter 
name,Goartes Thorne: che liquor or gymthar ifſuerh foorth of the rootes beareth the name alſo of 
Tragacantha : it is called in ſhops Gummer Tragecanthe, andin a barbarous maner Gumme 7 rage- 
_ canthi: in Englith Gumme Dragagant. | 
(WY Ne thon g. Ir doth conſolidate or 

This plant in cache part thercof is of adrying facultic without nipping, It doth C ; Of 
glew ter finewes Lin be cur : but the $25 have that facultic eſpecially , which are boiled 
in wine , and the decoQton giuen vnto thoſe that hauc any greefe or hurtin the linewes. 


Gum Dcagagant hath anemplaſticke or dawbing qualiticyby reaſon wherof it dulleth,or alajetl: 


the ſharpenes of humouts and doth alſo ſomething dric. | 


| 


| % The 


HISTORIE OF PLANT 
| _ _ * Thevertues. | 
The Gumme is ſingular goodto be licked in with honie againſt the 
throre,hoarſenes, 
taketh away the roughnes thereof. | 
Being drunke with Care orthe decoQion of Lycorice, it taketh away and alaieth the heate of B 
vrine:it4s alſo vied in medicines forthe cies, | 
The greateſt part of thoſe artificiall beades,ſweere chaines,bracelets,and ſuch like pretic ſiveere C 
things of pleaſure aremade harde and fitro be worne by mixing the gumme heereof with other 
ſveetes,being firſt ſteeped in Roſe water ill it be ſoft. | | 


' n149 


| h , roughneſle'of the A 
all ſharpe andthinne rheumes or diſtillacions; doing laida vnder the toong it 


kef9-1A! bt Of the Egyptian Thorne. Chap.24. | 


 % The kindes. 


; oy be , 


[eerice hath made mention of two ſorts of Lſeacia, this whoſe figure we haue ſerdowne is 
the right Acacia. | > 5 


 CHeacia Dioſeoridit., | .. | 
| | The AEegyptian Thorne, | | * The teſeription, 

1 Gf { | Joſcorides maketh mention of 'AHeacia, 
[8 whereof the fir{t is the rrne and right 464 
> © <QY = cia,whichisa ſhrub orhedgerree;burnor 
| growing right or ſtraight vp as other ſmall 
trees do; his branches are woodie, beſet with 
many hard and long Thornes, about which grow 
the leaues, cory of many fmall leaves chuſte- 
ting abour one fide, as in the Lentill: the flowers 
are whitiſh, the husks or cods be plaine and flar, 
yea very broad like vnto Lupines, eſpecially on 
_ that ſide where the ſeede groweth,which is con- 
rained ſometimes im one part, and ſometimes in 
LE AY A two parrs of the huske , growing rogither in a 
VYECTTC ID -_ narowe necke: the ſeede is fmoothand gliſtring, 
T\W ANI SSN 0 There is a blacke mice taken out of theſe huskes, 
Q VEL [£7 if they be dried in the ſhadow when rhey be ripe; 
bur if when they arenot ripe, then it is fomwhat 
. red:ſomedo wring out a mice out of the leaues 
and fruite. There floweth alſo a gum our of* this 
tree which is che gum of Arabia, called Gumme 

Arabicke. | | | | 
Dioſcorides having deſcribed Spins Acacia, 
ſetterh cowne a ſecond kinde thereof, calling it 
eAcacid a/tera , which hath the three leaues of 
Rev or Cyti/as, and cods like thoſe of GeniHelia , 
bur ſomewhar more blunt atthe end, and thicke 
| atrhebackelikea Rafor, and ſtill growerh fore- 
warde narrower and narrower , vntill it cometo hane a ſharpe edge: intheſe cods are contained 
three or fower flatſeedes like Geniſtella, which before they waxe — are yellow, bur afterwardes 
blacke : the whole plant groweth to the —_— Geniſta ſpin-/a,or Gorfle, both in ſhape, height, 
and reſemblance, and nor tothe height of atree, as Marhiolus woulde perfwade ys, bur full of 

ſharpe Thornes like the former. | Fes 


2 N& 2 | ol 
y 


\ 


% The 


| | 11 
p 


1150 THE THIRD »OOKB OF. THE 


T | + Thep 

The true Acacia giodiedh | in AEgypt, Palcſtina, Lonibs je ahd Syvda, as:Nioſcorides writeth : 
won the ſhrubs and trees that remaine alwaigs green, Acagia ts noredffor one by Petr us Bellants 
in his firſt booke of Singularities Lhap.44- 

The other Acacia growerh! in Cappadocia and Pontus;as jofeorides Lebat: itisalfo found in 
Corſica,and on diuers mountaines of [Iralie,and likewiſe vpon the coalt of won and mand 
dic,and vpon the Narbon coaſt of the Mediterranean ſea! {rs 6 

| % The time. 1 36 | 3 35 6 

Theſe flowerin May and cheir fruit is ripe in the end of Auult.,! 

| w*% Thenames. | | 

Thetree Acaciais named of the Greciuns 4:2, vea even ih ourtime &a likewiſe of the Latines 
Acacia :itis alſo called Aegyptia ſhina. This ſtrange thome hath no Engl namethar I can learne, 
a'd therefore it may keepe. {till the Latine naire Acatiaz etl hat \Hatucd it the AEgyprian 

thorne: the juice is called alſ6 Acacia after theriame of theplant. The Apothecaries of Germanie 
do appoint in ſtead heresf, the juice thar is preſſed foorth 0 Sloes or Shags, which they likewiſe 
call _Leacia. Mathiolus pitturerh for Acacia , thetree which the later Herbariſts do call Arlor 1u- 
ae, ro which he hath vntruly added Thozne that he might bh ic Acaciay, and yet he hach not made 
it agree with Dzoſcor:des his deſcription. 

They call this *neo#rge; in Latine LAcacte altera;-orthe he Acacia, and ngvenaars, or 
Ponticke Acacia.The Aparhecaries andwany Hebariſts inpwci itnot}] anal: 

| Y Thenutue. 

The juice of Acacia jb Galen ſaith,cÞnſiſteth nor of one orkly ſi bitanilabus is of ſubſtance both 
colde andearthie, towhich allo is coupled a cerraine wateriq efſence, and i hkewile hach thin and 
hor partes diſperled i in itſelfe: therefore it is drie mthe third degree, andcoldy n the firſt if it be not 
waſhed;and inthe ſecond, ifitbe waſhed: tor by w we fp loic Rnd: ay hiring qualitic, 
andthe hot partes... /, ME: © 

| '% The Vertues, 

Theiuice of Acach Nippetk the _ the 1m! —_ of omen: tenwexgnd mans inuo- 
Juntarie ſſue called Gomorrhes, fit be < upke, 1n, ;ed wine | 

Ithealeth the blaſtings.and infanupariqns ol the er) OE Sin and 4" of the 
hands ſinooth after Sergþgo, healeth he blulters and extent heate in * mouth, and makerh the 
haires blacke that are waſhed therewir Lo 

on Itis good,faith Diofeot vdesagair it S. Anthan: es fire. ſhingles, Clam, Prerygjagnd whit 
owes, 

The gum doth binds and ſomewhaticoole: it alſo hath j uw vnto itanemp laiſtick or diwbi 
qual bed which it dullerh or alaicth the ſharpnes of the arte cavempl jris mixed. Being 

applied miththe white and yolke of an! egge,ur will nor fufferbliſters to riſe in the burned orſcalded 

partes. Dzoſcorides, _ | | | 

E Theiuiceof the opt faith Dioſcorjiles, doth allo biade! bur it is not F: o fetull norſo goodin 
cie medicines, i | 


Re 


of boxe Thom bad 'he fice where a 


| 


li *% The a fription 
| 


Loci. Clap 25. 


i > 
oe > 


, 
[ 


Oxe Thorne 13a rare Nety' (hapenot vnlike the Boxe tree, where If it chath beene recko-. 

ned fora wilde kinde, hauing ny great branches {et full of ronmd and thicke leaues, veric 

like that of the common Boxe tree : oy whict gon ce toorth moſt ſharpe pricking 
.thornes; the flowers grawe among the leaues, which yeelc hſ{mali blacke berrics of a birter 
taſte,as biggeas a Loy bar the iujce TY is fomewhart oilic and ofa reddiſh colour; which 
birrer juice being fire,doth burnt with a maruellous cxacking and ſparkling the aſhes there- 
of are of ared clo i ch many —_ rootes $ growing? "x86 9 Yay 


: 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. : 6240 
> Theotherkinde of Pyxacantha or Lycium, groweth like vnto the common Priver, hating fuch 
like leaues,but ſomewhat narrower *the tops of the flender ſprigs are furniſhed with prickes : the 
roote is rough,and of a woodie ſubſtance, Fes 


1 Lycium ſine pyxacantha. AS 2 Lychoy Hiſpanicion., 
_BoxcThorne.. ., i] O24 2+ = Spaniſh Bouxe Thorne. 


> % % * CT 
: p GSH 
« ol Py ” s G4 
p 4 
_—_- - 
\ 4 


©. f# 


penny | * The place. = | 64 
They grow in Cappadocia and Lycia, and in many other countries: itprofperethvin rough 11a- 
places, it hath likewiſe beene fobnde in Languedoc, and Prouence in Fraunce; Bellepiu _ 
that he found it in Paleſtina, "1 \W Ez OF, 
| Mathio/us pictureth for Boxe Thorne, aplant with Boxe leaves 4 with very many bovghes , and 
cettaine thornes ſtanding among them : but the notable Hetbariſt C2ngwrlare and others, hotde 


opinion,that it is not theright ; with whom we alſo do agree. BOS © \ 
There is drawne ont of 4 leaues and branches of Boxe Thorne, or as Pxte faith; out of the 
boughes and rootes being thorowly boiled, a iuice,which is named L erm” | B74 
Diofſeorides ſaith that the leaues and branches muſt be braied, ang the infuſion made many daies 
inthe decoction thereofafter which the feaces or woodie ſtuffe muſthecaſtaway, and that which 
remaineth boiled againe till it becon-e as t;.icke as honie : Plany faith, thar the rootes and branches 
are very bitrer;and for three daies rogither they muſt be boiled ina copper yeſſell, and the woode 
and ſtickes often taken out till the decoction be boiledrathe thicknes of honic. 
| | El * The time. | | {36 oo 
They flower in Februarie and March,andrhenr fruitets ripe in September. | 
| | | * The names. | 
It isnamedin Greeke -Z«-ar%, which a man may call in Latine Buxee ſþ/na: and in Eng'ith 
Boxe Thorne,of ſome Aﬀes Boxe Tree &prickley Boxe: it is alſonamed Lye-am of the ivice which 
is boiled our of it, The iuice is properly cali'ed>y/ay, and retaineth in Larine the ſame name Lycium * 
it1s termed in Engliſh 1horne Boxe. But ir tcemeth co me, that the original name Lyceum is ficter, 


'being 


| 


1152 THE ; THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
being aftrange thing, and knowne to very fewe; the a aries know it not; who i 
thereof do vie —_ thejuice of the fruire of Woodohe,s that nor withour | great ns am 
we hauealreadic written,; 

Diofſeoridesteacheth ro make of Rhu (ua ahich; is good 'E thoſe things that Zyciues is, andis 
vicd when \ Lyciuns i15not ro be had,and ti is fitto pur itinall medicines in ſteede thereof, 

* The temperature. | 

Lyciun oc the iuice oft Thorne,js as Gaſes teacherh,ofa drying quali tie,and compounded of 
diuers kindes of ſubſtances,one of thinni parts digeſting and hotz another earthic and colde , by 
yore, irinioyerh his bind ng facultie: as hot i in a meane , | drherefore itis vcd for diucrs ſac: 
poſes | I | {1 


| goa * 'The Ver tues. [ 
A Lycium clecreth theſ efaick Dioſcori At bealerh the f ic iefeſtre ſores ofthe eic lids; the 
itch; and old fluxes,or d; yoke ofhumours; iris a cemedie forthe running of the cares ; far vl- 
cers in the guins,and almonds of the thi ore,and _ thec 


aps and —_ of the lips and fun- 
dament, 


of DIE 7 oth thorn, thgy 6. 


Y % The hinder, | 
An Feer the opinion & Diberide thezebe three ſorts of Rhamnas, one with long. flat, and ſoft 
leaucs zthe ode white] zandthethirce wich rounde leaves , which are ſomewhat 
: | ire that there are but to, the one white & the other blacke, - 
labour and :nduftrie of thenewe and. late writers, there 
deyery 61: -/themare plants of a Rey ſubſtance, ha- 
lant anches,ſce Wi! pricking thornes, 


| % The de 
His is |a ſhrubbe NG in hedges, and 
bringing foorch ſtraight branches and harde 
"ho like tothoſe of the Hawthorne,with 
little leaues, long, ſomething farand ſoft: and this 
hach that notable learned man Clz/ius deſcribed 
more diligen} in theſe wordes : TheRamme is a 
ſhrub fitro *h hedges of,with ſtraight branches, 
parting it ſeffe into many twigs , white, and ſer 
with ſiffe anf ſtrong thornes hauing leaues,which 
for the moſt |part growe by fowers or fiues at the 
rovte of eugry Thorne, long, ſomething fat, like 
to thoſe of the Oliue tree , ſomewhat white, but 
tender andfyll of i juice; whichin Aurumne doſom- 
| newe growing in their pla- 
tumne are ſomething long, 
whitiſh pow we atthe brims into fiueparts, in their 
places is eo ſeede, in ſhew as in Gelſemine; not- 


withſtanding it was neuer my chaunce to fee the 

fruit: therogte is thicke and diuerſly parted. 

| wt Thephace. 

hs Ramme is found on the ſea banks of Hol- 
land, andeſp cially of Flanders; itis alſo found in 
_ other places| in vallies or dales, and by running 
ſtreames, as neere vnto. Lycum Vindeluis fluniun, 
Cordu id oftentimes ſect, ashe 


* The 


HISTORIE: OFUPLNN Ts.” niz3 


* 


* Therime, 
This Ramis greene roger with hi leaues : the fruit orbetties remaine on the ibrub1 yeaeuen 


in winter. es ROY 
-TheGreeians call this blothl 14& the Latines Mo Oy [2d of ditiers itis nameA more: 
ines pZldiva/ thats; Spins atba,ot white Tharnez'Sp! — arts thorne, as wefitidewrit- 


ten among the baſtard wotdes, Marcellwna meth it Spin Meri tate ii which hath, 
faith he,as it were a Grape. Irisc led wi Irati DI Val Spaniſh $, Stambr aNeL; in 
Engliſh Ram,or Harrs thorne, OT aa 062 wot! 1 evflinch 330 36 1}, 4437 
TheRam; faith Gatn: oth drie init peſtir/tk eſecond de pn benk 
A ET, oonn Meri -vyyb - 13092 * _—_ 11 ” HO" ns So . 
1 by | hawsy £1 3+ 35:03 FRO ya, 


a # THU. 


\ Thcleaves Gi Dl forides, arti 
dutwe tn vie cherw 


| '& viſe Thorve. Chap 2 6. 
Paliuras. 


Chriſtes Thorne. * The PRE | 
Hriſtes Thotne orRattofLybia,is a very 
rough and hard — growing 
vp fomtimes 412th atal rec, 
| hauingvery longand ſh: branches; 
but the thornes|that growe rs the leaues 
| are EN ET Tile garke emes. The 
leaues are ſmall,broad and almoſt round,fome- . 
what firſt of a darke CO= 
- - Jour, andthen ſomewharreddiſh. The flowers 
\ © © growein cluſters at the topof theſtalkesof a 
| nk colour: the huskes wherein the ſeedes 
contained, areflat and broad, very like vnito 
| ſmall bucklers a5 harde as wood, wherein are 
' contained three or fower thin and flat ſcedes, 


+ like the ſeede of Line or Flaxe, 
Theplace. 
This Thome- thin Lybiaz iris better 
eſteemed of inthe countrie of Cyrena than is 


their Lote tree,a$ Pliny aftirmeth.Of this ſhrab 
Diphilus Siphnius in Athenensin his 14. booke, 
maketh mention, layin .that he did often cate 
of the ſame in A thatbeaurifull citie; 
Petrus Belloniza who travelled over the holy 
land, faith, thatthis ſhrubbie thorne Palaur ws 
was the thorne wherewith ey crowned our 
Sauiour Chriſt: hisreaſon for the proofe here-. 
of is this, that|in Iudza there was not any 
thorne ſo common , ſo pliant or fofit for ro 
| make a crowne 9r arland of, nor any ſo tull of 

cruel hows prickles.It Lao tironghoue the whole countric in ſic abundance.chat i it is their 
common fewell to burne,yea ſo common with themrhere,as our Gorſſe,Brakes,and Broom is here 
with vs. Joſephs in his firſt booke of Antiquities and 11. chaprer ſaith, thatthis thorne harh the 
moſt ſharpe rickles of any other, and therfore that Chriſt might be e more tormented the Iewes 
rather tooke this than any other. Of whichThauea ſinallrree pron "S in oy garden, hat I haue 


brought foorth by ſowing ofthe ſecede. 


*% The 


ns THE | THIRD: BOOKE OF THE 


t% The ime. 


The leaues fall away, adconinnnotarai geen docholeoft | Ra pbk fred 


in = ſpring,as Plmretel uficth, 


This Thornie (hrub zaalled i in Gre 
Palterm : for want of an Engliſhname 


reporteth, that the ſeedelts called Zurg. 


| * The nomes. 


cke meAivegs. : the and Kealians1 retaine "EH name 
jitmay. becermed] n of x Lb an Theme: 5 Flat 


| | bn | 


Theleaues and roore of Chriſtes Thor 


3 he "0 
Theta inde and cut. 


| % The wertwes. 


A By vertue of this curing nalitie the 
humors to remooue out "re the cheſt a 
B ThedecoQion of theleaues and r 


 ly.prouoketh vrine,and is axemedic againſt 


C Therootedath waſte/and conſume 


NT" WIN 
nr rye) £ot Cohn irh yon ides ch, ſtopperh 

re  Dioſcor qwriret th the bel. 
i IS: ting 


away Phymata and 15 aus nr RO 


D Theſcedeis good for the cough ,and weare away the ſtone, in che bladder. 


Of Buclghorn 'or laxatiue Row. Chep 7: 


Rhemmus ſol "= 
Buckthorue,:j;. | 


NE SSN 
> - - _— fs 


It fowreth in May he berrics beripei 


Thelater Herbariſts allicin Lati 
Ram,and bearerh purge aries. Bt 


by 


* rhe: 
Vckthorne prowy in manner of a ſhrub or 
hedge tree 5 his trunke or bodie is oft:nasbig 
bail 3 his wood or timber is yellow 
is of the colour ofa Cheſtnut, 
barke ofthe Cherrie tree, Thebran- 
th leaves thatare ſomewhatround 

the Crabor Wilding tree: amon 

ome footrh thornes which are hard 
pricklie. The flowers are white and ſmall,which be- 
ing vaded,there ſuccecd little round berries,greene 
at the firſt,bur afrerwards blacke, whereof that ex- 


| Buckthome cw «i borders of helds 
in hedges ” rags , andin other vntoiled places: 
it delighteth ro growe in rivers and in water dit- 
ches.It growethin Kent in ſundrie places,asat Far- 
ningham vpon the conie burrowes belonging ſorm- 
 . time to M,|Sjbill, 5 alſo vpon conie burrowesin | 
Southfleere, eſpecially in a ſmall and narrow lane 
leading from the houſe of Maſter Walliams Swan 
vnto Longfield downeszalſoin the hedge vpon the 
right bite Dartford townes end rowards Lon- 
don, and in many places more vpon the chalkic 
bankes and hedges. 
*% Thetime., | 
inthefall of the | 
* The names. ' 
Rhammiu ſolutiuws, bjcauſcir is ſetwith thornes, like as is the 
hiolus namerh i it mo infeltoria;) alerim Cords Spina Ceri, 


and 


and Jiders call it Burgi/þina, It is termedin hi 
Merlo, Spino Zerlino, Spino Cerneno : inEngliſh 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


1155 
Dutch Creukbcer weghdon : : in Iralian Spins 
xatiueRam, VVay thorae, and Buckthorne: in 


jowe Dutch they callthetruir or berries Rhtjnbeſien, that is, as though you ſhould ſay in Latine, 


Bice Khenanem Engliſh Rheinberries : in French Nerprun. 


'*% Thet 


ature. 


Theberries of this Thorne, 25 they be intaſte bitrer andbinding, ſobe they alſo hot and drie in 


the ſecond degree. 


| we Thevertues. 
The ſame do purge and voideby the ſtoole thicke flegme, and alſo 


holerike humours : they are A 


given being beaten into powder from one dram to adram and a halfe : \diuers do number the ber. 
ries, whogiue to ſtrong bodies, from fiftcene ro twenty ormoe 3bur ir is berter to breake them and 
boyle them in fat fleſh broth withour ſalt, andt co giue the broth to drinke : for ſorhey purge with 


leſſer trouble and —_—_ pings. 
There ispreſicd foort 


ofthe ripe berries a juice, 


which being boyled with alicele Allum is vſcd B 


of painters for a _ greene,which they docall Sap _ 


The berries whi 


be as yer vnripe, being dried an 
yellow colour, bur if rhey be ripe _— make a greene, 


infuſed or ſeepedi in water, domake a bare) C 


Of the Holme,Holy;or Huluer tree. Chap.28. 


AMerifolium. 
Tix Holly tree, 


% 


+ ens cription. 
He Holly is a ie plant, notwithſtan- 
ding ir oftentimes groweth to a tree of a 
reaſonable bigyes. The boughes whereof 
are tough and flexible, coucred with a finoothe 
and greene barke. The ſubſtance af the wood is 
hard and found, and blackiſh within,which doth 
alſo ſinke in the water, as doth the Indian wood 
which is-called Gueracwm. The leaues are of 2 
beautifi!l greene colour, ſmooth and glib, like 
almoſt ro Bay leaues, bur leſſer, andcornered in 
the edecs with ſhar rpe prickles 3 which nonich- 
ſta ding they rg + 70 few omen fr 
oley ic flowersbe white and fivecte (/{ 
the berries are round, of the bignes 6f - 
Peaſe,or not much greater,of colour re 4. 
vopleaſant, with a white ſtone in the © 


4 the Goth berke of this 
| . which the birders and 
countrie men dovſe to rake birdes with, They 
pull off the bark,and make a ditch in the ground 
cipecially inmoilt,boggie,or foggic carth,vher- 
into they put this ba e,coucring the dirch with 
boughes of trees, lerting it remaine there rill ic 
be rotten and purrified, which will be donein the 
pace of ewelue daies or thereabout : which don, 
they rake ir foorth, and beateit in inoyare vneill 


" It be cometothe thickneſſe and clanjeninelſe of Linc. Laſtly, that they may clcere it from peeces 
of barke and other filchineſle, they do waſh irwery often ; afterw wb Ad adde vnto it alittle oyle 


of nuts Andafrer that do pur itrvpin earthen veſlels. 


*% The 


E'OF THE 


This tree or ſhrub is : ine Agrifoliam : in] | io, and Agaifoghio + in Spa- 
in high Dutch | nt in lowe DurchHulftt in 


arc hot and dye, and of thin partes,and waſte away winde, 


k i *% The wertues. oh bo | | : 

inſt the colicke: for tenor twelve being inwardly raken bring away by the 

icke humors,as we haue learned of them,who oftentimes made rriall ke 
| barke hereof isno lefle hurtfull than that of Miſlelto, foritis 

| the intrailes, it ſhutteth and drawerh togither the guts ang 


s meanes itbringeth deſtruction roman, not by any qualitie, 


medicine againſt all fluxes of the belly, 


Of the Oke- Chap.29. 


I} | wThe kindes. | 
Here be diuers ſorts of Okes or Acornetrees, ſome cammon, others ſtrange, or of forreine 
countries: of the eqqpmon Oke with his fungousexcreſcence, as alſo of diuers forts of Miſſel. 
toes, which growe not6nely vpon the Oke, burypon ſundrie other trees alſo, and likewiſe of that 
 longwhitemoſlethatizeſpecially foilnd vyponthe btanches of the Oke,as ſhall be declaredin this 
preſentchapter, ||} | 9 EW; 
1 Quercus vulga) is cum glande & muſco ſuv. \ | 2 Qnercut walgaris. 
The Oke tree withihis Acornes and moſle, . }. . Thecommon Oke, 


6 , 
[- 
Wee 


- 


4 it 


-_ .. 
_ ; 
3 > 


HISTORIE OF. PLANTS, 2 2 | 1157 


| | | | &Thedeſeription. | 
4 He common Oke groweth to a great mathtetwadtcrbs len etifircamotilaetinid) 
{| athicke rough barke full of chops or rifts. The armes or boughes are likewiſe grear,diſper- 
*| fingthemſclues farabroad. [The leaues are blunely indevted abourthe de bocdnd 
ofa ſhining greene colour, whereon iis often found. a moſt (weere deaw, and ſomewhatclammie, 
and alſo a fungous excreſcehce, which we cal Oke Apples. The fruie is ng,couered with a brown, 


hard andtoughpilling, ſet in a rough-ſcalic cup or huske.T here is oftenfoundpon the body of the 


tree, andalſo pon the branches, a certaine kinde of lon __ mole hangin downe from the 

| ſame: andſpfnerimes another woodie plant, which we c Al Miſlelroe ranexcreſcence 
or outgrowing fromthe tree _—_— Or of che doung (as it nrpncyotne inlets _——_ 4 
certaine £ ITIC., NF , 


%* The deſert on. T2 25: [I 
3 Carolu Claus reporterh that he founde this 


height of acubite, which notwithſtanding did allo 
beare an acorne, like that of our Oketree, | 
that the cup is ſinoother, and the Acorne m ack 
bitterer, wherein it th fromthe reſt of his 
kinde. | 

_Thereisawild Oke; which riſeth vp aftenticies ., 
to a maruellous height,and reacheth veryfar with 
his armes and boughes, the body thereof isriow 


and then of a migh ,incompaſietwoor 
three II + foorth yon. ſpreading. 
armes, diuidedinto amultitude of boughes, ' The 
leaues are ſmooth, tomething hard, broad, long, | 
gaſhedin the edges, preene onthe ide: the 
Acornes arc long, butſhorter than thoſe of the 
tamer Oke _ ne faſtenedin his-@wne vp, 
which is roughwithou : they are couered with a 
thiarindaordpciahe ubſtanc orkernell within.is 


gl:b, and good to thi ſhe yoong 0 hides with,bur 
that of the old Okes is rugged, thick, hard,and full 
of chops: the inner ſubſtance or hart of the wood 
is ſomething yellow,hard and ſound, andthe older 
the harder : the white and ovtwarde partnext to 
| the barke , doth eafily rot, being ſubic to the 

worme, eſpecially if the tree benot feldi in due time : fome of ther grow EN" the carth, 
and other ſome far abroad,by which it _ ——_ | | 


The Oke doth ſcarſely refuſe any ak ; Ch it coral ina drie and barren ſoyle, yet dorhi it 
proſper better in a fruirfull ground: it groweth vpon hils and mountaines,and likewiſe in valleies:it 
_—_— vp "me where: inallparts of England, | bur is not ſo common in other of the South and 

regions. 
n *% Thetime. | 

The Okedoth caſt his leaifes for the moſt patr about the end of Aurumne : focvls ings iy 
leaues ongbur dric all winter long,vnuill they be rhruſt off by the new ſpring 


*% The names, | 
The Oke is called in Greeke 4457; in Latine Querews,of ſome Placid, as Gazatranſlaterh ir.Ie may 
be called $at:ua,”rbens,ot Cults; ſome alſo Emeros mudion,and The Macedonians iwgdyuer, 


as though you ſhould ſay Fer:querems, 35 Gaza expounderh it, or Fer? Quercws, the true Oke, We 
may naineit in Engliſh the camer Oke tree: in French Cheſze: NN Ap a _ 


baſe or lowe Oke not far from Lisborne, of the ** 


i | | | 
i753 THE THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 
The fruite is namedin Grecke Beyer: in Latine Claws: in high Dutch Eichel ; in lowe D 
Eckel tin Spaniſh Beloggs :in Ital ian Cds :inEngliſh Acome and LESS _ 
The cup wherein the |Acorne ſtandech,is named in Greeke iupazic, as Panls CAEginets in his 3. 
booke 42.chapter teltifieth ſaying, &is the hollow thing out of which the Acorne growerh : 
_ inLatine Cabrx glands :in ſhops Cupala glandzs : in Engliſh the Acorne cup, | 
| * The temper ature and vertues. | 
The leaues,barke,acome cups,andthe Acornes themſelues , do mightily binde and drie in the 
thirde degree,being ſorgwhar colde withall.6$þ > © | | 
| B Thebeſtofthemſaith Galea,is the thinne skin which is vafer the bark of the rree, and that next 
which licth neereſt ro tlie pulpe,or inner ſubſtance of the Acorne;al theſe ſtay the whires.the reds, 
uueny of bloud,and lagks: the decoGion of thele is giuen ,or the powderof themdried, for the 
purpoſes aforelaid, {| | | | ' 
C Acarnes it they be eaten are hardly 
that which1 groſle,rawe, and colde. 
D Swincare faticd heetwith,and by 


oncodted, they yeeldeno nouriſhment to mans bodie, but 


S 
s,[pors,the morphew with al de- 
Mk wi T do foreſhewe the ſe. 


cont 


| . chenfſel 


Of the ſcarlet Oke. Chap.z0. 
| na ws 


| vt *% The kindes, | | 

Lthough Theophraſtus hath made mention butof one of theſe Holme or Hollie Okes onely, 
4 Lyet hath the later age ſer downe two kindes thereof; one bearing the ſcarlet graine, and the 
other onelythe Acorne ;which thing is not contiaryto Dioſcoriaes his opinion, forhe intreareth of 
that which begreth the Acorne in his firſt booke among 44.4, or the Okes z and the other he deſcri- 
berh in his fourth booke vnder the titje xizcs £apiz3,or Cocems baphice, 


He Oke which : thi of a hedge tree, of a meane. 


bignes,hauing man | ereon are ſet leaues,greene 

abouc white vndern' 

ner of the {moother He 

ſtanding in little cups þr husks, armed with prickes as ſharpe as thornes, and of a bitter raſte. Be- 
| ſidesthe Acornes, thereis found cleauing vnto the woody|branches a certaine kinde of berries,or 
rather anexcreſcence pf the ſubſticg of the Oke Apple,8& af the bignes ofa Peaſe,at the firſt white, 
andofrhe Colour of aſhe: be ripe, in which are engendred little Maggots, which ſceme 
I} | £0 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1159 


tobe without life vntill they feele the heate of the ſunne , and then they creepe, and ſecke ro flic 
away. But the people of the countrie (which make a gaine of them) dowarchthe time of rheirfly. 
ing,cuen as we do Bees,which they then rake & pur into a linnen bagwherein they ſhake and boulr 
them vp and downe vnrill they be dead, which they do make vp intogreat lurapes ofrentimes, and 
likewiſe ſellrhem to Diers,and ſuch like, apart, cuen as they were taken foorrh of the bag, whereof 
ispade the molt perfe& Scarler. | 


Ilex Coccigers. 
The Scarlet Oke, 


%*|The place. 

This Oke growethijn Languedocke, andin the 
countries thercabour, and alſo in Spaine : butir 
| bearcth not the Scarlet graine in all places, but in 
| f Via +56 choſe eſpecially, which lie rowards the Midland 


= 
ſea,and which beſubig&ro the {corching heate of 


BN 


- 


__ 
q % 
ar 


N — WW" the ſunne, as Carola Cluſiaes witnellerh, and not 
Sauk Ve. 9 E854 there alwaies; for when the tree waxeth olde, ir 
S yy | cars to be barren,Ihendo the people cut and 

op it downe, that after the yoong ſhootes haue 
attained to two or three yeeres growth,it becom- 
merh fruirfull againe. 

Petrus Belonins in His bookes of Singularities 
ſheweth , that Corcis Baphicus or the Scarlet 
graine, doth growe in the Holy land, and neere 
tothe lake which is called the Sea of 7 zberraes, 
and that vpon little trees , whereby the inhabi- 
tants get greatſtore of wealth, who ſepararethe 


being made vp into bals or lumps, much deerer 
than the emprie ſhels/or husks, | 

Of this graine alſo Paufarzcs hath made men- 

tion in his tenth booke,and theweth;that the tree 

which bringeth foorth this graine,.1s nor great, 

and alſo groweth in Phocis,which is a cqunrric in 

Macedonia necre tothe Bceotians , nor-far from 

the mountaine Parnaſſus,” ehi3 cr act 

| Thephrattus writeth, that vive, or the Scarict 

Oke isa great tree, and riſeth vptot ie height of the common Oke : amongſt which writers there 


is ſome contrarietie. Petra Bellonizy reporteth itis a little tree, and 7 heophra tus a great onewhich -, 
may chaunce according to the ſoyle and climate: for that vpon the ſtorue mountaines cannotgrow 


to that greatnes,as thoſe inthe fertil grounds, : 
| bo ee *% The time. | | 

The little graines or berties which growe about the boughes, begin to appeere eſpecially me 
ſpring,when the Southweſt windes do blow. The flowers tall and are ripe in June,togither with tie 
Maggots growing in them, which receiuing life by the heare of the ſunne, do foorthwith flie away 
(in manner of a moth or Butterflie) ynleſie by the care and diligence of the keepers, they be kille4 
bymuch and often ſhaking them togither,as aforeſaid, SEE: 

Therree or ſhrub hath his leaues| alwaies greene: the Acornes be very late before they beripe, 
leldome before new come yp in their place. | 

E pe | | wv Thenames. | 

The Scarlet Oke is called in Greeke rec: in Latine //ex: the later writers Jlex Coccigera, Or Cor- 

tifers : in Spaniſh Coſeoia : for want of a fit Engliſh name, we haue thought good to chriſten it by 
the nameof Scarlet Oke,ot Scarler Holme Oke:for lex is named of ſome in Engliſh Holme,which 


lignifiech Holly or Huluer, Buc this/Zlex, as well as thoſe that follow, might be called Holme Oke, 


| Huluer Oke,or Holly Oke,for difference from the ſhrub or hedge tree Agrefoliam, which is imply 
called Holme, Holly, and Huluer, | 


/ 


husks:trom the pulpe or Magors, and tell this -- 


Fiffz The 


» 
- 


1160 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
The graine or berrigthar ſcrueth rpdic with , is properly calledin Grecke z/zz:c 220i)! in Lavin 
Ceceus infectoria,or Cocem infettorium : Plinyallonameth it Cuſculrum , or as moſt do read it Quif- 
quilizn; the ſame authhr ſaich,chat itys likewiſe named Seoftc/on,or Maggot berric, | | 
The Arabians and the Apothecarjes do acknowledge it by the name of Cheſmes, Chermes, and 
Kermes.| hey are deceitied who thinke that Cheftnes doth differ from InfedZor im Corum: it is called 
in Italian Gr ano de tindort:in Spaniſh Grane de #mmtoreres: in high dutch'Scharlachbecrtin French 
Vermullen and Graine deſcarlate : inEngliſhafter the Durch Scarlet Betrie, or Scarler graine, ang 
after the Apothecaries worde Coceys Baphicas, the Maggot within is' that which is named Cur. 
chonele as moit do deqme. | + | 
The Acorne or fruite heerof iscalled of diuers as Theophy aſtws ſaith, 4z1or, Acylum. 
+ 3004 *% The temperature and vertues. | 
A Thisgraine is aſtringent,and ſomewhar bitrer,and alſo cy without ſh es and biting;there- 
fore ſaith Ge/eritis good for great wounds andſinewes that be hurt, if it be laide thereon ; ſome 
remper it with vinegerzorhers with Oxymell,or ſyrupeof vineger. 
B Iris commended and giuen by the later Phiſarions to ſtaje the menſes: itis alſo counted amon 
thoſe ſimples which be cordials and pood to ſtrengrhenthe hart. Of this graine that noble and ta- 
mous confeftion _AMkermes __ the Arabians, andng his name , which many do high] 


commend againſt the infirmitigs ofthe hart ; notwithſtanding it was chiefely deuifed in the begin- 
ning for purging ofmelancholy, which thing is plainly declared by the greatquantitic of Zapis La- 
z#1« added thereto: afid therefore ſeeing thar this ſtone hath in ita venemous qualitie,and likewiſe 


a propertie topurge melancholie ,it cannot of it ſelfe be for the hatt , but the other things be 


_ good, which be therefqre added,that they might defende the hart from the hurts of this ſtone, and 
correct the malice thereof. - | T3 | | 
C This compoſition is commended againſt the trembling/and ſhaking of the hart , and for ſwou- 
nings and melancholike paſſions, andfſorrow proceeding of nocuident cauſe : itis reported tore- 
create the minde,and to make a man merric and ioyfull, | 9 
D lristherefore goodagainſt melaricholicke diſcales,vaine imaginations, fighings,greefe and ſor- 
rowe without manifeſt cauſe, for that it purgeth away melancholike humourg; atter rhis manec ir 
may be comfortable for the hart,and delightfull to the minde,in taking awa Ke materiall cauſe of 
ſorrow : neither can itorherwile ſtrengthen a weake and feeble harr, vnleſle this ſtone called Lepii 
Cyawexs bequite left our, | | 


| 5] LF 

E © Thereforche that is purpoſed toyſethis compoſition againſt beatings and throbbiogs of the 
hart and {wounings, and that not aa purging medicine , ſhall do well and wiſely by leauing our 
the ſtone Cyanews: for this being raken in a little waight,or ſmall quantitie, cannot purge at ahbur 
may inthe meanc ſeaſon trouble and torment the — and withall thorow his fharpe and ve- 
nemousqualitic (if jt be oftentimes raken) be very offenſiue to the guts and intrails, and by this 
meanes bring more harmie then gogd. By 

E Moreoueritis not neceſlaric , nqnor expedient, that|rhe briſtic died with Cochenele called 
Cheſmes.as the Apothecaries tearmd it,ſhould be added tothis compoſition: for this briſtle is not 
dicd without aur:pigmentwn, calledalſo Orpiment, and other pernitious-things ioined therewith, 
whoſe poiſonſome qualities are added to the iuices togither withthe colour , if cither the briſtle or 


= 


"4 


dicdfilke be boiled inthem. | Oey | 

»G Thebercics ofthe Cochenele muſt be taken by themſelues, which alone are ſufficient inough to 
dic the juices , and toimpart ynto them their vertue: neither is it likewiſe necdfull ro boilerhe raw 
briſtlerogither with ' pix.erhs ,as moſt Phifirionsthinke:| rhis may be left our, for ir maketh no- 
thing at all for the ſtrengthening of the harr. | 


Of the barren Scarlet Oke. Chap.31 : 


| | w Thedeſeription, | 
He barren Scatler Oke , of the great Holme Oke , groweth many times to the full 
height of a tree”, ſomerimes 3s bigge as the Peare tree, with boughes farre ſpreading like 
che Acorne or common Maſtertrees : the timber is fixme & ſound: the leaues areſetwith pric- 
kles roundabout the edges , like thoſe ofthe former Scarlet Oke: the leaues when the UEFWanen 
; | FeAl O 


» 


. 


NY "il 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 1161 
olde, haue on them no prickles at all ; bur are ſomewhat bluntly cut of indented about the edges, 
greene on the vpperſide, and graie|vaderneath: the Acorne ſtandeth in a prickley cup, like our 
common Oke Acornezwhich when itis ripe, becommeth of a brownecolour with a white kernell 

- within, of taſtenor vnpleaſant: there is founde vpon the branches of = tree , acertaine kinde of 
long hairie moſlc,of the colour of aſhes, not vulike to char of our Engliſh Oke, 


llex Glandifers. 
The barren ſcarle: Oke, 


* The place. 


In divers places there are great woods of theſe 
trees, hils alſo and valleies beautified therewith; 
they grow vſually in many kingdomes of Spain : 
they growe in greatplenue in Languedocke and 
Prouence. Pon | 
| Ir is likewiſe founde in Italie: it beareth an 
Acorne greater, and of a larger fize then doth 
the tame Oke , in fome countries lefler and 
ſhorrer : they are ſtrangers in England; notwith- 
ſtanding there is heere and there a tree there. 
of, that hath beene procured from beyonde the 
ſeas; one groweth in hir Maieſties garden of 

"White Mal aint tothe gate that leaderh into the 

ſtreere, and in ſome Qther places heere and there 

one. * 7 he time. | 

Ic is greene atall times of the yeere: it is late 
before the Acornes be ripe : Clu/izs reporteth 

that he ſawe the flowers growing in cluſters, of a 

yellow colour in the monerthof 

| 4 % The names. | 
This Qke-is named in Grecke Tv, in Latine 

The x:in Spaniſh Enzina:in Italian Ekce:in French 
Cheſnenerd: in Engliſh Barren ſcarſer Oke, or 
Holme Oke,and allo of ſome French Oke. 7. 

The Spaniards call the fruire vr Acorne Belbre, 
| : | or CAbillote.- hyeſtm ſeemmeth to call this 
[Ag 1% | . tree not Prinos,but Smilax, for he maketh menti- 
on but of one zex only,and rhat is of ſcarlet Oke,and he ſheweth chat the Arcadians donotealthe 
other, 1/ex,but Smilax;for the name Smilaxis of many ſignifications:;|there is Smz/ax among the 
pulles, which is alſo called Dolichas, and Phaſeolus; and Smilax aſpera, and Lewis,among the Binde- 
weedes : likewiſe Smrlaex is taken of Dyoſcorides tro be Taxwus, the Yew tee 3 of Smilex Theopbraſius = 
writeth thus in his third booke : the inhabirants of Arcadia do call a cettain tree Smilax, being like 
wangy ſcarlet Oke : the leaues thereof be nor ſer with ſuch ſharpe{|prickles, but renderer and 
frer | | 


' Ofthis Smilsx Plinie allo writerh in his 16.booke 6.chapter. There be of 7/ex faith he, raids 
Exijs in Italia folio non multum ab olers diftant, called of certaine Grecians Smzlaces, inthe promnces 
Aqwifetza tin which words in ſteede of Olinetrees, may perchancebemore truely placed Suberis, 
6 the Corkerree ; for this kinde of ex or Smilax,js not reported of any ofthe old writers ro haue 
the leafe of the Oliue tree: bur Suber in Greeke called Phelbs, or the Cotke tree, hathas we'haue 
hide a little leafe. þ 3792" 18 32G 12, 29/2 UUSTTI EE 1 ons 
: & wont The temperature and vertues. . Y | y 
The leaues of this Oke haue force to coole and repell or kee ; 2s baue the leauesof the A 
Acorns, or Maſte trees: being ſtamped or beaten mtepplied | 


back 
are-yood for ſoft lwellings, and 


TIG2, 
B Thebarkeoftheroote 
haice blacke,it they be 
Cl 


Plinze allo hath perad 
{erucd atmens tables fo 


'k 


« 
- 


I Cerri@ maiore Glande, | 


The Holme Oke wit (great Acotn 


Ti... 


777 


ble for. 


- - 
* 
&* 


he. yood of rimberjgft 
comely branches,diſ 


og 


geor the Jar NUSKE 
oftentimes a certaine ſmooth 


nat hucke;ot a 


Ss 


of Gall, altogither 


THE THIRD BOOKE 


boiled in water wntillitbee difſolued and laidewon all ni 
{t ſcoured with Comolze as Diofeoridey (aith, | 
reporteth thatthe Acorne iscſteenied of, 


| caten,and brought into the marker to be folde, 
m thecitic of Salamanc4 in.Spaine, and in many other place 


ature written jn his 16.book 5.chapter,in theſe words ; Morcouer there is, 
a ſecond coutle all Spaine tiorow,an Acoinc, ; 


2 Ci 


| 


{| 


; 
| 


OF THE 
geht, maketh the 


»s of that countrey : and of this Acorn 


Chap-yþ.. 


1115 minore Glande. 


4 


HISTORIE/OF'PLANTS: 115; 


forth another kind ofexcreſcence which the Grauer hath omitted in|the figure, which is called in 
Greeke odrwer, Gazanameth it Pens 3 this Pertror pricke is hollow, oſhe, hanging downe haltc 
a yardelong , like a long ra2ge of linnencloth, bs | 
2 The ſecond is alrogither r like the firſt, ſauing thatrhis beareth fi ler Acornes , andthe whole 
tree 1s altogither lefſer-. ey pos confiſterh the difference.” | 
| * The OS: Pls 08 
This Oke groweth in vhroiled places,it i is ſeldome times found; 7 that but in woodes onely : 
it is for the moit part vaknpwne italy,as Pliny reportetl, h | 
| ' % The time. 
They bring foorth thei fruire or Acornesin the fall of the leafe. 
| $ The names. | | 
This Oke is called in Greeke « Pool : in Latine Corres t yer doth Plinie make mention both of 
AFgHlops and alſo of Ceryaw. Ariat is likewiſe one of the diſeaſes of gorne,called in ar Feit u- 
ee,in Engliſh wilde Otes,and farre differmg fromthe treeiAEgriepse| | 
Thar which hangeth-from the bqughes is named of Pl-njein his 16.booke $. chap teas one- 
ly: that Acorne tree named AEgilops bringeth foorth Panos arentes,” withered prickles', covered 
with white moſſiciagges hanging drwne,not onelyin the barke, but allofrom __ boughes Jultea 
yarde | in bignes, bearing aſweerte ſinell,as we have (aide anong ointments. 
| mA The tempera ture and vertues. | | 
'Wefinde nothing written of the faculties ot this tree among the off] wricers:neither of our owne 
experſance. | | | [rt #3 


< the Corlg ey | Gbap.31 | 


| 


'W%.7 the kinaes, 
There hs Sore forts of the Corke treces,differing accarding to countrey andclimate, 


l Suber latifolium. | | 2 Subey aneuſttfoliwn. 
The Corke tree with broade leaues, The Corke ree wich narrow len mes. 


a 


f j : 
5} i —= 
F: : 
TH | OF' T] 
1164 | O HE 
F- : 
« of 1 [1 ; 4 : 3 " " 


z which when the oldisrc. 
; tht Acorne ſtandeth in a 


cup which 1 C 
more vnplea arit then thi 
2 The Corkerree wit 


the trunke or body where 


Oziar, where | 
dented woo 6 e fruite gro) | 
tholc of the other kindegas is the reſt oft the chiefeſt difference, 


T08: | *Theflace. _ | 1 

Key of Aquitahia, neereto the mountaines called Pyrenzi:it alſo groweth 

mes of Spaine, differing ſomwhart from that of Aquitania , as C.C/uſius dc- 

indin Italy,and that jn the territo of Fiſa,with a longer leafe,and ſharper 

pointed; andabout Rome with a broader, and cutin the edges like a ſawe, __ rougher, as Marhi- 

oli reſtifigch. | 1} [ ; | | : | 

18 * The time. ] w | 
Theleaues arc alwaies greene in Fo and Italie , about the Pyren#i mountaines they fall 

away in winter, 18 Hr | , 


118: | | *% The names. | ; | 
- This tree is calledin Grecke 5033s: i Latine Swbey :in French Ziege :in Iralian Sugars :theſame 
names doalſo belong tothe barke : the Spaniards call the treg Atcornoque, the Enghth men Corke 
tree; and the barke Corcha de Alcornoque,whereupon the low countreymen,and Engliſhmen alfo, 
docall it Corke zand yexit is called in Ibwe Dutch likewiſe Cllothout. j | : 
| i *% The temperarure and verthes. p 
A Thisbarke doth manifeſtly dry withabinging facultie, | bY 
B Beingbeatentopowlerand raken with water,it ſtancheth bleeding ig any part of the bodie: the 
Corke which is taken out of wine veſitls ſaith Paul/ws, being burnt , maketh aſhes which do migh- 
_ tilied ixed ih compolitions,deviſed againſt the bloudie flixe, "> Þ | 
C Corke is alſo profitable for many things z it is vied faith P/je about the ankers of ſhips, fiſhers 
- nets, andto ſtop veſlellwith zand in winter for womens ſhoaes, which vic remaineth with vs cuen 
to this day; fiſhermen hang this barke vpon the wings of their nets for feare of ſinking; and 


4 


ſhoomakers pur it in ſhoocs and pantgfiles for warmnes lake. 
' | | Of theGalltree. Chap.34- 
ingf tth Gals: ic 


in thisp 


and to thicken skins wit I | | | | 
- Dioſcorides and Galen make but two ſorts of Gals,the onelittle, yellow, full of holes, and more 
ſpungie in the inner p; | : both ofthem rounde , hauing the forme ofa lictle ball 3 and the other 


pb  HISTORTE: OF! PLANTS, we: Þ 


ſmooth and eeuen on the outſide: ſince, the later writers haue re ſome hauing certaine 


lictle knobs ſticking foorth, like in forme to the Gall, which doth allp cleaue and growe without 
ſtalke to the leafe. There is alſo founde a certaine excreſence ofa ght greene colour, ſpungie, 
and waterie , in the middle whereofnowe and then is founde a lirtle flic or worme: which ſoft ball 
in 5 countries , doth bags times $ become harde, like the little th "On, as ppratts 
ſal 


1 Gill, ſine Robur main. | | | 2 Galla minor; 
| Thegreat Galle ee. nr: Thellirtle Gall tree. 


| * The deſcription. | 


He Gall tree gonethr to a ſufficient height, hauing a verie faire trunke or bodie; 
whereon are plac co iggie branches, bringing foorth veric faire leaues,, broade, 
4 _ —_— e the teeth ofa ſawe: among which come foorth Acornes, al- 
| age cepeſi nor the fare, like thoſe of the Oke , andlikewiſe oper = ra] 
whic —- the Gall, 5. nur ſmalleminencesorb nches on the ourſide, growing 
for the moſt part vpon the ſlender branches without ſtalkes, and ſomecimes they grow atthe ende 

thereof,which by the beater ofthe ſunne are harder, greater, and mgre ſolide in one countrey en 
- anotherzaccording to the ſoile and clymate. "Tf EO 

2 'TheleſſerGal 5 cnc differeth = from the former, ſaving that i is altogither leſſer; the fruite 


andGals likewiſe keſſer wherein yori cont the —_— 
Me -\ . | The 


4 
i 


d 1} | 
| | 
E THIRD BOOKE 


: 
: 


+ 


: 
y 
. 


| reſi of diners forts of Cubs 


4 Gals ' SPE 
The long Gall. 


2 BISTORIE OF PLANTS: 


. - 
- 
© : | : 
/ $4 4.44 . 4 ; L | 
- | | 
7 Gala Calericulata, | 4 '$ 
; 
: : 
. Cv 4 J 
| . | 
&T. 
» S*#% * «© , 


; 


| 1 © #Theplad 0 Th Prat. 
The Gals are founde in Italy,Spaine,and Bohemia, andmoſtof the hotregions. ' | + —- 


; nd | irons | * The Lime. # \\ 7 ; 
The Gall ſaith Pliny: or commeth foorth whenthe ſug commend OUT | 
min;,and that generally in onenight. _ 4 x OF ATC HA a 


; 4 - 
- Av 
= a 


Gaules and Gals, | 
| * The temperature andryertues, | . | 
The Gall called Omphacitis,as Galen writeth,is dry in the thirdedegree,and coldein the ſecond: A 
it is a very harſh medicine, it taſtnerh aa boat fai 
ings in the fleſh, ire and rheumes cffcCtually 
vie fame,elpe deſethtinrothe broth, and 


E THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 
of greater vertue to f bethoſe th are notburnt muſt be laide ypon hot burnin 
_—_— row white,and RIS ou 


| © thoſe thatbe flixe and common laskes 


Liſetoe,r 9 eMifteltoe./ Chep33 


Indicum 
> Views - Lions 


” Fr” _ - 
i , = 
* l 
Y —”— f{\ % 
* F / + U/ L% %. % 
WAH *%.\ . \ 
, 4 
HAAYR EL 
j j \ | 
' F 
”,% 
: £ . A 
[5 = v 
tz # - 
z 


ivs 


inall an: ——_ h bei 
CE eenY nz; tnghs 
whereofthe beſt Birdlune i opde Foe | 
- and within this berric is atm 
| therdothincreaſehimlelfes 
moiſture & ſubſtance garhetedrogi 
aheppalchianon—s.e c 


—_— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1169 


EEE the learned haue fer downethatit came of the ofthe birde called a 
his ownebane, h voided and left his 


: IndianMiſlel 


| ſe wponthebranches of trees, ain og eſt the ſame in ma- 
ner of Polypodie : the 25of the are like thoſe of Couch which riſe vp _ 


ſalkes,ſmooth and cuen,ſer with i $ and knees at certaine w__—_— :towarde the 
foorth one leafe,ribbed like the Pl leafe,whereon are marked certaine round Co are 


in the haft of a knife z from the whereof commeth foorth a chaffic branch, ſerwith ſmall 
mes 40 continue greene wingrand ſommer, 


3 There is founde alſo another plane 
ypon the boughes orbranches of trees - 
as our Mifſelroe doth, and may very wel be recko- 
ned for a kinde thereof: the plant cleaueth vnto' 
hmm es etherero, as it were with the 
gs of the ſeat nion, ofthe bredth bf amans 
_ toward the me, and ſomewhat hollow: 
the tops wherofare very ſmall andruſhie , hollow 
likewiſe,& ofa pope color: among which comes 
foorth a branc netolnr mares reg/a, or the 
Speare for a King , reſembling the buth of Ores, 
couered with a clear filkeyſuc asis tobe founde 
in Aſclepias,of a nicrous taſte, my Vvn- 
pleaſane, | 


| Thefirſt kinde , obbes —p—_ vonOkee : 


erunianum L'Obe NY | 
"ET Peru, m + The deferi jon. 


anddiuers othertrees almoſteuery where; as for 
the other two theyare ſtrangers in England.” 

| T he time. | 
| Gaaiatean as 
ir mn. wars ary they 


t3 eafoode for di- 
gs rv as Thruhes, 
doues, | 


and ar 
ues, Btxkbnds , Fon 


* 2" 
 Miſſelroe is called in Greeke i22s, or ir2:in La- 
ſear * \ high Dutch Fiſtell : in lowe 
kenzin Iralian Y;ſehio : in Spa- 


and [xi4:in Engliſh 
a found -- 


the rootes thereof. This wordisal 
names. - Bdghilikewerchoaed 


ke germany Gm 
he doth particularly diſcourſe of 
of = 1 Ws 7 rn rey 


: 
£ 
: 


1170 TE 78 THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


And Do elſe inhis 6. booke wherehe downe his indgement of Simple 
Cons erreaerh fr ofOk Chameleon niger andthenalirtle after of [xie; yet hath he written a_—_ 
diſcourſe of 7xja.Theſex things declare that Chameleon niger doth differ fro 1xie, which is reckoned 
among the poiſons. Mqreouer, itcanno where be _ that Chameleon niger doth beare Miſſelroc 
birdlime,or hath ſo glufinous and clammic a ſubſtance,as that it oughr Cioalied Ixia: Thetfore 
Ixia 2s it is one of the poiſons, is the glue rar garde Par 7y—roakly which 
bicauſe 4 gta bit ginflamerh and ſetteth the toongan fire, and with his {limic andclam- 
mic ſubſtaMe, doth ſo drawe togithet,ſhutand glue vp the guts, as thatthereis no = for rthe 
excrements,which Ir are +" among the miſchiefes thar inipbaingerk, : 
: * The temperature and ver 
A Theleapes and berri $ of Miſſelroe,arc hor anddrie and of ſubtill parth: the Birdlime is hot and 
biring,andconfiſteth ofanairie and waterie ſubſtance, with ſome earthie quality: for according to 
the iud nt of Galen; his: acrimonie/ouercommerh his bitternes;for if it be ved in outward appli- 
cations ft dcawerh humpurs fromthe deepeſt or moſt ſecret parts of thebody , ſpreading and di- 
them abroad,and digeſting 
B It ripeneth ſwellings lathe groine, hardſivellings behinde the cares, and other impoſtumes, be- 
ing tempered with Ro a ,,anda little quantitie of waxe. 
C With Frankenſenceit mollificth old vicers, & malicious bnpotumed, being boiled with vnſla._ 
ked lime,or with Gagate\ pide,or Aſio,and applied,it waſteth away the hardnes of the ſpleene. 
D WirhOrpment or dndiraca, it taketh away foule ilfauored nayles, beingmixed with vnſlaked 
ime and wine lees,it eiverh greater force, | 
Irhuchbeencmoſcl diblie reportedvnto me chataſeweofcheberres of Miſlloebnied nd | 
” ſirainedintooile and drjokenyhath py ley door recupus and fore ſtitch, 


E This Birdlime inward we wr> mart ut) wa cnt te wong is in- 
flamed and ſwolnegthe m des draghdghoicogh = 


Ins 4% #1" 4325) 8A Wi Wer. - | 
Pot us gtque cibi. flat ws vbi carcere clauſe 

Dant firepit nn hogs 
Sic iſere af fucFs ix tandem dacere preſſe 
Ore pegeſt anoman. | 


| corps ecordinge Gora rain which 
| waiesofmeare andeke of rinke 


pFtructed are : when winde | WE f 

In gut $incloſed ar bling makes | : 

Ar oP nop ige me | I > 

So ar e t ſore apaide 
Dobrnihigeck and. 

Can hardly feed on brerh thar « 
+life and maintaine. 


Of the Cedar tree. Chap.36. 
orb ets 4 helm. lod 

Tow wo Cole poebicig: , the othe ual 
nj Ry Gt pac wwe; 1. 


mn | 1; . 
hi < IAN ly.exc al k 
- 4 
#71 iE »# 4 
F: 8 - ws «* 
. . #7 


n ON wwe 2s ſomermen ac 
\whichproceedethout of 


. LF 
l - 
Fe. > 'T 
"Zh 4 , bi * "#831 : ; 
4+ $3% 3 4 ge » > 
# 'FC JOTTLOTT 
: - C d 4 » 
s * 4 bs .. by : 
: 
TIC. £ £4 / LIE. 
w A 
# 4 F « + - 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. || 1113: 
round about in maner ofa circle,and are ſo ofderly placed by degrees,as thata man may climbe vp 
by then to the very top as by a ladder : the leaues be ſmallandrounde , likethoſeofthe Pine rrec, 
bir ſhorter-and not ſharpe pointed, all the conesor clogs are fatreſhorrer , andthicker then thoſe 
ofthe Firre tree,compadt of toft, nor harde ſcales,which hang nor downwards;bur ſtande vpright 
vpon he boughes:whereunto alſo they areſo ſtrongly faſtned, as they can hardly be plucked off 
without breaking of ſome part of the branches;as Bellonias writerh :the'timber is extreame- harde, 
and rortetlinor;nor waxeth oldezthereis no woormes nor rottennescaithurtor take the hart] mar- 
ter or hartof this woode, which is very odoriferons;ahd ſomewhat red; Se/omenking ofthe lewes 
did therefore builde Gods Temple in/lerufa "Cedar woode:the Gentils were woont to make 

of Libanus. 


- | | Thegwbat Cedar tree of 


who: 2/17 f,1e he Tegerdc:i, ons | 

The Cedartrecs grow vpon the ſnowie moun- 
{ —raines, asin Syria on; moung Libanus , onwhich 
FIC EA thereremaine ſome cuents this day, ſaizh' Be(b- 
NI ECIDY, ==. planted asitis thought by Salomon himſclte : 
MON TQR=4; jr) FAN Va -cheyare hkewiſe found on the mountains Tavrws, 
: ITY /Q and Aman; incoldeand ſtonie places; the Mer-! 
Ag NS J WA 


chants of the Faorie at Tripolis , rolde me that 
the Cedar tree groweth vpon the declining of 
the mountaine, Libahus neere vnto the Hermi- 
.2 rage byrhecitie Tripolis in Syria: they that dwel 
in Syria vſe to make boares thereof for want of 
the Pine tree. WE | 
*% The time. | 
= .. The Cedar tree remaineth alwaies greene as 
Rk othcrtrees,whichbeare ſuch maner offers 
timber of the Cedar tree, and the images 
: _ other workes-made thereof, ſceme to ſweare and 
| as dolikewiſeall thathaue anolliciuice , the au- 


\ { 
\ 
\ 


St by. 7 - 
WA Y 

«a = ' 

> 


Wl \ 
Veg 
<2 


D 
DJ 


LS .  thoris Theyphraſiua. | TRE. $1 
1, *+ The nomes. > 
/ This huge andmightie cree is calledin Grecke 


xievs: in Larine likewiſe Cedrws: in Engliſh Ce- 
dar,and Cedre tree, Þ/r#y in his 24.booke 5.chap- 
eer namethit Cedrelare, as though he ſhould (ay, 
WS boy nn; 1, Cedru abies, ot Cedrina abirs,CedatFirre, bo 
thatie may differ from thelictle Cedar , and allo bicauſc iris verylike tothe Firrg tree, 
The Roſin hath no propet name, but it may be ſurnamed Cedrina,or CedarRofin, 
The Pitch whichis drawne out of this.is properly called «dee, yet P;nywriteth that alſothe li- 
of the Torch Pine is/named Cedriums, The beſt ſaith Dioſcoides is far, thorowe ſhining, ofa 
frong ene pohich being powred outin drops vniteth it ſelfe rogither, 8 doth nor temaine ſeuercd, - 
3 The temperature and vertues. | 


Cedar is of temperature hotand dry with ſuch an exquiſite tenuitie,and ſubtiltie of parts thatir 
ſcemeth tobe hot Eeddeyon the fourth degree,cſpecially the Pitch cr Koln thereof. 4 : 
There iſſueth out of this tree aRoſinlike vnto thar,which ifſueth out of the Firre cree, very ſiveere 


in ſmell, of aclammy or cleaving ſubſtance , the whichif youchew in/your teeth, irwill hardly be 
gotten foorth againe,ircleaucth ſo faſt; atthe ficſt is liquideand white, bur dried inthe ſun 
it waxerh hard:ificbe boiledin the fire anexcellentpitch will be _—_ called Cedar Pirch. 
The Aegyptians were wont to coffin and embawme their dead in Cedar;and with Cedar pitch, 
although they vſed alſo other meanes as Herodotwarecordeth. | | 
The condited or embawmed body they call in ſhops 2/wnie,bur vetie vnfitly: for Mwnjeamong 
the Arabians is that which the Grecians call P:ſaſþbelton as appecreth by Auicen chapter 474.and 
out of Serapio chapter 393. Foes | th 
il | c 


| nu | | 
[2 o ; | : 
P | 


TR | | 
1172 THE'.THIRD BOOKE"OF THE 
He thar interpreted and tranſlated Serapio,was the cauſe gf this errourgvho tranſlated and inter. 
preted'/ſumie, according to his owne fancie , andnot after the ſence and meaning of his author 
Serapio, ſaying that this| Mama is a compoſition-made of Aloes and Myrrhe mingled togither, 
with the moiſture of mans body. | idk s mY FT 
14 The gumoftCedarisgood ro be pur in medicines for the gies, for being aunointed therewith it 
| cleereth the ſighr,and clenſeth them from the Hawe and from tripes.. : 
Cedar infuſed in vineger,and putinto theeares killeth the wormes of the eares, and being min. 
pled with the decotionof Hyſlope, appeaſerh- the ſounding, ringing, and hiſſing of the cares, 
Ifit be waſhedorinfiiſed with vineger, and applied vntotheteerh,ir ceaſerh theroothach, 
If irbe pur into the h@llowneſle of the teeth, ir breaketh; them , and appealeth the extreame 
greefethereof. Þ | | [EPL | Oe, ol. 
M F- Ie prevaileth againſt CLginas, and the inflammggion of the Tonlils ; if a Gargariſmebe made 
It is good to kill nits and lice , and ſuch like vermine: it cur 
being laide on with ſale, | | | Eb: AA 
Ir is aremedie againſt the poiſdn of the ſea Hare, ifit be drunke with fweete wine. 


In 


It is good alfo for leap 5: being put vp vadernearh it killeth all manex of wormes, and drawcth 


y 
Z 


foorth the birth, as Djo cor ides writerh., 


) SY - bl 7 | 3-1 

, 3: , i 
35 = bl * ” 

6 dy | ? 

RF > b . 

#41] : Fa) 


of the Pitch tree. Chap.37. 


'; 
by 


The Pitch. | 


us 


F 
 notonelyabour the rop,but much Yeuhgs fr 
beneath the middle part of the body, which many 
Ll g\downe, bending towards the ground: 
the leaues be narrowe ,: norlike thoſe of the Pic 
tree, bur ſhorter , and broader, more like to rhe 
leaues of the Firre tree yet are they blacker, broa- 
der,ſofter, and tenderer zwhich do withall cover 
the yoong and tender twigs in maner of a circle 
like thoſe of the Firre tree , bur being manie and 
thicke ſer, growe foorth of two ſides, onely one 
righe againſt another,as in the Yew tree,to whoſe 
leaues they are very like: the fruite is ſcaly and 
like vnto the Pine apple, bur ſmaller : the barke of 
thetree is hatblacke, tough , and flixible, 
notbrickle, as isthe barke of the Firre tree, vnder 
which next to the woode is gathered a Roſen, 

- which many times iſſheth foorth , and is like ro | 
that of the Larch tree. : | 
| _ *Theplue. 
| ThePitchtree groweth in Greece,[taly,France, 
'Germanie/, and all the colde regions even vnto 


|  Thefrujteof thePitchtree is ripe in theendof 
September, | Ar 


&% The 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. * nthy 
| Ft | *% The names. | | 

The Grecians call this Cone tree zws:the Latines Picea,and not Pinus: for Pimeor the Pine tree 
is the Grecians /*",as ſhall be declared: thar»w+ is named in Latine Picea, Scriboniund Lurguste- 
ſtifeth in his 201.compoſition writing after this maner: Reſ« Petuine,tdeftex Picea arbore,which 
fignifieth in Engliſh ofthe Roſen of the tree Pizs, that is toſay, of the Pirch tree, With him doth 
Pliny agree in his 16, bopke 10.chapter, where hetranſlating Theepbraſtus his wordes concerning 
Peuce and Pitys,doth tranſlate Pitys Picea, although for Peace he hath written Zarzx, as ſhall be de- 
clared. Plany writeth thus, Larix w/{ts radicibus non repulinlat: and the Larch tree doth nor ſpring vp 
againewhen the rootes are burnt:)the Pirch tree ſpringerh vp againe; as it hapned in Lesbos when 
the wood Pyrthews was ſer on fire. Moreouer, the wormes Pityocempe, are ſcarce found in any tree 
but onely in the Pitch rree,as Belpims teſtifierh:fo that they are not raſhly called Pi#yocampe or the. 
wortmes of the Pitch trees, although moſt tranſlarors name them P;zworum ernce, orthe wormes of 
the Pin@rrees : and therefore P#y5 is ſurnamed by Theophraſtme v%«e#7ve;, bicauſe wormes and ma- 
gots are bred init, Bur for ſo much as the name Pztys is common both ro the tame Pine and alſo ro 
the Pitch tree ;diuers of thelatec writers do for this cauſe ſuwwpoſe, that the Pitch tree is named 
Theophraſtwanirvs 54,07 the wilde Pine tree. I his Pzces is named in high Dutch Schwartz Tamme- 
batum, and Rot Tannebaum : and oftentimes alſo Jozenholtz , which name notwithſtanding 
doth alſo agree with other plants: in Engliſh Pitch rree: in low Dutch Peck boom, FD 

| | © th Thetemperature andvertues. * 

"The leaves. barke,and fruite of the Pitch tree,are all of one nature, vertue,and operation , and of 
theſame f acultic with the Pine trees. [- 


fthe Pine tree. Chap.38. 
| | | | 4 The kindes. ht 2 
T He Pine tree is of two ſorts,according to Theophraſtme; the one Fueess, that is toſaie, tame or of 
the garden; the other e/«.or wilde: he faith that the Macedonians do adce a thirde, which is 
#275, or barren , or without fruige, that vnto vs is vnknowne : theater writers kane founde moe, 
as ſhallbe declared. {| hrs : | 
Pinus ſatiua fine domeſſ ica. Bas» | 
The rame,or manured Pine tree, &The deſcription. 


\ \Y 'M | He Pine treegroweth gh, andgreat in the 
[\ \QVYA! trunke or body,which below is naked, but a- 


boue it is clad witha multifude of boughes, 
which diuide thefmſelues into diuers branches , 
whereon are ſet ſinal leaues, very ſtraight;narrow, 
ſomewhat hard and ſharpe pointed: the wood or 
timber is harde, heauic , aboutrhe hart or middle 
full of an oileous liquor , and ofa reddiſh colour. 
The fruite orclogs are hard, great, andconfiſt of 
many ſound woodie ſcales,vnder which are inclu- 
ded certaine knohs,without ſhape,couered with a 
wooden thell, like {mall nuts, wherein are white 
kernels,long,veryſweere, and couered with a thin 
skinne or membrane , that eaſely is rubbed off 
with the fingers , which kernell is vicd in medi- 


Cine, 


*% The place. Bots 
This tree groweth of it ſelfe in manijeplaces of 
Iralie, and eſpecially in the territorie-of Ravenna, * 
and in Languedocke , about Marſileg, in Spaine, 
and in other regions,as in the eaſtcountries: it is 
allo cheriſhed n the gargens of pleaſure , as well 
in the lowe countries as England. 
: % The time, | 
The Pine tree groweth greenc both winter and 
Cgee kt ſommer, 


: 
: 


1174 THE THIRD BOOKE|OF THE 
ſommer , the fruite is conumonly two yecres before ir be ripe': wherefore it is not to be founde 
withoutripe fruite,and alfo others as yex very ſmall,and not cqme to ripencs. | | 


Itis called in Latine Prweand Pinus ſatrma#rbina,or rather Hanſucts : Engliſh tame and 
garden Pine:ot the Macedonians and ane Greciahs Tan ies: but the Arcadians name it »1wr,for 


thatwhich the Macedonianscall aww jury the Arcadians ame =, as Theephraſtlis faith, and 
ſo doth the tame Pine in Arcadia,and ahoutEliachange hir name : and by this alteration of them 
it hapneth that the fruiregr nurs of the Pine tree found inthe Cones or apples, be namedin Greek 

vids, as though they de terme it Pityos fradteus, or the 


by Dioſcorides,Galen,Pauleand others 
fruice of the Pine tree, || . | | [ | | 
There is alſo another #5: in Latine Picea, or the Pitch tree; which differeth much fromthe Pine 
tree: but Pitys of Arcadia differerh nothing from the Pine tree as we haue faide. 
The fruite or apples of theſe be called in Greeke «5» : and in Latine Cops : notwithſtanding Co. 
05 is a'cOmon name toallthe fruits of this kind of trees: they be alſo named in Latine I\ zces pines: 


and Cone. | — + The temperature and vertues, i 
A Thekernels of theſe nutye coft and moderately heaxe, being ina meane berweene colde 
| 190th; it is a remedy againſt an oldcough, and long infirmi- 
tics of the cheſt, being taken byi-{elfe ar with hony,or elſe with ſome other licking thing. | 

B Ircureth the Phtifike, and thoſe thatpine and conſume away throughthe rottenneſle of their 
lungs :itrecoucrerh ſtrength zitnouriſheth and is reſtoratiue fo the bodie, 

C lryecgldeth athicke ang $90s iuice,ahd nouriſherh much,yer is it not altogither caſic of digeſti- 
on.,and therefore it is mixed with preſerues,or boiled with ſugar. —_ 

D The fameis good for the ſtone in the kidncies,4nd again rettings ofthe bladder, and ſcalding 
of the vrine,for italaieth|theſharpnes,mirtigaterh paine,andgently prouoketh vrine : moreouer it 
increaſeth borh nulke and ſeede,and therefore ir alſo prouoketh flethly luſt, 

E Thewhole Coneor applebeing boiled with freſh Horeholnd, faith Ga/es, and afterwards boy- 
led aggine with a little hany tillthe decpRion be come tothe! thicknes of hony, maketh an excel- 
lent medicine for the cleyſing of the cheſt and lungs. | : | | 

F Thelikething hath Dizſeorides, theiwhole Cones (ſaith he)which are. newly gathered fromthe 
trees, broken and boiled ih [weere wine = goodfqr an old cough,and conſumption of the lungs,if 
a good draught of that liguot be drunke euery day, | | 

G Theſcalesof the Pine apple,with the barke of the tree, doſſtoppe the laske and the bloudy flixc, 


they prouoke vrine,and the decoction of the ſame hath the like propertie. 
4 { the wilde Pine tree. Chap.; 9.1. 


| | 4v Thekimaes. | | 


” 


- "F: Here be maky ſorts of wilde Pine trees whichif they may bereferred vnto twoythe one ſhallbe 
\ the wilde mountainePine,and the other the ſea Pine. | 


x 


? 


- 


£ 
: 


\ 


158 os | % Thedeſeription. | | | 
1 "THe firſtkinde of wilde Pine tree, groweth'very great; butnot ſo high as the former, being 

the tame or manured Pine tree; the barke thereofis glib: thebrahches are ſpread abroad, 
 beſer with longſharpe nd leaues:the fruite is ſoſnewhar likethe rame Pine tree, with 
ſome roſin inthem,8 tweere of ſmell, wich doth eaſily openii ſelfe, & quickly fallerh from the tree. 
2, Thefecondkinde of wilde Pine tree groweth not fo high|as the former, neither is the ſtem gro- 
wing ſtraight vp,bur yet bruigerh toorth many branches, lohg, flender, and ſo calic tobe bent or 
bowee, that heereof-they make Hoopes for wine Hogſheads and Tuns: the fruite of this Pine is 
greatcr then the finite otany of the other wilde Pines, FE: 


f RET", 4 {a G . 
"$6 191% 2649902 ge OY AY rt ry gi ang © 64 11 Mp eh RTF orE, wo” eb 


© va 


I P 140 


| | HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
1 Pinzs ſlueſtris. 2 Pinw ſlueſtris mage. 


| The wilde Pine tree. The lowe wilde Pine tree, 


WW (4 EZ 
DA Wh - 


" ,& DE / 


G Gi Pee) 
324, 


;, AA; FRE: 
_ Z PLZ, 


i, — 


3 Pinus Flue ſtris ahatens, | Pimus AWD minor. 
The mountaine wilde Pine tree, The imaller wilde Pine tree. 


JJID 
BNA 


_—_ 


w a $0 
WS 


1176 THE THIRD BOOKE' OF /THE 


65 


£ 


+ Thee, 


not ſo high as the othe 
big,almoſt like the fruit'o! 

nurs of the Pine | | 

taſte, like the kernell of the rame Pine the woode js 

make tables and other workes of, [| 1 | | 
4 Thereis another wilde Pine of the mountaine, not g from 
growing for the moſt parrlike a hedge trecwhercin is the difference. 


el 


Tis <H> 4% 4 % 

Fi 4.4 
4, S\ 4a. > 
>< h> 4 4 


a 


% The atſer iption, | : | | 
Pine tree , groweth pe above the height of two men, ha- 


ſhorter; the truite is 0 
th very much Roſin, 
e Sca Pines, 


the ſame forme, bur longer, ſomwhat 


7 The ePine 

ches and leaues are like vnto thoſe | 

it reſemblerh che pine is ſelfe;& the other yeres as awild hed 

to plaic and Hon hir ſelfeamongft hir delights, i mber is 
foft,andnatfir for building, but is of the ſubſtance of our Birch tree : the ſtuite is like thoſe of the 
otherwilde Pines whereof this isa kinde, = : 


' 
; 
: 


7 Teas 


, 
pa 
: 
= 
Ml 


- HISTORIE OF PLANTS. T4 
7 Tedafuc pſende mms.” "| | X 
The baſtard wilde Pine, wT he hae 
E's Theſe wilde Pines do growe vpon the colde 
ff W/ WW; L; FL. mountaines of Liuonia, Polonia, Norucgia, and 
We '(F ji 14 UEES Ruſſia, eſpecially vpon the land called Holand 
Ya: i / 's, FL ; within the Sawnde,: beyonde Denmarke ,and in 


the woods by Narua vpon the Liefeland ſhore, 
and all the trac of the way , beinga thouſande 
Werſts (cach Wetft containing three quarters 
of an Engliſh mile) from Narua vato Moſcouia, 
where I haue ſeenc them growe in infinuce num- 
bers. 
The time. 
The fraite of theſe Pine trees is ripe. in the end 
of September : our; of all theſe iffuerh foorrh a 
white and ſiveere ſinelling Roſia : they are «lo 
changed. into Teas, and out of thele is b-jled 
through the force of the fire, a blacke'Pitch :thie 
Pirch tree and the Larch tree be alſo ſometimes 
changed into Teda; yet veric feldome, for Teds 
is a proper & peculiar infirmitie of the wilde Pine 
tree. Atrec'is faid to be changed into Tedravhen 
not onely the hart of ir, bur alſo the reſt of the 
ſubſtance i is turnedinto ;Farnes. 
. *+ The names, | 
Allrheſe are called; in Greeke wie hot t arid in 
Latine Sywmeſlres Pani: of Plinie Pinaſtri: Pinefter 
faith he in his : 6.bgok 10. chaprer, is nothing «fe 
but Pinw fylueftris,or the wild Pine tree,of a lefler 
height, and full of boughes from the/middle, as 
therame Pine tree in the top, (molt of the copies + 
havefalſely Ofa ables height; they are farre deceiued who thinke thac the Pinerree is called 
in Greeke »ws, beſides the tame Pine which notwithanding is ſo callzdnor of all men, but onely of 
the Arcadians (as we have faide before) #74, all men do name the wilde -wixa: and therefore Teds 
orthe Torch Pine heerofis ſaid to be in Latine-nor Picee, but Pinea, that is, notthe Puch trec, but 
the Pine trec,as Ouid doth plainly fellibe' in his Epiſtles of noble met; 


f 1 v 


rt ds of pers, nes notis ionibus arſi, 
wor cans vi ad {wg Pinca Teda deos. . 


Allo in FaHorun 4. 


| Midaccemdie divine pro lamwede Pinus, | | 
Hine Cererts | rpm *74 + Teas datir. | | E 


Ti ſame doth rig alſo Ggnific in the 7.of his AEneid. 


Ipfa intgr medias fagrenenſernil Pinum | _ 


, Suftiner. b 


Where ia ſteede of Flngramen Pinwn, Seruim admoniſheth/vs to nderſtand reds Pines. 


: 


* 


Gegg 3 | | Cant 


1 


1178 THE THIRD BOOKE' OF THE 
Cizullxsnlſo conſenteth with themin the mariage ſong of Juliq and Melims: 
||; —_— — | 
Pineam quate tedam, | 
WirhHhande of thine 
Shake Torch of Pine. 
mare Ceres Paſchalis. 


4 


2 | 


Sew Plnus pice em fert alimoniams. | 
As the Pine tree doth beare and breed, | 


A pitchie food ir ſelfe to feed, | _ 
Moreouer the herbe Pexcedanos,or Horeſtrong, ſonamedof che likenes of ws, is called alfoin La. - 
tine Pinaſtellam of Pinwthe Pinctree: all which things do euidently declare that man is calledin 
Latinenor rae Pink. 2 io] uy ; h | p ( 4 | 

The firſt of theſe wilde kinds may bei/des 7 heophra ;,or Theophra « his Pine tree, growing on 
mount Ida jt the apple which is neck were biker 7 for he nameth twokinds of wildePines = 
one of mount Ida,and the other the ſea Pine with'the round fruit: but we hold the contrarie,for the 
fruit orapple of the wilde mountaine is ſhorter,andthatof rhe ſea Pine longer. This may more 
truly be Macedomon mas,orthe Macedonians male Pine, for they make two forts of wilde Pines,the © 
male and the ferake,and the male more writhed and harder ro be wroughe vpon; and the female 
more eafie,but the woodofthis is more writhed,and not ſo much in requeſt for works, asthe other, 
and therefore ir ſeemeth/tobe the male This wilde Pine tree js called in high Dutch Þart3baum, 
and wilder Hartzbaum in Gallia Celica E wo uleno :in Spaniſh Pino,Carax. 

The ſecond wilde Pine tree is named commonly of the Italians, Tridemtinis , and CAnanien/ibus 
Cembro and Cirmelozit ſeemerhto differ nothing ar all from the Macedonians wilde female Pinc , 
for the wood is cafie to be wrought onzand ſeructh for diuers and ſundrieworkes. 

The thirde they call-Afvgo, this may be named notwithout cauſe zzuarmizn, that js , Humilis 
Pinu,or dwarffc Pine:yet doth it differ from 2-4/4» thehetbe,called in Engliſh ground Pine, 

The fourth wild Pine is named in Greek mewianivin: in Latine Afaritime , and Marine Pin :in 
Engliſh Sea Pine. || | | | | 

 _ ThatwhichtheLatinescall Teds,is named in Greeke #,and 4%: in high Dutch Kynholtz: ic 
may be termed in Engliſh Torch Pine, | | : 

Plinie is deceiued, inthathe ſuppoſeth the Torch Pine to be a rree by itſelfe , and maketh itthe 
ſixr kinde of Conerrees, as likewiſe he erreth in taking Ler#x, the Larch tree,for »iww, the Pinetree, 
And as D#oſcoridesraaketh fo little difference, as ſcarie any berweene wn and »ws, and ſuppoſerth 
them to be both of onekindeyſo likewiſe he ſerreth downe faculties common to them both. 

| '} ! . t* Thetemperatuye and vertges. 

A Thebatke ofthem bgth ſaith he,dgth bmde 3bceing beaten and applied ir cureth merigals, and 
alſo ſhallow vicers and burnings if it be laide on with the froth offiluer and fine Frankenſence. 

B 'With the Cerote of Mirrils it healeth vicers in tender bodies , being beaten with Copperas ir 
ſtaierh retters,and creeping vicers: it draweth away the birth andafterbirth, ifir be raken vnder in 
afume: being drunke it. ſtoppeth the belly,and prouokerh vrine. 

C Galenhathalmoſt the ſame things,bur he faich that the bark of the Pine tree is more temperate 

' then that ofthe Pirch tree ;the leaues ſtamped take away hot ſwellings and ſores that come therof 

D Being ſtamped & boiled in vineger they aflwage the pain of the teeth it they be waſhed with this 
deco@i6 hor:the fame be alſo good far thoſe that haue bad livers being drunk with water or mead. 

E Oftheſame operation is likewiſe the barke of the Pine nuts ; but Gaſes affirmerh that the Cone 
or apple , although ir ſeeme to be like vntotheſe is notwithſtanding oflefler force, infomuch as it 
cannot effeQtually performe any ofthe aforcſaide vertues, but hath in ita certaine biting qualitic, 
which hurteth. FRE | 1 

F The Torch Pine cut into ſinallpeeces and bolled in vinege r, is a remedie likewiſe againſt the 
roothach,ifthe teeth be waſhed withithe decoQtion, if SMEs 

G Ofthisthere is made a profitable ſpather or lice to be vitd in making of compounde plaiſters 
and peſlariesthatcaſe paine. | 

H Ofthe ſmoke of thisis made a blacke which ſerueth to make ynke of and for wGe2eex, and for 
cating ſoresin the comers of thecies, and againſt the falling away ofthe haire of the cie lids, and 
for watering andblectecics ; as D/oſcerides teacheth, | $5 

If i | | ſ b | 


- 


» 


- 'HISTORIE' OF PLANTS: //7 xt79 


bOfanſs: ile bnaghyitbalgonnc) 10,48 
© 


| | __ 11 Þ\The hinges," | {1 | 

x OutofthePine trees,eſpecially of the wilde kindes, there ifſueth foortha liquid, whitiſh, and 
ſweere ſmelling Rofin , and thatmany times byirſelfez but more plencifully either out of the cur 
and broken boughes,or foorth of the body when the tree commeth to be/a'Lorch Pine. | 
2 Thereifſuerh allo footth of the crackes and chinkesof the barke'z ot out of the cut boughes, a 
certaine drie Roſin,andthar foorth of the Pine rree;or Firte tree, | | FE 2 ff 

There is likewiſe founda certaing congealed Rofinvpon the cones or apples; | | 

Iris calledin Latine Reffws: in Greeke porn: in high Dinch Hartz 3inlowe Durch Herſt; in Tra» 
lian yage in Spaniſh-Reffna: in Engliſh Rofin, | | 

The . 4 


2:2 Poo: 

is namedin Latine Liquids Refine: in Greekefmim ie, and of divers «vnFfone,that is ro 

fay,fluingour of it ſclfe,of the Lacedemonians Trwnhvns, or Primefing,, the firlt Aowipg Roſin : and 

in Cilicia KeTvaixvr; as Galen writerh inhis thirde booke of medicines according'to the kindes: in 

ſhops Reſima Ping, or Roth of the Pine tree, aud common Roſin. It hapneth oftentimes thorowe the 

negligent and careleſle gathering thereof,thar certaine finall peeces gt woode,and little ſtones be 

—_ mixed with it: this kinde of|Rofſtn Galen ſurnameth ww, as though he ſhould ſaie, con- : 
fuſed,which being melted and clenſed from the drofſe becommeth hard ane briczle, | 

The like haprcth alſorto anorher liquid Roſin,which after it is melted, boiled;and cooled ag aine, 
ishard and brittle , and may likewiſe be beaten, ground, and ſtarced; andchis Rofinis named in 
Greeke gpuzni: in Latine Frida, and many times Colophonia, in Greek vaogoriz: whichname is vicd 
among the Apothecarieszand may ſtandefor an Englith name; for Galen in his third booke of Me- 
dicines according to theirkinds ſaith,tharit1s called Frita,andof ſome Colophonua that, ſaith he, 
is the drieſt Roſin of allwhich ſomecall Fr:&a,others Co/ophonza: bigauſe in times palt ; as Dyoſco- 
rides wriceth,it was deſired of Colophy zthis being yellow in compariſon of thereſt, is white when ir 
is beaten, P/zzje in his 14booke 20;chaprer, 4 | 

The ſecond Roſin is namedin Greeke min £n-2, ſpecially that of the Pitch tree without fatnes, 
and that ſoone waxeth dry ,vhich Gzlenin his6.booke of Medicines according tothe kinds, calleth 
properly revue mwirer:that which in Altats madeof the Pitch tree being very white , is called Spa- 
g4,as Pliny teſtifieth, | FC \! 

Thethirdis called in Greeke jmvy 525Cnive: the ſame is allo named #i7nue vectinuwer, this is vnuknown 
in ſhops. Yet there isto be folde a certaine drie Rofin, burtghe ſamejs compounded of the Roſins 
of the Pine tree, of the cones or clogs,, andofthe Firretree mixed al togither, which they call Ge- 
ripet: this is vicd in perfumes in ſtecde of Frankenſence , trom which notwithſtanding it farre 


diftereth, 


| | *% The temperature and vertues. | oo” 
Allthe Rofins are hot and drie;, but not all after one caaner : ſof there is a difference among a 
them: they which be ſharper and more bifing , arc hotter, as that which commeth of the cones, 
being of Roſins the hotteſt bicaule jt is alſothe ſharpeſt : the Roſin of the Pitch trec is not ſo much 
biting,and therefore norſo hot: the Rolin of the Firre tree is inameane berweene them both z che 
liquid Rofin of the Pine is moiſter , comming neere to the qualitie and-faculkic ofthe Larch 
Roſin. | | bs ab 
The Roſins which are burnt of fried, as Diofcorzdes teſtificth, are profitable in plaiſters, and B 
compoſitions that eaſe weariſormneſle; for they donor onely ſupple or mollifte 3 bur alſo bv rea'on 
of the thinnes of their parts and drinefle, they digeſt : theretore th&/both mollifie and waſte awaie 
lwellings , and thorow the ſame facultic they cure wearilomneſle , being vied in compound me- 
dicines for that purpoſe. | "= I hes” 
| Theliquid Rofins are very fitly mixed in ointments., commended for the healing vp of greene C 
wounds,tor they both bring to ——_—_— do alſo glue and vnite them togither. | 
- Moreouerthere is gatheredout from theRofinsas from Frankenſence,a congealed {moke, called [3 
in Latine Fu{5go, in Greek ai59vs: and in Engliſh Blacke, which ſerueth for medicines that beaurific 
the eic lids,and cure the fretting ſores of the corners of the eics,and allo watering eics,for it drieth 
without biting, | | Et. ic 
There is made heereof ſaith Dioſcorides, writing inke : but in! our age notthat which weeE 
ih '* * Gggg 4 _ 


£ 
x 


! 


% 


10 THE THIRD BOOKE 'OF- THE 
write withall, but the ſame which ſeruerh for Princers to priht their bookes with, thatis to lay, of 


this blacke,or congealed ſmoke,and other things added. | 


Of Pitch andTar.. 


The manner of drawing foorthof Pitch. | 
/ | + þ | i 


fire. A place muſt be paued with ſtone,pr ſome ocher hard matter,a litle higher in the middle.abour 
which there muſt alſo bemade gurters, into whichthe liquor ſhallfallz then out from them other 
_gurters are to bedrawen, by which it 5 Fu be receiued; being receiued, jris put into barrels. The 
place being thus prepared,the cloucn wood of the Torch Pime muſt beſer vprightz thenmuſt it be 
couered with a greatnumber of Fir and Pitch bouphes,and on every partalabour with much lome 
and carth ; and greatheede muſt be raken, leaft there be anyeleft or chinke remaining,onely a hole 
left in the top of the Furnace, thorow which thefire may bepurin, andthe flame and ſmoke may 
paſſe out : when thefire burneth the Pitch runnerh foorth\firſt the thin,and then the thicker. 

This liquor is calledin Greeke *w9=: jn Larine Pix : in Engliſh Pitch, and the moylture,cuen the 
ſame that ficſtrunnettris named of Price in his 16.booke nine nn Cydria : There is boyledin 
Europegfaith he,from the Torch Pine liquide Pitch vied abpur ſhips, and ſeruing for many other 
purpoſes; the wood being clouen is burned with fire, and fer round about the fornaces on euery 
fide, afterthemannerof making Chatcoles ; thefirſt liquor runneth thoxow the gutrer like water. 

. (Thisin Syriais called Cedrizm, whichits of fo prear vertuegas'in Egypr the bodics of dead men are 
wp1491 being all coveredoner with/it) the liquor followit onngogy thicker, is made Pitch, 
; Bur Dyoſcorides writerh, that Cedyzais gathered of the great] Cedar tree, andnameth the liquor 
drawen out of the Torchtree by force a fire, #ou $ye:z: this isthat which the Latines call Prx l1qu4- 
az: the Italians Pere liquzds + in high Durch UMetch bach: in lowe Dutch Teer t in French 2x 
foudrre :im Spanith Pez /iquiaa: certaink Apothecaries ers va wein England Tar. 

And of this when it is boyled.js —_ a harder Pitch: this is named in Greeke S1cs we, in Latine 
Aridi or fieca prx : of divers muwnion:; as rhoughthey ſhould fay, /rerats Fix, or Pitch iteraced: 
bicaulc itis boyled the ſecond time. Adertaine kinde hereof being made clammie or glewing is n2- 
med 9x: in ſhops Pix mavali,or Ship Pitch : in high Duch/Bach : in lowe Dutch Stcenpecy ; 
in Italian Pece ſecca: in French Pogx ſeche :in Spaniſh Pez ſecs: in Engliſh Stone Puch, 


| 


Out of the fatreſt weedof the Pine tree changed into ima Pines drawn Pitch by force of 


* The zemperature and vertaes. 


Pitch is hot anddry, Tarre is —_— ſtone pitch more frying,as Ga/ex writeth. Tarre is good 
againſt inflammarions ofthe Almonds ofthe throte, and the vuula,and likewiſe the Squincie, be- 
ing outwardly applied. | | | EEIIRE & 

Itis a remedie tor mattering cares with oile of Roſes Pie healeth thebitings of Serpents, irirbe 
bearen with ſalt and applied. | | | | "WW 

With an equall portion of waxe it taketh po yas ilfaugured nailesit waſterh away ſwellings 
of kernels,and hard ſwellings ofthe mqther and fundament. | 

With barly meale anda boies vrine,jt conſumeth xe/445,op the Kings Euill + ir ſtaicth cating v!- 
cers,if ir be laide vnto them with brimſtone, and the barke of the Pitch rree,or with branne. 
_ If irbe mixedwith fine Frankenſence,and a cerote made thereof, it healeth chops of the funda- 
— mentand feete. $38 iu HH] | | 
Stone Pitch doth mollific and ſoften hard ſwellings: it ripehech and maketh matter,and waſtcth 
away hard ſwellings and inflammation of kernel$itfilleth vp hollow vicers,and is fitly mixed with 
_ wound medicines. Fi [2 | F}- 
What vertue Tarre hath when ir is jnwardly taken we may reade in Disſcorides and Galen , but 


we ſer downenothing thereof,for that no man in qur age willſeafily vouchſafe the raking. 
There is alſo made of Pitch a congealed ſmoke or blacke,whichſeructh for rhe ſame purpoſes,as 
that ofthe Rofins doth, | | I EEE $22 


* i i 
z « 
f | pl 
£ * * 
' E & . i ? . 
: G : , A 
«- by Y Ml 
$ & . : 
7 . Lee) . = £ a 
; : : 1 
© k 
K - 


= 
= 


'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1181 


— 


Of the Firre,or Deale tree. Chap.4.0. 


«Abies. | bed oy 
The Firre trce, | | % The deſcription. 


He Firre tree groweth very high andgrear, 
hauing his leaves cuer'greene z his trunkeor 
" bodyimooth; cuen and ſtraight , without 
joints or knots , vntill it hath gotten braunches ; 
which are many and very faire,beſet with leaves, 
not much vnlike theleanes of the Ewe tree, but 
ſinaller:among which cometh forth the frair,like 
vnto the Pine apple, bur ſmaller andnarrower, 
hanging downe as the Pine apple: rhe timber 
hereof excelleth all other timber forthe maſting 
of ſhyps, of poſtes,'railes,deale bordes, and fun- 
dry other purpoſes. | - 
There is another kinde of Firre rree, which is 
likewiſe a very high and call cree, and higher rhen 
the Pine: the body of itis {traight withour knots 
below, waxing ſmaller and finallerenen tothe ve- 
ric top : about whichit ſendeth foorth boughes, 
fower togither out of one and the ſelfe fame parr 
of the body,placedone againſt anothey,m maner 
of a croſle growing forth of the fower ſides of the 
body, and obſerving the ſame order even tothe 
very top : out of theſe bonghes grow others alfo, 
but by two and two, one placed right againſt an 
other,out of the ſides, vvhich bende downwardes; 
when the other beate vpwards:theleattes compas 
theboughes round abourt,& rhe branches therof ; 
| they be long, round,and blunt pointed,narrower 
. | - and much whiter then thoſe of the Pitch rrec, 
| | | that is to ſay, of alight greene , andina manner 
ofa white colour:the cones orclogs be long,and longer then any others of the cone rrees,they con- 
filt ofa multitude of ſoft ſcales, they hang downe from the ende of the twigs, and donot ealily fall 
downe,butremaineon the tree a very long time : the kernels in theſe are ſmall, nor greater thenthe 
kernels of the Cherrie ſtone , with a thinne skin growing on the oneſide, very likealmoſt to the 
wings of Bees,or great Flies: the timberor ſubſtance of che woode is white , and clad with manie 
coates,like the head of an Onion. | | | 
| | + The place. ob Cop 
The Firre trees growe ypon high mountaines , in many woods of Germanie and Bohemia, in 
which it contiaueth alwaies greenez it is found alſo on hils in Italy, France,and orher countries ; it 
commeth downe oftentimes intothe valleies: they are found likewiſe in Prufe, Pomerania, Liefe- 
land Rufſta,and eſpecially in Norway; wheie I haue ſeenc the goodlieſt trees in the worlde of this. 
kinde,growing vpon the rockie and craggie menace without any earth about them, or 
anyorher thing, fauing alittle moſie abour the roores, which thruſt themſclues heere and there 11ito 
the chinkes and cranics of the rockes, and thereforeare cafily caſt downe with any extreme #ale 
of winde. I haue ſeenetheſe trees growing in Cheſhire, Staffordihire,and Lancaſhire, where they 
grew m greatplentie,as is ———— Noahsfloud; but then being ouerturned, and ouerwhe!. 
med haue lien fince in the moſſes and waterie mooriſh grounds very freſh and ſound vnty!l this day, 
and {b full of a Reſinous ſubſtance, that they burne like a Torch or Linke , andthe inhabitants 
of thoſe countries do call it Firre-woode, and fier woode vnto this day; ourof this tree iflueth the 
Rolin called Thus,in Engliſh Frankenſence:bur from the yoong Fir trees proceedeth an ag. ie 
Ht | | Cleerc 


-V 


B 


C 


| adcingrthecero a little Saffron, 


withour: it bringethfogrth many boughes diuided into other lefler branc 


W_ 


1182 THE-/THIRD: BOOKE/ORF TWE 
hepeelings or outward rinde of the Pomecitron. 

| w*% Therme, = 
the Pmetrees. ©. 


. 


and UNci(5 
m, and Yaſt-boomn: in 
rec,and Deale tree, Thefirſt is called 


ng Firenns, is called in Greeke 
1 Lathy chryn ns :nſhops of Germany, as alſo of 
Terchinthing Veneta, ot Venice Turpentine: jn Italian Zagrimo : divers do thinke 
| © inaud/\s fmrirn, Olcoſa Reſena, or oilic Rofin ; bur of Rofſin is the ſame thar 
Pix liquida,or Taris.' j#| | Li | , IT 

CArida Abietum Reſing,ordrie Roſiniof the Fir trees,js ngnny called in Greeke im iaeriv,andin 
Latine Abicgne Reſina:it hath a ſweets mel], and is oftentimes vied among other perfumes in ſtead 
of Frankinſence. |: | bo \=3H6}] F | | 


Thebarke,fruit,and gumsofthe Fir tree, arc ofthenature of the Pitch tree and his gums, 
THE | }_- *% Thevertues. '| 7 


A Theliquid Roſin of the Eir tfeecalled Turpentine, looſeth the belly , driveth foorth hot chole. 


ricke ons chrefpiraet mundifieth the kidneies, prouoketh vrine,and driueth foorth the ſtone 
and gravell, in} BoÞs: | [| a | 
Theſame taken with Sugarand the powder of Nutmeg gave the ſtrangurie, ſtaicth the Go- 
norrhcea or the vnuoluntarie iſlue gfnjans nature, called the running of the rains, andthe white 
fluxe in women. E327 ha 1 CS PREM | 
It is very profitable far all greene ahd freſh wounds, eſpecially the wounds of the head: forit 
healeth andclenſeth mightily, eſpecially if it be waſhed in Plantaine water, and afterward in Roſe 


warter,the yolke ofan egge pur theretowith the powders of Ol;banum and Maſticke finely ſearced, 


| Of the Larch tree. Chap.qa. | 


| The deſerivtion. 


x He Larchis a tree of no ſmall height, with a bodygrowing ſtraight vp:the barke whereofin 

theneather part betieath the boughes is thicke, rugged, andfull of chinkes ; which being 

cut in ſfunderis red within, /and in the other part above ſmooth, flipperie,ſomething white 

ref | bh which be tough and 

pliable. The leaucs are ſmall,andcut into many iags, growingin cluſters thicke togither like raſſels, 

whichfall away atthe apprach of winter. The flowers or rather the firſt ſhewes of the cones or fruir 

be round,and grow out of the tendereſt boughes, being at the length of a braue red purplecolour. 

The cones be mall, and like almoſt inbignes to thoſe of the;Cypres tree, but longer, and made vp 

of a multitude of thin ſcales like leaues zynder which lie ſinall feedes, hauing a thin velme growing 

on them very like to the win i7 of Bees or waſpes :|the ſubſtance of the whod is very hard, of colour 
eſpecially that in the middeſt, ſomewhat red,and very profitable for works of long continuance, 

 Irisnoteruethat the wood of the Larch tree cannor be ſet on fire, as Y1trauimereporteth of the 

caſte]l made of Larch wo6od,which(Ceſay beſieged; for it burneth in chimncies, and is rurned into 

coles,which are very profirable for Sniithes, as Mathic/ms writeth, 

Thereis alſo gathered of the Larch tree a liquide Rofin, yery like in colour and ſubſtance tothe 
whiter hony, as that of Athens orbf Spaine, which notwithſtanding iſlueth not foorth of it ſelte, 
bur runnerh out of the ſtocke of the tree,when ir hath been bored euen to the very hart with a great 
and long awger or wimble. ! = | | | 


4 £ 


Galen writeththar therebe after a fort two kindes hereof, in his fourth booke of medicines ac- 


_ cording tothe kinds,one like vato Turpentine,the other mote ſharper thi this, hotter more _ 
Ek -T-| FS, | | 0 


 _ HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1183 
of a ſtronger ſmell.and in taſte birterer and hotter: bur the latrer is thought not co be the Rofin of 
che Larch, but of the Firre tree, which Ge/exbicaulc iris after a ſortlike m ſubltance , might hauc 
taken for that of the Larchtree. + 4-5 5 
Theregroweth alſo vpon the Earch tree akinde of Muſhrum or excreſcence, not ſuch as is vp- 
onother trees, but whiter, ſofter, more looſe and ſpungie then any other of the Muſhrums , and 
for medicine, which bearcth thenameof 4gariews,or Agaricke : I find that P/xy ſuppolerh 
allthe Maſticke trees , andthole that beare Gals,do bring foorth this Agar icum, wherein he was 
ſomewhat decciued,andeſpecially inthat he trooke Glandrfera for Contfera,thar is,thoſe trees which 
beare Maſte or Acornes,for the Pine apple trees: buramong all the crees that beare <Agaricus,the 
Larchis the chicte, and bringerh moſtplentie of Agarick. | Sos 


1 Larici yomalus. | 


| _ Larix cun 4 4Yico ſuo. 
| AbranchoftheLarchtree, «weeds 


The Larch tree with his Agarick, 


”: 


4 '8, JD —_ >—Y * 
Nt Va 11162 CE 
LOB OM DAS Ao 
CNL F995; = 
8 +44, 4 
v4 


__ & Theplace. | | 

The Larch tree groweth not in Greece,or in {reyes Wl but chiefely vpon the Alpes of Italy,nor 
farte from Trencyhard by the riuers Bonacas and Padws zand allo inother places of the ſame moun- 
nines : itis I1kewife found on hils in Morauia, which in times paſt was called the countrey of the 
Marcomans: Fach/zue writerh ; thatit groweth alſo in Silefta :othersin Lufatia, in the borders of 
Poland: it alſo groweth plentitully in the woods of Gallia Ciſalpina, ' ARIES va, 

Plinie hath (aid ſorwhat heerof,contradiQting the — ot others,in his 16.book $8. chapter, 
Where he ſaich, that fpecially the Acornetrees of France dv beare Agaticke, and not onely the 
Acornetrees,butthe Cone trees alſo; among which faith he;rhe Larch tree is thf chiefe that brin- 

th foorth Agaricke , and that not onelyin Gallia , which nowe is called Fraunce, bur rather in 

umbardic and Picmont in Iraly, whete there be whole woods of Larch trees , atchough they be 
foumde in ſome ſmall quantitic in other countries. RECITED aL: SEE 

The beſt Agarick is that which is whiteſt, very looſe and ſpungie , which may eaſily be broken, 
andislight,and in the firſt raſte ſweere,harde,and wellcompaRt: that whichis heauy blackiſh, and 


containing init little threeds as it were of finewes,is counted pernicious and deadly, 
- —-] 


+7 he 


i; | 
{7 


ns THE TrInD | BOOKE 'oF THE 


Of allche Cone trees; Dhl the Larch tree is ar tobe: without elves i in the winter: inthe 
ſpring growe freſh leauegout of the ſame knobs, from which rhe former did fall. The cones are to 
be garhered before winter ſo ſoone as the leaues are gone: for after the ſcales are lcoſed and 
opened, the ſeedes drop ts & the Roſin mult be gathered in the ſommer moneths, 

| *% Thenames. {| 

| Thistree is called in Greeke 4 Þ ih as alfo Lerix : ih Italian and Spaniſh Lrice : inhigh 
Durch Lerchinbaum } in lowe Dutch \Lozkenboom: 2 4n French Meleſe: in Englih Larch tree, 
and of fome Larixrree. | |: 

Theliquid Roſen is named by Gal th ; alſo tenb; the Latinek call it Rejina Ltrigna, Or Reſing Ly. 
ricea, Larch Rofin :the I falians Large, the Apothecaries Terebinthina, ot Turpentine, andis olde 
and alſo mixed in medicines jn ſtea thereof: neither is that a thing new - A. ;for Galcnlikewile 
in his timereporteth, that the druggers ſold the LarchRofing in ſtead of Turpentine, and this may 

/ be done without error : for Ga/en hiinlelfe in one place vieth;Larch Roſin for ITurpenine; andin 
another Turpenrine for Larch Rofin, in his booke of medicipes according to thekindes, 

The Agaricke is alſo called in Grecke d,zeney and «lems : in Latine Aggricum and Agariews, and 
{o likewiſe in ſhops: the [caljans, Spavia rds, and other a___ do 1 —_ the Greeke word, and 
in Engliſh wecallit AST. | ; 

+ The timperirare and wiriues. 
A Theleauesbarke Fruix and Lernell. of temperature like'vnto the Pihe, but not tfo ſtrong. 

The Larch Rofin is of a moyſter remperature than all the reſt of the Roſines, and is withall 

without ſharpnes or biting, much likeito the righr Turpentine, and is fidly mixed witlt medicines 
which perfectly cure vices and greene/ wounds, | 

AllRofins,ſaith Ga/ex, that haue this kinde of mioyſture ond clamminelſe joined with them,do as 
ir were binde rogither and vnite drie medicines, and bicauſe they haue no cuident biting qualicie, 
they do moyſten the vicers pong at all ; rherefore diucrshaue very well mixed with fuch con 
pound medicines cither 1 urpentine| oline, or Larch Roſine :thus far Ga/ea, Moreover, LarchRo. 
ſine performerth all ſuchthings thar the Turpentine Roſine doth, vnto which, as we hauc aid, itis 
much likein remperature,which thing| likewiſe G:{ez himſclfe affir neth, : 

aricke is hotin rhefirſt degree and drie in the ſecond,atcording tothe old writers. It cutteth, 
makeththin, cleanſetl?, taketh away obſtrutions| or ſtoppings of the ntrailes , and purgeth allo by 
the {toole. 

Agaricke cureth the yellow Jvnblich proceeding of obſtruRt! ONS) and] is a ſure remedie for co!d 
ſhakings,which are cauſed of thicke and cold humors. 

" The fame being inwatdlyraken & oltward!y applic d,is good for thoſe that are bit of venemous 
beaſts which hurt with their colde >bylon. | 
G Irprouckerh vrine, andbringeth dqwnethe menſes: ir alech the body well coloured, driueth 
foorth wormes, cureth agues, eſpecially quortidians, and wandring feuets, and others thatare of 
long continuancef ir be mixed with fir things thar ſerue for the diſeaſe : andtheſe things itperfor- 
meth by drawing foorth and purging avay of grolle, colee,, and flegmatike humors, which cauſe 
the diſeaſes. 
14 Fromadram waightgr a dram and ; a halfe to ewo,is given; ar oncein ſubſtance or in powder : the 
_ waightofitinan infuſion or decoQion is from wo drams to five. 
1 Butitpurgeth ſlowly, and doth fo ewhat trouble the ſtqwacke : and therefore itis appointed, 
ethar Ginger ſhould be mixed with i ,0 ot 0s ſecde oF Louage leede, or Sal gem, in Latine 
Sal fo 

I xy #5 as Meſues foth reporr, gaue i with wine wherein Gin ger w as infuſed : ſome vſeto giueit 
with Oxymel,otherwiſe called licupe of vine erwhich i is the ſafeſt way ofall. 


Agarickeis good againſt the pines and ingning of ined, orth be falling euil] }bcingraken 
with the firupe of vineger. | 
4 Irisgoodagainſt thaMarnnelſeof breth called Aithma, the inueterate re cough of the lungs, the 
'* prificke,confumption,and thoſethar ſper blood: it comtorterh the weake- and jecble ſtomack,caue 
ſeth ggod: digeſtion Til good agpink wormes. | | 


o 


- 
5 M 6 
£ : 
' s Po 
by F = . 
w . 
0  . : a *a 
t L : b £ : . 
ts : m - ; - 
- = F, bl 2 * 
do * . i 
: 9 
6 > : 4 o 
: $ 4 . 
o »* 4 < 
Fi 
. - 
£ 


; 


| HISTO RTE" OF FLANTS.1T  - ris 
GL 154 1997 & "Of theOpreſſe tree. "Chip. 43.12 


Cupreſſin alter a,ſme ſylueſtris. ROROY | Sig pat ware 

| GEO ele. | OREN _. % The deſeription. _ | 
wr. Jy | hi _ PT Heranicor manure CARSON Nath 4 
| long, thicke, and Itraighrbody: whereupon 
-* ©*.: many flender branches do growe;; which 
$i ou hy Ike ag, branckesof other 
trees, bur gtow vp alongfthe bogy,yetnor rou- 
- chingrhe ive Mead the ans ofa 

ſteeple, broadbelow and narron SUING the 
rop :the ſubſtance of the woods hardeſounde, 
well cortpact ſweere of fmell, and ſomewhar yel. 
low, almoſt like the yeRlow Saunders, but noral- 
rogithetſoyellow 3 neither dorh itrot, horwaxe 
old,nor cleauerh or chapperh it ſelfe. The leanes 


are long,toimd like thoſe of Tamariske;burtnore 


full of tubſtance. The fruir or nurs do hang vpon 
' the boyghes, being inmannerlike toh6ſe the 
Larch tree, but yer thicker & more cloſely com- 
pat: which pen ripe doof themſeluesparcin 
ſunder, andthentallech rhe ſeede, which is ſha- 
ken out with the winde: the fame is ſmall,flat,ve. 
ry thin, of a {wartill fauoured colour, which is 
leafanr to Ants orPiſmires, and ſerverh them 
orfoode, The figure of this tree we do want, 
and the Hachierfaſſet it foropaſle,bicanſe itis wel -. 
knowen to moſt. The figure of rhe wildekinde 
we have ſct foorth with his fruir. | 7 
Of this divers make two kines : rhe female 
and the male; the female barren, andthe male 
fruitfull, TheophraFus reporterh that divers affirme the male to come gf thefemiale, The Cyprefſe 
yeeldeth foorth a certaine liquid Rofan , like in fubſtance to that of the Larchrree, bur i mar- ©? 
vellous ſharpe or biting, | | i "4 999% <p 
The wilde Cyprefle, as Theophreftmwriterh, is an high tree, and alwaies preene, Tolike to the -: 
other Cypres,as it ſeemeth to bethe ſame both in boughes, body, leaues, and truire, ratherthen 2 _ 
cerraine wilde Cypres : the marter or ſubſtance of the wood is ſounde, of a fweete ſmell , like thar * 
of the Cedar tree, which rotteth not : there is nothing fo crilped as the roote, andrherefore rhey 
ve to make precious and coſtly works hereof, A COATS fn of 
| * The place. ag : | 
The tame or manured Cypres tree groweth in hot.countries, as in Candie, Lycia, Rhodes , and 
alſo inthe terrirorie of Cyremia: it is reported to be likewiſe found oh the hils belonging to mounr 
Ida,and onthe hils called Lexcz, that is to ſay, white, the "_ whereof be alwaics couered with 
ſnow : Bellonizs denierh it ro be found vpon the tops of theſe hils, but in the bottomes on the rou 
parts andridges ofthe hils:ir groweth likewiſe in diners places of Englande, whete it hath beene 
planted,as ar Sion a place neere London, ſometime a houſe of Nunnes: it groweth alſo at Green-. 
wich, and at other places: andlikewiſe ar Hampſtced in the Garden of Maſter Wazdg , one of the 
Clarkes of hir Maieſties Priuy Counſell. | w+:4 Kh Pak 
The witde kindeof Cypres tree growerh hard by _Ammons Temple , andin other patrs of the 
countrey of Cyrene,vpon the rops ofmounraines,and in extreme colde places. Bellonim aftirmerh, 
that there is found 4 cerraine wilde Cypres alſo in Candie , whichis not ſo high as other Cypres' 
trees,Hor growerh ſharpe toward the top,bur is lower , and hath his bongbes iprcad flar, rounde 
aboutin compaſſe ;he faichthat the body thereof is alſo thicke : but whether this be Thys, of which 
Theophraſtus and Pliny make mention,weleaueitro be.confidered of; | a _ 
| | 4A * 


21986 - THE, THIRD nooks OF; FTA 


| | * Thetime. | 
The tame Cypres tree is ain) ghbene may be gathered thiiſe a yeere zin Ianuarie, 
Maie,and lawn and therefore ve is Oe Ton! 
The wilde Cipres rri rree is lare Ang very long before ir uddeth, 
| *%Themwames. | 
The rame Cypresrn cree is called in Greeke Kwnetero5s of Koaderrles: in 


eſſws: in IralianC in French and Spaniſh Cipres: in high 
graſs An ate b Cypres,and Cyprestree, | 
 Thefruite is named in Grecke roaitee ris xymelgor: e Pilule Ci refs, Nures Cupreſs, and 
Galbuli: in ſhops XN uces Cypreſe: in Engliſh Cypres Nuts},'Clogs rree in times paſt was 
dedicaredro Plato, andyas faide to be deadly , whereupon ovcgh charthe ſhadowe thereof 
is vnforcunare. gs | 
The wilde Comes erdis| calledin Grechediagt $7oy , and9Vor: fr 
namenotofap rhuyolomomy mahbch yſbiaſaon n.7 hye as 
booke 16.chapter, was wellknowne to Homer ; hc Mewerh| thar this is 
ſinels, which Circe was much delightedwithall,whom he 
their blame that call ſveere and adoriferous ſmels, euen , even of them, .by thatname; bicauſe he 
doth eſpecially make mention withallin one verſe of Cedrwwand Thya: | haue falſely 7. 
rix,orLarch oY in which it is manifeſt that he ſpake onely of trees ; the np extant in the fife 
.booke of Oayſes, where he mentioneth that Aercarie by Iupiters commandement went tO Calpſus 
den,and that he did feele a great way off the ſmell of the burne trees Thja and Cedrus, = 
T heophraftus artributerh great honar to this tree t theroofes of old temples became 
famous by reaſon of that wood,and that the timber fwhich the rafters are made, is cuct- 
laſting,and is not hurt l cre by fag earch, nor anyother infirmitie or corruption, 
| be temperature. | | 
The fruite and leave of Cypres are dryi in the third degree and aſringene. 
+../- | Thewvertues. | 
bein and en with wing, as Dieſeorides writeth , ſtoppeth the 
laske and bloudie flixei! itis you againſt the ſparing of bloud,and all other iſſues of bloud, 
B They glucandhealeypgreat vicersin hard bqdies, they ſafely and without harme ſoke vp and 
conſume thehidand ſecret moiſture lying deepe & in the borame of weake and moiſt infirmirics, 
C Theleauesand nuts Arc goodtoc ſc the feos Wo take ; away the Apenthac: is an exctelcence 
growing in the noſe. d1..4 
D Somevſc the ſame againſt cxrbuncle , and eating fores, mixing them with parched Ba:'cy 
meale., 
E . Theleaues of Cypres boiledi in rexte wine, or meade, doh belpet the ſtrangurie and difficulc.c 
ofmaking water, - 
E "4 reported charths ſinckeof the leaues dothdriue anay gnats , and that the clogs do ſo like- 
wiſc 
G Theſhauingsof the wood laid amongſt Jpnſan . pep chem from mothes, the Roſin kil- 
leth mothes Jictle wormes and go. | 


Of the Tree 0 | Life. oy 4 


* Thed | 
"Hetrce of life WE wddlebolate ofa fron. chebarke g of adarke reddiſh clones 
the timber very hard,rhe branches ſpreading themſelues abroad, downe towardthe 
ground by realbeibft the weakney of the twiggie br —___ , ſurcharg ot with veric oileous and 
likg the 


ponderous leaues caſting and ſpreading themſelues thers 3 a wing,reſembling thoſe of 
the Sauine tree,or rather like the Yew cree leaues, but thicker , and more full of gummic or oileous 
ſubſtancezyhich being rubbedin the hands do yerlde a an argmaticke,ſpicie,or gummieſauour,very * 
pleafam and comfortable : among the leaues come foorth ſmall yell owiſh flowers, which in my 
garden fall away withour any fruite 5 bur as it harh beene reported by thoſe thar have ſeene the 
ghere followeth a fruit in hot regions,much like vnto the fruit of rhe Cipres tree, bur ſmaller; 
coinpad of lictle and Finke __ , = re pap one vpon kn 2 which myſelfe hauc not yer 


feene: 


ſcene. The branches of chis creelaid/downe inthe 
earth will very eaſllic rake roote., \euen like the 
Woodbinde or ſome fuch plant,which I haue ofren 
proo 
rrees. *% The place. | 
This tree ous not _ . "11 os buric 

werh in my garden very plentitu 
2 & * bet lg 7 

Is endorerh the cold of our Northrenclimar , yer 
doth it loſehis gallant greenes in the winter months: 
it f6wreth in my garden about May.-' 

*% The names. 


and aromaticall tree Thur; or-T hys: fone callit Ce- 
rus Lycia : the new writers do terme'it Arbor vite: 
in Engliſh the Tree of life, I do nor meane that, 
whereof mention is made Gen. 3.22, 
| *% The n710 gre | 
Both the leaues and boughes be hot and drie, 
* The vertues. | 
Among the plants of the Newfoundland, this 
tree which Theophraſtus calleth Thu#a or Thus, is 


themoſt principall and beſt agreeing vnto the na- - 


ture of man as an excellent cordiall, and of a very 


pleaſant ſmell, | 
Of the Yewtree. Chap. 43. 


Taxt. The Yew tree, 


<< 


by Sg *) 


HISTORIE OFUPLANTS. | 1187 
CArbor 3 wit. The Tree of life; 


y ucd, and thereby haue greatly multiplied theſe 


Theopbrattuw and Plinie haue called this ſweete | 


% The feription 

He Yew tree is a great high tree remaining 
alwaies greene , and hauing a big trunke co- 

uered with a ſcabbed or rough icalie barke, 

the timber wherof is ſomewhat red, and hisarmes 
alſo with his branches, The "Wks be of a darke 
TP ene colour, long ahd narrowe like feathers or 

E FP 4 wings, ſet full of lice! leaues , growing all along a 
RN ſmall ſtem, one ſtanding right oppoſite againſt an 

other, whereof-cach leate is narrower and longer 
than the leaues of Roſemarie, of 4 brighter greene 
colour, otherwiſenot much valike : among &bich | 


I. | > =S come foorth faire ſhining” red berries as biz as 
& Wo; «> = rm” 4s ;full of a {limie ARNIE very 

EE LA 74 weete taſte, 

/, p þ\ &* 7 he Place. | 

(fr Fx - The Yew tree groweth in many countfics : in 
SY Macedonia and Arcadia,in Iralie & Languedock:ir 
EZ groweth likewiſe in moſt places of England, 
1 


oo 
Ia The flowers come Gonk'i in March or April.and 
1.24 ſtraight after them appeere neiv buds : che beries 
be ripe in —— which rime they tall. 


- This tree is —_ Y Diofcor ides minatby Thee- 


phraſt wes: but by Nicander in his booke of Coun- 
terpoylons quiaes : Galen doth alſo call it vis: 


} 


"#; 
4 


- 


-£ © 


4 2 - 
*%. — ooo cw 
o 
% 


The names. 


_—- q3 


| 


31188 


THE THIRD 


oore OF. THE 


itis named in Latine Taxes: in bigh Dat ebandente inlovs Deck Ihenhoon: in Italian 


Taſſo: in Spaniſh Taxo and Taxo: in French rf: 


_ if anyof them z itis c 


Ewe or Yew tree in vnlearned ſhops 


Temeriſceas, which in times paſt were woont not without great 


error to mixe the bay hereof incompound medicines in ſtead of he Tamariske barke. 


: 
: 


is 6 generally all thathe 
venemousto be taken inwar 
ſerh , and oftentimes de: 
onely dangeroudynto man and 
thers,and many times to die. Allw 
y wif rae) to ſchoole, 
@ the berries of this rree _ 
ches alſo,withour any 
 xboupn,gnimalie Gaza ttat | 
but ſuch cartell as chew a | 
N:cander in his bookof Count 


| & The temperature. 


The Yew tree,as Gilesreporketh js of a venemous 


death. apy che 


ic,and agy 
< haue dealt in thefaculti hat 
,andthatif anydo fleepe vnder the cara it cau- 
lay that _ thereof being eaten, is not 
doemethenechie cauſeth them to caſt their fea- 
whe affirmc,is altogither vntrue, For when 1 was 
of my ſchoole fellowesand likewiſe my felfe did eateourfils of 
Sys ſlept vnder the comer ena but among the bran- 
pry :not one time, eat aw (aith, that 
n Jumenta,o! cat of the leaves: 
iveno hurtatall 


ifons doth reckon the Yew rree amodg the venemous plants, 


Yew tree 


ſerting downealſoa qnedic ach a tin thelg words : Gerfaurhath « T—_ them, 


Pater venduatd Taxo qu fergie in oh 
Abietibus fonts Jethoque abſumit arerhe, 
N ipr eter morem pleno craterem eraca 

| Fundere _ pares,cum primum ſentict ager 
CA 'OHers _— 207 EL & i a 


| 


& p fp tree. Gp ++ 


* The kinds 


aa enel leſſer, other reater; ; beinga 


a ſtrange and forren tree, one of 
ingeth bogrep a 504 wp no fruke: 


© orher fruite andy ho flowers, 


Aden 


| | x» The deſorption | 


He common "HG rree growerh in 1 oe parts of Kent, vnto che ſtature and bignes of a 

faire great tree,bur moſt comm h very lowe lev vnto ground Furres : this tree 

hath a thinnebarke or rinde., which; hor regions \ will chop and rende it ſelfe into manie 
cranies or peeces ;z outof which tifts iſſuerh a certaine orliquor, much like vnto Franken- 
cenſe;the leaues are very ſmall,narrow,and hard,and fomwharprickly, growing cuer greenalon 
the branches thicke rogither : among which come foorth rounde and ſmall berries , e at | 
firſt, bur aftzrwarde blacke declining to blewneſle, ofa goyaſauour, and fweere in taſte, which do 
waxeſomewhartbirter,after they be dry and withered. 
2 ThegreatIuniper tree commeth now andthen to the height of the Cypres a a greater 
and harderleafe,and alſo with neem pcm IL , of an cxcec- 
ding faire blew om of an excellent 


t Innipers 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1139 
1 Juniper. | 2 Juniperus MAXIM, | 
The luniper tree, Mo he great luniper txCe, 


EE / a SIC >> 


= KIERD 
= SDN 


Toa Gn Dy nEg DF 
HDD UL WAS. 


ww =r *1d RY 
b . Gu», 
mg” : © 'S > Lt 


ts 4 .=W. 


Lg at 


+7/e lace. | + 

The common luniper tree is found in very BY places eſpecially inthe ſourh parts! offoatind. / 

Bellonixes reporteth,that the greater grawet? vpon mount Laurus: Llo;fime i Angarliare wrireth — 
thatitis found on the ſea ſhores of the Ligaſfici maris + Adriatic, and ax 1trica , bringing foorth 
great berries: avd others fay that it groweth im Provence of France: ic commeth vp for the molt 
patt in rough places andnecte to the lca,as Divſcor tdes noterh; 

% T hetime. | 

The Iuniper tree flow thi in May; the. flower whereof is nothing «tf, but as itwere a little yello- 
wiſh duſt or powder ſtrowed vponcheboughes, The friuris ripe in September, and fcldome found 
cither winter or ſormmer without ripe and vnripe berrigs,and all ar oe time. | | 

.  *% Thenanes. | TY 

The luniper tree is called in Greeke#:44«: the Apothecaries keepe the Latinename taniperis : 
the Arabilns call ic Arcane and Archencas: the ltalians Gnepro: in high Durch Wa : 
- Spaniſh Enebro,G, nebyo, and Zimbro : the French men and baſe Almaines Genenre : in Engli 

uniper tree. 

Thelefleris named in Greek &:r44&:' ih Latine faniperms The brow luniper trec is calcd in 
Greek waewys 525: in Latin (by C Obelixs) Iuniperus maxemin Wyricm carmica baceaby realonpt the 
colour of the berries ,and may becalled in Engliſh bleiv luniper. The þerrics are called Grand tunt- 
pert, in Gteeke 44%, alrhough the tree ir {elfe allo is oftetitimes calledby the ſame name «is: ;it 
isrermed inhigh Dutch Brooeepect, UWeckholterbeer ; inlgwe Durc ! Gcneviebelien: ;n TE -_ 
niſh N eurinas tin Engliſh Ton iper berties. 

The gum of the Iuniper rree is viually, called of he Apothecaries Fernix : in Laine Lachr yn 
Tunips pers: Sex apto nameth it'Sandaras atid Sanderacha; butihere is ahorher Sa ndarachs 
Cache a kinde of Orpment, which groweth.inthe lame minerals whercin Orpr 
andthis doth far differ ftom Yerynx, orthe luni per guiv. Phzjein his 11, bogke 7-6 chapter er make ot 
mentionalſoof another Senderachs , which.is called Erithace and Ceranthu: di.is 
beexwhileſt rey beabouttheirworke; $1:k et 0 a 

OS Rk 66 #46 


119590. © THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


| 18 | # The temper ature. | 
luniperis hot and drie, andrthat in the third degree, as Gafemteacheth ; the berries are alſo hor 
but notalrogither ſo driezthe gum is hot and driein the firſt degree,as the Arabians write, c 
TILE ! | *% Thevertues, | | 
A Thefruitofthe luniper tree doth clenſerhe liuer and kidnezjes, as Ge/en teſtifieth: it alſo maketh 
thin clammie and grofle humours :itis ved in counterpoyſons and otherholſome medicines : be. 
ing ouer largely taken ir cauſeth gripings and gnawings intheſtomacke, and maketh the head hor: 
' irneither bindeth nor looſech the ly prouoketh vrine, | : +bg 
B Dioſeoridesreporteth, thar this being drunke is a remedie/againſt the infirmities of the cheſt, 


[4 


Wy SS with the diſcaſecalled the mother, _ | m_ i with 


C Iris moſtcerrainethatthe decoRion of theſe berries is ſing ood againſt an old cough, and 


againſt that with which children are now andthen extr troubled, called the Chin cough, in 
which they vieto raiſe vp taw,toughandclammic humors,rhar haue manytimes blood mixed with 
them. | 18: £5, 0" | OY | 

Diucrs in Bohemia do take in ſtead of other drinke, the water wherein theſe berries haue becne 
ſteeped who liue inwoonderfull good health. | ts : | 

E Thisis alſo drunke'againſt poyfons and peſtilent feuers, and itis not vnpleaſant inthe drinking: 
when the firſt water is almolt ſpent chevelleſ is againe filled yp with freſh, $- 

F Theſ{mokeof the leaues and wood driueth away ſcrpents,andall infefon and corruption of the | 
aire, which bring the plague, or ſuchlike contagious diſeaſes: the iuice of the leaucs is laide on 
with wine,and alſo drunke againſt the bjtings of * viper, 

G' The aſhes of the burned barke, being applied with water, taketh away ſcurffe and filch of the 
skinne, 4118s of "SI BA | } 

H The powder of thewoode being inwardly taken,is pernicious and deadly, as Djoſcer ides vulgar 
copies do affirme z but the true copies vtrerly deny ir,neicher do any ofthe old writers affirmeir. 

I Thefume or ſmoke of the gum doth ſtay legrpatike humours thatdiſtill our of the head , and 
ſtopperh rhe rheume: thegum concocteth rawe and flegmatike humours that ſticke in the ſtomack 
and guts,if the ſame be inwardly taken and alfo dtunke, | | 

K Itkillerh al maner of werms in the belly jt ſtaicth the menſes, and hemorrhoides:it is commended 
alſo againſt ſpitting of bloudz ir drieth hollow vicers,and fillech them with fleſh;jifir be caſt theron: 

_ being mixed with ole of Roſes,jr healeth chops inthe hands and feete. | 

L There is made of this & of ofle of Lineſced,mixed rogither;a liquor called Verniſh, which is vſcd 
robeauttfic piftures, and paitted tables with, andro makeiran gliſter, &todefendir from the ruſt, 


o 


Of the prickly Cedar,or Cedar Funiper. Chap.54- 
He prickly Cedar tree is like to Juniper, andis called the ſmallor little Cedar, for difference 
-X from the great and tall, Cedar, which bringeth Coneszandof this there arc two kinds,as 7 hee- 
 phraſtu nd Plinydoteſtifie,that is to fay,one of Lycia,and anorher crimſon. 


| — | |*Thedeſeridtion, | _ ; 
| prickly Ce r, lcemeth to be very like to the Ipniper tree, in bodice and 
boughes,which are writhedknortic,and parted intoivery many wings:the ſubſtance of the 
wood is red , and fweete of ſmell likethat of the Cypres z the trec is coucred ouer with 
a rugged barke ; the leaues be narrow and ſirpqpoineed, harder {12 zoſe of Iuniper, (harper, 
and more pricking,and ſtanding thhner von the branches : the fruit orberric is ſomrunes as bigge 
asa haſell nut,or as Theophyaſtus ſaith,pt the bignes of Myrtle berries, and being ripe itis of a red- 
 diſkyellow ar crimſon c@lour, ſweere of ſmell, and ſo pleaſant in taſte, as cuen the counticy men 
nowand then docate of e fame withbread, + SI Vol wed Pra PE” 
2 Theother lowe Cedar which groweth in LyGa, is not ſo-high as the former, ha i likewiſc 2 
writhed body as big as 4. mans arme , full of bobghes; the|barke is. rough, yellowith without, 
andred within: the leaues ſtand thicker,like at the firſt to thoſe he Fs yet ſomewhat ſhore 
ter, and in the thirde or fqurth yeere thicker,long;and rounde withall, comming neere to the _ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS,'!17 1191 
ofthe Cypres tree,orof the ſecond Sauine,thar is, blunt & not pricking at all; » which being bruſed 
between the fingers do yeeld a very 6 pre ſmell: ſo dothoue &the lelfe fame plant bring foorth 
below ſharpe and prickly leaues and abouethicke and bluntones; as that norablc learned Herba- 
ciſt C/aſjws hath moſtdiligently obſcrued:the truite or berric hecrofis roundlike that of Iuniper, of 
colour yellow when it is ripe gnchining 2 aredzin taſte ſomwhat daver bur fend of fmell. 


1: Oxycedrus Phonics. 2 Os apurdhan Mr 
| Crimſon or prickly Cedar, 


| Rough Fodngeis 


I 


_— 

The prickly Cedar wich the __ Tags oe hr avkighs = hotwes certaine \placesbf 
raly, Spaine, and Aſia, andin other countries : for that which growerh on mount Garganus in 
Apuliais much higher, and broader then thoſethat growelſcwhere,and bringeth foorth greater 
berries,ofthe bignes afan Haſell Nut,andfweetet,as thatrmofſtdil; it 9 corre xeportethz 

—_ bu ſhewerh thatthe prickly Cedat and the Iuniper tree be of fo great a growth in-diuers pla- 
ces of Spaine which he hath obſetued,as tharthe body of themis as thicke as a man, 

| The Lycian Cedaris found inProuence ofFrance,not Fafa ETON ure: wx a great 
part of Greece,in Shall bg and —_— 

vlht 4 SEP h- > Shoravs,\ £24 ; 
& Bothof thern ie gti tticdyraena hpdactanetl 
foorth berries,as. when new Come in ſpring growe vp newe 
budsand beginnings enuoiagtaotanfePogs ret otje a3 dochebenics of 


Ingen: ae | | 
15 * Themames./ f #9912 223] 
Thayare calladin Lane Adveres and Humyes Cedri, inde an jone Cedars, fr cen 
fromcherall andgreat Cedarwhich bearerh Cones: 
The former is named in Greckitiu4255; and Kiley cunabs icLatin Colt anieait 
Engliſh Prickly Cedar,and Crimſon Cedar: 73 ann” 
a” 


Acenacr.manc Li. 


vs, ft 
vb 44" * 


- T IE THIRD BOOKE. or THE 


the fruit :the Spaniards call this alſo. Encbro,as Clyfiuteſtifiech, even by the ſame name which they 
CF luniper z whexein likewiſe they atc ro imjirare divers of the olde writers, who 
di Ing I the Iyniper from | Cedar, bur have, as Theophr aft writeth, 

i&rrees 3 yer Ceflar with an addition #07 prieklie Cedar. 
1r leate is riamed by Theophraſtus nijn niders: of Plenieallo Lycia Cedrws:in 
 Prouenceof Fraunce AMarutinc : divers name this Sab;za, and vicit in ſtead of Sauine, which they 
want, asthe Apothecarigs of Epidaturkg, and in divers cities of re £90 andalſoin Ulyricum ang 
izth.Some would hauc itto be 8,7 hys ; Thyz according to T heophrg. 
d w=_- and boughes, | bur in fruit alſorothe Cypreſle tree: bur the fruir 


edat 6 ed ''T beopbraſims wdie, Cedrie: nowwithſtanding Cedrws, ashe 
* (Gazanamer it Creduls ) is a cotryine lictle yubypbich nevergrowerh 


Tor lqvat; aid Mb oqnh ofthe Cog ao calledonis adi 


ncedetboee . | 
"it th] temperature and vertges. 
A The ls Cedar, as 's 4 is hotand drieinamanerin the te, the marter or 
ſubſtancerhercof i is ſeycete of ſmell like tharof luniper; andis ved for pris andoderiferons 
B The berries or fruit of bes bf kane ht faculticendets rang as the ſame authorrteſti- 
fierh,in fo muchas thar they ſo bi _—__— if RR en t0O cadet 
ach,andbreede hearea by L ingsin | re weene thele two 
Cedarberries ; for the c1 rimſc ics Bao bbc and drie, by re are ſweeter and plea- 
fanterto the raſte, andthe eypre becerzobe and doe alſo yeelde vnto the bodica 
| Linde ofuoithonige > t | fer ly: wee: ting, horter' drier alſo than thoſe 
of Iuniper which th pecia in the bi ici brin 
all; and hough ama exe never ſo ewof here ſhall kak 
in bis 
C | Thepeaſantsdo feede thereon, rather to fariche their h than forany delight they hauc in 
the raſte, or the as” v2 thereof 3 albcir PIR rr A and proucke 
VIInE. 118} F | ; 
| HG |: . 


— 


| of Sauin. a ks 


18 
Y 4 : 
% x - " 
. i | ; 
+: ww 
5 
'N- 


= #3 bobinder I 
Torn: one like i in rs mſg the aherro he Cypreſle cor, 


Nile; | Thos, 
vim his ch cuhmnckenc flnonennticcmmrie gra 
"We 69> = 099 et tv 
A- 
ee met 
GE er Ei Lran ih in Hg FI bis. 114 
2 The other Sauinis high tree, as Pedhny 
the rame | he bi a rprbied,p 


rree, ants thicker or more in alias; in taſte birterzof a 
arc broader and __ ſer as it were with wings, like thoſe 


r= 94m arr foe veryroundlike 
* en 


I FR 


' PLANTS, 
2 Sabing B: VF 
«dela eager, 


HISTORTIE 


4 " 
< 
V 


\y 
WV 


\X'A\ 
*, \ 


4 & 
v 
ot 


"Dj 5 oy gee SY Es Os We : YT 
LL Wp As ULES 
| WELY / 3 IO: 


| ' A Y Ly, 15 
= aC > s No - - 
* > 1; 3a 
; 4 _ * 


*% Theplace. 

Both ofthem Py" vpon hils,in CO Hint in other like wth VER asin Candy 7 PREP 
ellewhere.'P, Bellonus reporteth that he foundthem both vpon the © tops of the mounraines ris, 
Amanus,and O!y: ympns. | 
 _ ThefrſtisplantedinourEnglich gardens almoſt exxry wheay we ſecondidpl is] 
ſcede,and the li :the ſlippes mult beſer in a ground that is meant moiſt andſhadow! 
take root: ſhrubs nhichd of theſe, rs. towards the one 
the bouy that Sauine which is r A 
ot rime bringeth foorth opens otherfor the part remaineth barren:boch che gowin/ 
ny garden, jolt T- $69. 


| Theyboch continue abjaies greenes rei nad abe lots die ripe ſuite, on 
wic3burichath fie atall mes orbeor the old bereſll mw accom. | 


% The nancy, % 
\Savineis calledin Greeke uc,or Begdv: in Latine Sabine, F- 
| _=— lledin| igh 1 eb . n low 


on:in French Saveniey : in Engliſh Sauine,.com 

=o Ita onn rCyreeſ Canton thy iwhiegs, booke 
te ,makerh mention ofa tree called Brats : ſome there ar whe —_ his robe alters Sebis 

the ſecond Sauin,and to be read Bruta,for Bye, Brathu by alt of the vowels. For its de- 

ſcribed by Pliny in his 12.booke 17,chapter tobe like the Cp erep i aan, ſecke int 

the mountaines Elmiaj the tree Brits being like to the broade Cypres tree, having white 

yeelding a ſweetc ſmell when iris ſet on fire : whereof mention is mace, with a myracle in the ſtories. 

of C Ceſar. Itis reported thatthe Parthians do viethe leaues in potions: that the ſme]lis ve- 

ric like tothat of the Cyptes tree , and that the ſmoke thereof is a remedie againſt other woods, I 

groweth beyond Ptigriipecre vntotherowne A OY Zagees: 1 "Thus tarre Plinie, : 

3 | The 


9p THE. THIRD FOOKE OF/THE 


The mountaines Elim2i arc deſctibed by Straho i in the countrey of the Aﬀſyrians nexrafter the 
mountaine pagrus abouc the Babylonians \by Profemews not far from the Perſian gulfe: therefore ir 
is hard to ſay that Bratais Sehinealtereprihe ſeconde Sauine, fecing tharſo great a diſtance of the 
place may vndoubredly cauie a difference, and thar it is norlargely bur brictely deſcribed. It ſee. 
meth that 7 bys mentioned by The aftms is more like vnto Sauine : bur - for gs much as Thy is 
like in fruire tothe Cypres tree, andnar to the frujte or berries of the little Cedars ;itis allo veric 
manifeſt,thar the ſecond Sauine i is not 7 he; neither Ytearbor, ſocallcd of the later Herbariſts jit 
is likewiſe named Sabams gems 24 4k atrocerwles, that)s the _—_ Sauine that bearethber. 
rics of a blackiſh blew colour, 

j 21 The temperature, 


Theleaues of Sauinewhich are moſt viedm meticine,arehot and dryi mthe third degree.and of 
ſubrill parts as Galen ſaith. : ; ' w*The Vertues. 


The jcaucs ot Sauincboiled i in wine and druoke, prouoketh vrine, brigger downethe men's 
with <= a draweth aw y the af <a the dradchille, and Vac hath 


iuen inmilke 
ES thoſe kinds of cxcreſcences, Sub 
with ynclean women, take them away per- 
| afher be lruecenid olde , andhauebecne much tam- 
wnto the ſame a ſinall quantitic of Auripigmentis in fige 


i Erna ethane pe Be 
niadeore corrolive. i 
Of T amarivle Chap: 47. 


I T owariſc lens bs | | es Wn! * Tamariſcw Germanica. 
| French Tpmagitee.| | AL  Gerjaaine Tamariske, 


\\ 


a | 
« . \ 
5 

SY 
* 


"W-= \ 
; R— JÞ> 


aft ?OS 
> ob ett! 


"of fs 4 5107 + 


- HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 
7 he X. The deſcription. | 
) I He firſt kinde of Tamaricke growerh like Jags 


hedge tree; couered with a reddiſh barke, 
hauing many branches ſer and bedeckt with leaues , much like vnto Heath : among 
which come foorth ſmall moſſie white lowers declining to purple, whichturne into a pap- 
pous or downie ſeede,that fliethaway with the winde,asthat of Willow 1s : the rooteis woodic as 
the rootes of other ſhrubs be and groweth diuers waies, - / oF 1» 1548 
2 The Germaine Tamatiske hath many woodie branches or ſhootes riſing fromthe roote, with 
a white barke,hauivg hisleaues thicker and grofler then the former,ahd not fo finely iapgedor cur: 
| The flowers are white,and norvnlike the former, which do tune intgfeede, thatis likewiſe caried 
away with thewinde, >! | 


| *% Theplace, ©: "9 | 4 

Tamariske groweth by running ſtreames par 9 cimes by riuers that breake foorth,, an4nor 
ſeldoime about fenny grounds, commonly in a grauely foile;for it be{t profpercth m moiſt and ſtony 
places: itis foundin Germany, Vindelicia,[raly,Spaine,andalſoin Greece, | 

The Tamarikes do alſo grow in Egypt and Syria,as Dioſcorides writeth, and likewiſe in Tylus ari 
Ilandin Arabia , as Theophraſtwmsnorcrh: the woode whereof faith he, is notweake as. with vs in 
Greece, bur ſtrong like newor,ortimber,or any other ſtrong _ Fa. crea Diofcorides doth 
call i295, that. is to ſay, tame,or planted; and ſaith thar ir bringerh foorth fruite very like to Gals,in 
: raſterough and binding. - hb ; 

Petrus Belloniws in his ſecond booke of Singularities reporteth, thathe ſawe in ryeric high 
Tamariskes and great like other trees,and that ſometimes inmoiſt places by rivers fides;and manie 
times alſo in dry and grauely grounds where no other trees did grow ; which now & then did beare 
hanging on the boughes ſuch a'multitude of Gals, thatthe inhabirants call Chermsſel, as being 
_ >den,they were ready to breake:they both grow and proſper well in my garden, 

4 | | _ "+ Tzetime. . | | 

Theſe trees orſhrubs' doflower in Maic,and in the later endof Auguſt,theirſecde is caried away 

with the winde. bY Hh (Ei | 


- 
Fi 


of * % Themames. | 

They are called in Greeke wei : andin Latine alſo Myriegand Tamdrix: in ſhops Tamariſcus : 
of OfFanine Hor at ianus Murica: Dioſeorides maketh that which growethin Greece and Iraly ro be 
<4,or wilde Tamariske: itis named in high Durch Tamariſchenholk, and jPozk 2 in low Dutch 
Jberhboom, Tamariſchboome : in Icalian Tamarigio :in Spaniſh Tamergueire,and Tamariz.: in 
French Tamari: inEngliſh Tamariske, ©.” 

4 2 t Thetemperatureandvwertues. | 

Tamariske hath aclenfingandcurting facultic with a manifeſt dryingzitis alſo ſomewhat aftrin- 
gent or binding,and by reaſon of theſe qualities itis very good for an hardefpleene, being boyled 
with vineger or wine,either the roote orleaues,or tender branches,as Gafewwriteth, 

Moreouer D/oſcorides teacheth,thar the decoction of the leaues made with wine, doth waſte the B 


ſpleene,and thatthe ſame is goodagainſt the toothach, if the mourhbe waſhed therewith: thar ir 
brin myers thementſes, if the patient ſic thereinzthar it killeth lice and nits, if the parts be ba- 
| ith. | SEL | + c 
Y Le: aſhes ofburnt Tamariske hath a drying facultie , and greatly ſcouring withall, and a lictle 
nding, | ! | 8; 
The flowers &downie ſeed of the greater Tamariske doth greatly hindezinſomuch asit cometh 71 


+. 


y neere tothe Gall,named Galla Omphacitis,but that the roughneg of taſte is more euident inthe 
he which flowers arc of an vnequall temperature, for there is joined tothe nature thereof a 
great thinnes of parts,and clenfing facultie, which the Gall hath notyas Ga/ex writerh, , * 
Theſe flowers we firly yſe faith Disſeor:des,in ſteede of Gall, in megitines forthe cies andmomh. x; 
_  Itis goodtoſtanchbloud,and to ſtaie the laskeand womens whites, it helpeththe yellow iaun- 
cnt thoſe thatare bir of the venemous ſpider called Fhalangium; the barke ſeruerth 
or tie lame — | [ | . 
wo: "doing nh 2H of Tamariske haue great power and vertue againſtthe hardnesand ſtop- p: 
Paget the ſpleene,eſpecially the leaucs being boiled in water and the decoftion drunke, orelſe in- 
ſed ina ſmall veſlell of Ale or Beere,and continually drunke: and ifit be drunke foorth of acup'or 
diſh made of the woode or timber of Tamariske,jt is of greater efficacie, LESS: 
$55 ; | | | Hhbh 4 |: of 
| £ | 


P 


THE! THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
Of Heath ;Hatber o of Linge. Chap. 48. 


4 F: % 7 helkinies.. 7m 
da Here be diuers weak ian home greater, others leffers Pore oy broad leaues, and ſome 
narrower: ſome bringing foorth h berrich,and orhers nothing bur flowers. 
_ Pumilg alba, 


1 Ericawulearii fixe Pumil . 
4 ſave warlfe Heath with white flowers, 


mon ji SR Heath. 


I. * 
lg 


< K. 
"TIS. 


55 


— 


\ 
\ N 
\ 
7 
& {N 
. \Y 
oY ol 
" 2 
OT. 
4 . 


{fy bg | # The deftriptinn | 
1 ah i is a loweplant, but yet wood and ſheubbie, {carſe a cubit high :it 
bringeth foorthimaby branches, whereupon do grow ſundry lirtle leaues ſomewhat harde 
and rough, very like ro thoſe of Tamaricke , orthe C Corelle tree: the flowers are orderly 
placedalongſtthe b | hes, ſmal! BY and of a: pres colour tending to purple, The roote is 
alſo woodie,and creepethivader the "per cruſt of the earth: . {and this is the Heat which the anct- 
ents tooke to be the right and crue He th | 


2 Theſecond Heath diffeteth not frpm the precedent, ſ; aſh that, charthis plant bringerhfoorth 
flowers as white as ſnowe;wherein| confiſteth rhe difference. 

3 IhegreatHeath, which ©.r9/s Clu/ins at his being in England foundi in the barren grounds 
about Windlore, which i in his Spaniſh travels he maketh rhe firſt kindez growerh to the height of 
rwo cubits, ſeldome higher, full of branches, conered with a blackiſh. barke: whereon are ſet in very 
good otder by couples, Guallicaues fiber than thoſe of Tamariske or Cypreſle, and ofa greeneco- 
lour, Theflowers incldſe the lirtle rwiggic branches ro ye. ee at certaine diſtances, from thc 
lower part to the top faſhioned like li lebprrles , conſiſting of fower partes, of a ſhinin purple 
colour, very beauriful rgbehqld ,and che rather robe eſteemed bicauſe it flowreth wiſe in the yecte: 
the roote is likewile'woggie, {4 

4 Ofthis kind there isangtherſorr wihwhite Licani burſeldorne ſound or ſcene, vnleſſe here 8: 
chereaplarir amongſt the other fort, which flowers are ſomewhar greater than the former, butin 
forme like,wherein the 4 irence dvthcouſilt F: 5 


| | | | 3 Eric 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 1197 
2 Ericamator flore purpurante Clusy. 4 Erica mator flore albo. | 


x The great Heath with purple flowers, Great Heath with white flowers, 


5 Erica cruciata. 6 Erica Pyramidalis. 
Croſſed Heath. Steeple Heath. . 


TOIMERTBITYTITYN ET TORE TT WH ER, 


1198 THE [THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 
| [414.4 | +Thedeſeription. | © 

5 Croſſed Heathgrowethto the height of a cubir and a halfe, full of branches, ofa fivart darke 

colour: whereon do growe{mall leaues, ſet atcertaine ſpaces by two þ you one {ide,and two onthe 

other,oppoſire, one anſwering another, euen as do the leaues of Crofle woort. Theflowers in like 

manner ſtand alongſt the bratches Croſle faſhion, of a darke ouerworne colour, The roote is 

likewiſe woodie,as is all the reſt of the plant. | 


! h- p ; 


6 This Steeple Heath hath likewiſe many woodicbranches, | arniſhed with ſmall leaves z among 


which come foorth diuers little moſſie pwers of ſmall moment. The whole buſh for the moſt part 
growethround togitherlike alittle cocke of hay; broad at che lower part, and ſharpe aboue like a 
Pyramide or ſteeple,whereof it tookehis name. | Ry 19 
7 Erica tembfolles, | | 8 Eriea tenuifolt caliculata. 
Small leaſed Heath, | Challice Heath, 


: . 


| | * The deſeription. 


7 Thisſmallor thin leafed Heath is alſo a lowe and baſe ſhrub, hauing many ſmall andſlender 

ſhootes comming from the roote, of/a teddiſh browne colour z whereupon do growe very many 

ſmall leaues, not vnlikero them of common Thyme, but much ſinaller and tenderer. The flowers 

m—_ in tufts at certaineſpaces of a purple colour. [The rooteis long, ſingle, and of awoodic ſub- 
nce.  1H.Þ x | 4 ; 


8 Chalice Heath hath alſomany woody beknchel growing from the roates,ſlender,of a reddiſh 


'Þ 


: 


browne colour,a foote anda halfe high,garniſhed with very little leaues Jefſer than thoſe of Tyme. 
The flowers growe onthetops and vpper partes of the branches, and bein number fiue , fixe or 
moc,hanging downwards,in faſhion long,hollow within like alittle tunnel;or open cup or challice, 
of alight purpliſh colour, The roote creeperh and purteth foorth-in divers places new ſprings of 
- ſhootes, #63 | Ih | | | 


"HISTORTE OF PLANTS; ' | now 


Gl gi Enich berctfers Latifolis:: 4 - 10 Erica 4 tenaifolia, 
Broad leafed Heath went ry Small eats Heath with 0 wing 


A 


| 
deſeriptiong, © | 

9 This ſtrang ina wihbs ne vp like awoo F"ZIWEN t- 
ward the nuts oh hath long flexible hes trailing this way-and that way: whereon are ct 
confuledly long leaues,narrow to ſtalke,and blunt ar thee Ad,not VIKetc ythelictle leaucs 
of Purſlaine in forme + amongwh foorth lowers which thee prauer-harthomirred in the 
hgure, and.my ſelfe haye-no - | wha thereof, bicauſc 1 haue noeſcene the ſame. The 
berries are round, ſoft; andof aTedcolour when they be ripe. The roore is long, and creepeth far 
vnder the vpper cruſt ofthe carth. 


10 Thethin leafed Heath that bringeth foorth berries, hath many weal and {lender branches 
of a reddiſh colour, which trailing yon the ground do take hold thertofi in fu iEplaces whereby 


it ris. increaſeth. The leaues are ſformwhat broad,of a thicke ay 5 Ap Ibſtance,in taſte ſorn- 
thingy at the firſt, bit afrerwardes ſomewhat ſharp and biting the ws," which come 
I. af flowers of an herbie colour, which being vaced, therefi ſmall round berries, 


= at the firſt are green,and afterwatd black, being as big as thoſe of "are ral is contained 
a pyrple ivice like that of the Mulberyzwithin thoſe berries are conrajned three cornexed 
grains: The roote is hard, and of awoodie ſubſtance; 

* 7 he place. 

Heath groweth vpon drie mountaines which are hungrie and PO) as vpon Hampſtead heath 
neere London, where all the ſortes do grow, emaphroar with we Fhite flowers, and PU 
beareth berries. 4 be 

Heath with the white flowers rowe t ho—_—_ 

"Heath which b berries ha h in HEHtth parts of 
Crodbie Rauenſwaith,aridin' Crag clofe atfoin'thefame anal 
red berries bythe gi of # learned gentleman called Maſter Jewes Thea. 


1200 THE THIRD BOOKE of THE 


| * The thme, | 
TheſkindsorloresofHeathdofor themol par flower allthe ſommer, 4 Rraron noe ag of 


September. 
'% The nave; | 


Heathiscalledin Greeke % IY :in Lathe alſo Erica: divers do falſely nameir Orice: in high 
and lowe Dutch Þetiven: in halian Eries: in Spaniſh ahem" ro:in reach Broagre : inEngliſh 


Heath, Hather,and Linge. 
] * T berhmperdenns: | 
Heath hath as Galen Git A geting facultic conſuming - vapors whe flowers and leaues are 


to be vicd, | 
' % The Vertues. | 
A Thetendertops and FIRM: faith Divſeorides, are good to aide on hebiing or ſtingings 
of any venemous beaſt: of theſe flowers the Bees do gather bad hony. 
B Th PAT 1 2001 forgndindhelamecalestha Tamariske is vicd, 


] 


'* Heat " for C bo 49. 


Hiericontes ſcar. 
he Heath Roſe of lerico dried, 


" xi the : Roſl a> © 
hat hath beene written of, 


| this plant : what 
binds tape en P ded 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 120% 


nico; them thereroTknbwenot: burthus much ofmy owneknowledge , it hath neither ſhape, 
nature,norfacultic agreeing withany Roſe z the whichdoubcleſſe isa kinde of Heath, as thebarren 
ſoile,and thatamong > Hearh doth euidently ſhewe;asalſorhe Heathie matter vv herwith the whole 
plant ;gpoſlceſſed, agreeing with thekinds of Heath in very notable points, Irriſeth vp out of the 
ground of the height of fower inches,or an hand breadth, compaGt or made of ſundry hard ſticks, 
(which are the ſtalkes)claſping orthurting i it ſelfe rogither; into around forme, intricately weauing 
irſelfe one ſticke ouerthwart another, like a little ner: vpon whicktwoodie ſtickes do growe leaues 
not vnlike to thoſe of the Olive tree, whichmakeththe whole plant of a round forme,and hollowe 
within ;among the leaueson the inſide grow finall moſhie flowers ofa whitiſh herbie colourgwhich 
turne intolictle ſeede,, like the ſeede of Rocker, but leſſer: the whale planet is of the lubſtaunce of 
Heath,and woodie, | 
2 Theſecond figure ſerteth foorththe dried plant,as itis broughy vnto vs from beyond the ſeas, 
which being ſet into a dith of warme water for halfe an hower,it openeth i it ſclfe in forme, as when 
itdid growe, and taken foorth vntillic ddyopanat ſhut on, i before. | 
is : T] 

It proweth i in the barren grounds of France,andother hot region «among the Heath and ſuch 

like plants: itis a ſtranger in England,yet dried wehaue them in Sree] plenty, 
2 * The _ ap F: nes 

The ſeede being ſowervin our coldeclimate, is fowen in Aprillz ut hou when itis 

rpanbingas Giri flowers nor ſecede. prog 
Fare - 1 %The names. 

This kinde of Heath iscalled Roſa Hiericontes,or Hitricho, the Rok of Ierico;of ſome the Roſe 

efTeruſalem ane alſo Roſs Mare : in Engliſh the Heath Roſe, 4 
't The temperature and vertwes. » || 

There i isnot any of the ancientnor later writers, that haue ſet down any certaintic of this a___ 

as touching the remperarure and faculties,but onely a bare picture with mn ors 


Of the Challe are, Mo 4 bs page 


rites, hn. ee Ear *%*T he eſeraptian,.. 
The Chaſte tree. Nex,or the Chaſte tree, groweth Ng the ma- 


ner of a buſhie ſhrub or hedge tree, hauing 
es,very pliant,&ecaſic ro 
be bent Ces -, ihe Willow: the 
leaues are for the moſt diuided into fiue or ſeaven 
- ſe&ionsor diuiſions, much like the leaues of Hemp, . 
&8 whereof each part long andratom ney ewe: | 
6 the Willow leafe, bur {imallet tthe Aowers do grow 
£2 5 ar the vppermoſt partsof the branches , like vnto 
$/#/."- - ſpikie. cares, cluſtering rogitherabour thel branches, © 
patter the faſhion of -2athialus his Lilac ;of x:Nghr 
/ 11 blewcolour, and veryſeete ſmell:the frujrc isſmal 


Son. 
4 
| 

F - 


oy " 
F - 
F Xe - 
. 4 
. 


A 

i 24- -- and rounde.like vnto rhe grainenorcornes &p: 

Ms 4. © per. 9101 "= *% be place. 

ESL AN rex growerhnatur; in Italy andother barges 

F BF? SAY BIN a pm ares Pt IB IT 
PEER)! growing in my garden. 


ol 


*” "NF \ '# bp X* The time. | 
| Ys Py Y - rieebeginnethe recur i aſt leaves in ai, 
_ — —— Augult »þ3: 8 hiv 


. As 1.2%; Pi. 
SA The Giecians call qhisſhrub Hyrand»dx bi- 
VU WIA eauſeſairh Plinie in his 24. booke 9,chapter,thema- 
"| mrones:; T heſmophorys Cthenienſiun, deliros: to 
keepe themfſclues chaſte do laic thie leaves in their 
beddes vnder them; 7 Latines NAME. \it Fiex; 


and 


E202. THE THIRD BOOKE/ _ THE 


and of divers it is termed/as we finde among the baſtard and counterſer names <+: in Latine $4. 
tx marina,ot Salix Amerineand Piper CAgreſt ee in bigh Dutch Schaffmulie , Keuſchbaum: *in 
low Dutch,and alſo of the Apothecaries _Ugnm reſtus :the Italians Y7rice, Agno caſts: in Spaniſh 
Gattlorafto: in Engliſh Chalte Tree , Hempe Tree,and of divers gms caſt we. 
+ The tempr rature. 

The leaves and fuire of Agmas cf arc hot and dry inthe third cages they are of very thinne 

parts,and waſte or conſugne frinde. | [1 
ih 4 =” The vherewes. 

A <A ſomus caſt us isa ſingy nedicheand remedic for ſuch as woulde willin live chaſte, for ic 
withiadedt all vncleannes,or deſire to the fleſh,conſuming and drying vp the ſeede of generati. 
on,in what ſort ſocuer jt be raken,whether in powder m_—_ the decoRtion drunke,or whether the 
leaues be caried about the body for whichcauſe 4 was rom Caſts, _ chaſte, cleane, and 


pure. 

B Theſecdeof Agumei fl avdrunken, drioth away and diſoluech al windineſſe of theſtomacke, 
openeth and curerh the toppings of the liver andf{pleene ; and in the beginning of dropfies, it is 
good to be drunke inwine inthe quantitic of a dram, | 

C Theleaues ſtampedwith burrer, diffolue and aflivage theſwellings of the genitories and cods, 
being applied thereto, | | 

D ThedecoQion of the: herbe and ſeede i is good againſt paine and ;inflamwations about the ma. 
trix,if women be cauſed to ſit and bathe their priuy parts therein: the ſeed being drunkwith Penny. 
roial bringeth downe the menſes,as it doth alſo bortvin a fume and in a peſfary : in a Pultisir cureth 
rhe headach, thephrenetike,and thoſe that haue the A's; are woontto be bathed heerewith, 
olle and vineger being added thereto, | 

E Thelcaues viedina feineaand; alſo ſtrowed, drive away feqentzzan bling laide on do cure theic 
bitings. 

F Theſeede laide on with water doth heale the clifes ortiftsof the fundament; with the leaues ic 
is aremedie for lims out of ioint,and for woundecs . 

G lIrisreportedthatif ſich as iourney or tranell docarry whh thema branchor rod of Agums (4: 

fin their hand, t willkeepe then from merry pAls,and wearines: wy 122 | 


4 
E.- 
= IF 


; 


ein Tre Oh (8: : | 


| * Thekindes. 
Tix divers dof WillonesLontaed vnder rvecte Ouirge Sallow theRoſe 
Willow, ed ji Pg bh a Wi IG 
4-1 % 
1188 | | Thedeferiprion. | 
I" He common Willowis anhightiee,vith ofa meane thj 
4 as orhercrees doifitbe not toppedin the beginnin R_—_ ; isp 
- 7 of is ſmooth, tough, and) le;zthewoode is white,tough, and! 
Ives x long Jes a oon then Gf ſie Peaghthes. 2mewh: 
fideand({lipperie, and on theneather fide ſofter and whiter: the boughes 
purpleorelfe with awhite | AT bes 
of all foorth beinglorgrnparctly andegubiyeunc ing ite and {c _— Ca podaniy 
i: The eff lingerh th of che head which ſtanderh ſomewhat | ſlender wandes pigs 
Ti ft oO w Mt or ew1g 
with a reddiſi or greenebarke,good to make baskers and deal of; it is planted by 
s or rods being thruſt evidobath che vpper pa us, #6 5 is cut 
cf harwichvelhe hair mer hem hom whe | 2p 
which being oftentiniescut,the head waxeth greater; many apoio wandes of 
thehi Eee eradiafndite Dies hd A oe bandes 
mans Ea Ont TOP commonly for bandes, 
wherewi taper AY 


ie HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | 1203 
ET | | 2 Salix aquatica. . 

The common Willow, | e-.. Oziar,or water Willow, 
— 


= % 1F ” F 
- ww 4 


, ' x , | | ; Ry . 
wr Salix Ca prea rotwndifolia.” © 
The Goarte round leafed Willow. 


— I 


7 
- 
\ 

* BF 

Ae 1 
GH, 
4 


% 
TP 4% 
_ 
(A 
>: 
ey OO 
- 
4 


S 
F 
. 


® s # 
1- Is 
- 


1204 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
The Sallowetree or Goates Willow,groweth toa tree of ameane bignes the trunke or body is 
foft and hollow timber,couered with a whitiſh rough barke: the branches are ſer with leaues ſome. 
what rough,greene about, and hoatic 'vnderneath ; among which come foorth rounde catkinsor 


by 


aglersthatturne into downe,which is caried away with the winde. 


4 This other Sallowetree giffererh nor from the precedent, butin this one point, (that is to ſay) 


_ theleaues are greater,andeuery part of the tree, wherein is the difference. 


5 Salix Reſea _Anelica. | | | | 
The EngliſhRote Willow. | | * The deſcription. - ; . 
3 NH = -\5 The Roſe Willow groweth yp likewiſe to 
fl ' k/l,s | theheight andbigneſle of afhrubbie tree; the 
| body wheteof is couered with a feabbed rough 
| barke: the branches: aremany ,-whereupon do 
_ | growe vety many wignala reddiſh colour, gar. 
7 ' | niſhed with ſmallo leaues, formwhat whitiſh: 
among which come oorth: lutle flowers, or ra- 
ther amukiplication of leaues, ioined togither 
in formevt aRoſe, of a greeniſh white colour, 
which do hot onely make a gallantſhewe, but 
| alſo yeelde a molt cooling aire in the heate of 
.| fommer,heing ſer vp in houles , for the decking 
of the ſame, IE] 
'6 The lpwe or baſe 


> Willowe, groweth but 
lowe,andicaneth weakly vpon the grounde, ha- 
ving many ſmall and narroweleaues, et vpon 
limmer and phliant branches, of a darke or bla- 
kiſh greene colour : among which come foorth 
longtends ſtems fullof moſſie flowers , which 
rurne intg alight downie ſubſtance, that flic:h 
| away with the winde. 
7 The Dwaifte Willow hath very ſmall and 
lender braunches , ſeldome times /aboue a 
tootre, but never acubire high , couered witha 
duskiſh bark, with very little and narrowleaues, 
..of a greene colour about and onthe vppetſide, 
- | but mdemeth of an hoarie orouerworne grec- 
niſh colour, in bignes andfaſhion of the leaues 
of garden Flaxe ; among which come foorth lit- 
tle duskiſh lowers, which doturne into downe 
that is carjed away withthe winde: the roote is 
[#1 -| = ſmall and threddie, of the bigneſſe of a finger, 
| at} M1 - Fo acki _ 4 = R 
There is another kinde of Willow like vnto the former , | 1 fromit in that, that the 
leaves of this kinde are fmaller and narrower, asbigge as the leauesofthe great Myrtill, hauing 
ſmallknobbie lowers of! a duskiſh colour, whichiturne into downe that ficth away with the winde: 
the roote is ſinall and limbergnot growing deepe, bur running along. vpon the vpper face of the 


4 
+ 
nf 
$5. 4 
+ 1 
F 
£ ' 
z | 
, 
K | 
- 
Y 


n 
jt 


5 EPS. 


* 
_ Jos.s: MDOH £4. - wv 


44." $58s 
. « K 
ITS: 2 ES lh AG CERT OCT 52 RAT Fr LN 


carth, | 


L 


[ bes ob $4:% 6 Salix 


yg IR TY 


'KISTORTE"OF PLA 


" a "Rs | 1205 
6 Salix humilis, 41192 7 Chameitea, ive /alix pumila. 
The lowe Willow, - | wart | 


The Dwarffe Willow, © | ol © 


% : 1 
_ 
JI IS 


e 
| 


od al j *% The place... A 
Theſe Willowes growe in divers places of Pl; the Roſe Willow groweth plentifully in 
Cambridge ſhire, by the rivers and ditches there nn Cambridge towne they growe aboundantly 
aboutthe places called Paradiſe,and Hell mouth, in the way from Cambridge to Grauncheſter :,I 
found the dwarffe Willowes growing neere to a bogge or martiſh;grounde, at the furtherend of 
Hawpſteed heath vpon the declining of the hill , inthedirch that incloſerha ſmall cortage there, 


4 
fl 


not halfc a furlong from the {aide houſe or corrage. 


| | * The time. | [2 
The Willowes do flower at the beginning of the Spring, | | 
| | *+Thenanes. {| 


The Willow tree is called in Greckeirie: in Latine Sa{ix:; in high Dutch UMepHen t in lowe 
Dutch UMilgen : in Italian Sa/zce, Salo: in French Sayx : in Spanith Salgueiro, Salzer, and Sau : 
inEngliſh Sallow, Withie,and Willow. je / RF 

The greater is called in Latine Safix pertica/is: common Withy, Willow, or Sallow, eſpecially 
that which bging often lopped ſenderh our from one head many bqughes: the kinde heereof with 
the red barkeT$ called of Theophraſtms blacke Virhic ;and the other,whire: P/anje calleth the black 
Greca,"or Greeke Withie, the red being the Greeke VVithy, faith he , is eafie tobecletr zand the 
whiter Amer ina. & 3. | | 

Theophraſtus writeth,that the Arcadians do call the lefler ,z3,not its: Plinie alſo nameth this 
Melice : both of them do make this tobe Salzets rertia ſpecres, the third kinde of Sallow ; the ſame is 
likewiſe calledin Latine $Sz/:x pumila, Salix viminels Gallic Salix and by Columclls Sabine, which 
he faich,that many do terme _AUmerina: in high Dutch Kleyn UTevben:t in low Dutch UWtimen; 
in Engliſh Ofter,{mall Withic, Twigge Withne: Petr Creſcentiou nameth it Yincwus. | ' | 
7 ET. hl 1 note The temperature. | | (Mons | 
}Ths leaues, flowers, ſeede, and barke of Willowes, arecold anddry in the ſecond degree, and 

ingent, | | i $4735 
| , Hit | % The 


1206 THE THIRD B@OKE OF THE 


| '*>Thevertues, {| 
A Theleaues and barke ofWithicas Willowes do ſtay the ſpitting of bloud, and a other fluxe of 
bloud whatſoeuer,in man or woman, if the ſaide leaues and barke be boiled in wine and drunke, 
B Thegreene boughes with the leaues may very well be brought into chambers,and ſet about the 
beds of thoſe thar be (icke of agues; ; for they do mightlycooh the heatec of the aire, which thing 
is a woonderfull refteſhing to the icke patients. | 
C Thebarkes have like vert $ : Dioſeorjdes wrireth,that cheſdbeing burnt ro aſhes ,and ſiceped i in 
vinegar,take away cornes and other bke riſings in the feete and tocs : diuers faith Galen, do {lit the 
DE whiles the Withic is in flowrin ,and gather acertain juice, with whichthey vſeto take away 
| that hinder the ſight, and Ws is when "Y are conſtrained to viea  clening medicine, of 
china and ub part, [Tit 4 Y | i 


'9 ted la tree. Op 52. 
| 118 | '* The hinder, | 
There bermo forts coli ceaghe rae and the wilde. 


r Oleſatine, | | | 2 Obes frlngftra,, 
3% Oljch tree 1 | | The wilde Oliue rree. 


Il... | x 5 «The deſe bription. | 
He tame or wandldd Oliue rree,pro werhhiph and grep; t,with ai itiches; full of long 
owes , 


ef 
z 


narrow leaues, not mich vnlike The the «nes Wil bur narrower and ſmaller : the 
flowers bewhice and very ſmall ,prowing vpon cluſters©r bunches : the froite 5 long and 


COME KD is an hard ſong: from wich fruire is Prrnes char liquor which we call oile Oline. 
| 2 T 1E 


HISTORIE OF BEANTE |" wy 
2  Thewilde Oliue is like;vnto the tame or garden Oliue tree, ſaving that the leaues are fome- 
gwhich.grow many prickly thornes:the fruite heereof is lefler then of the ſor- 


mer,and mo in number, which dothfeldome cometo:maturitic or ripgncs, mſomuch that the oile. 
whichis made of thoſe berries,continuerh cuer greene , andiscalled gjle Omphacine, or vile of vn- 


ripe Olives. 
| The ple. — 
Boch the tame andthe wilde Olive trees grow in very many places of taly, femmes, and Spane, 
and alſo in the Lands adioining: they are reported to loue the ſea coaſts;for moſt45 thinke as Cots: 
mella wriceth, thar abone's6;miles from the ſea,they either drie, or Me bring foortlino fruire : bur 
te beſfnttheyrhardo Yeeldrhe Mercrerey oile xrethoſc chat gfow nghe lle called Candy, 
*% The time, 's 
" AtteOjnerca flower inthemoneth of Iune: the fave is gathered- m Noderiler orDe- 
ceipber when they be-xliedle dried S&beginto wrinkle,theyate| purintothe prefſe,and our af them 
is ſ{re@oile with watetandedin the fireſſing: the Qliueswhich are: tobe NOT in {att and 
gorys gory be LIITN before ne oo ripe,and whileſt they "Are g F ; | 
yy The names, * Po nl 


_— 


Oliues IM in brinle 6 picklefre called colitis = [1 l 

The wilde Oline trees named in Greeke Xo2amaic :in Latine Oles (ylue 
AEthiopica: in Darch wald Delbaum: in Tralian 0/40 /aluatico :in 
butheyro : in French Oltujer eangy* in Engliſh wilde Oliue tree, 

*% The temperature and vertwes.. | 

The Olives which be fori pe,as oh citherthey fall off themſclues, br be ready tofall f whith are A 
named in Greek fovnr: Al)be moderately hot and moiſt,yetbcin 'S Ge T4 yeelde tothe PR little 
nouriſhment; - - © 

The vnripe Oliues aredry and binding, 

Thoſe thar are preſeruedin pickle, called Colmbater, do dry vp LD anh moiſture ofthe - 
ſtomacke,they remoovethe lothing ofmearte, ſtirre vp an appetite z bur there i is no nouriſhment at 
all that is to-be lookedforin them,mnch lefle good nouriſhment...) . 

The branchesleaues.,aiid tefider buds of the Oliue trees do coole dry; andbinde, and eſpecially D 
of the wilde Oliue:fortheybe of greater force then thoſe of the rame, therefore by realon they be 
milder,they are beter for cie Mr icines,which hauc necd of binding things to be mixed with then, 

The ſame doe ſtaie Sairlt Anthonies fire, theſhingles, epinyCides, night wheales, carbuncles, E 
andeating vicers:beinglajd on with hony,they take away eſchares,clenſe foule and filthic vicers,g 
quench che heate of hot ſwellings,and be good forkernels in the fanks:they heale and «kin wounds 
mthehead,and being chewed theyare a remedy for vicers in the mouth. 

The iuice-and decoRidgnalſo arc of the ſame effe : the juice doth oer and beſides ſtaic al ma- F 
ner of blecdings and alſothe whites. 

The iuice is preſied foprth of the ſtamped leaues,with wine addel tre (which is better) or G 
with waterzand being dried in the ſunneitis made vp into little cakes like perfumes. 

The fweate or Oile which ifluerh foorth of rhe woode whikeſt it is in buroing : mat tetters, U 
ſcurfs,and ſcabs, if they be annointed therewith, 

The ſame which is prefled foorth trom the vnripe Olines, is as <dlde as it is binding. T-- 

Theoldoile which1s made of feet andripe olives being kept long, doth withal! kecome hotter K 
andis of greaterorce to digeſt and waſte away; and that oile which was made of the ynripe Oline 
being olde; doth as yetreraine ſome part of his former aſtriftion angi is of a mixr faculne , rhat3; ro 
lay,partly binding,and partly digeſtingzfor it hath got this cigeſting orconfuming faculrie dy age, 
anc the other propertie of binding,ofhis owne nate. 

The oile of ripe Olives mollifieth and aſlwageth pane, diſolnerh tumours or ſwellings,is good L 
for the ſtiffeneſle of the ivints , and againſt crawpes , cſpecially' ng mingled according to Art 
with good and wholeſome herbes , appropriate vnto 7 diſeaſes and griefes, as Hiper: cor , 

iis || Cammon:!l, 


| 


is $ "INOS Oh 
aniſh Re, Cres 


1208 THE THIRD BOOKE//OR THE 


CammomillDill, Alec! Roe, Jan rpany' naw _ vrwywrry evans his'vertties, - 
14 Theoile of vnripe Olives, called cinum Oleum, y 4 0 PR f | 
ruwmnours,and — | Dj Hh pq bo we @utn 0067 w. , 


[ 
; q; hi x ? $A, 


0fP, P; rinet, or Prin Prin, . Oo Pl 


Liguſtrum. |. wh 4 bps PEEL O 
Peer, OT ePrimPre > 4:4 | | 1% YT i FRO q 
Mee es ” . \Rineni $a ſhrub ing hke an hedge tree 
| SS. Puck ches _ twigs wherof be ſtraight, 
þ $7 EP Þ +l couered wi gliſtering leaves of a 

AN KN 22  ,..'/--; deep greencolor,like-choſe of Peruincle, butyer 
Jonger, greater alſo; by the leaues of the Ole 


1 art; 13 


KN Oo - ; "of [free :the flowers be regfweere of ſmell, veric 
ns Zo = S. | little, growingin clu ters : : which being vaded, 
/S SF Ng J RY; # . |. there on A ues _—_ at the firſt 
DAS _,. greeneand w y acke like alittle 
D Wz Za DO” _ | cluſterof grapes, whi h yeelde a crimſon hay 
= D WA = > : : hekaooonps euery way aſlope.. 
LAN = I; Zi- NZJ | 26 indo labac 
_ WW — RA NSF es xy woode,gndhedge umes of our London gar- 
OE bz, » \ \ _ > dens: it is not foundein the countrey.of Polo. 
«* > Dmn_— ? A L J k c\ 


. Ws: Parrs accent, 


CJ BY 


\ 


My 
W ES Ms _ DF | | [- | e Lime. 
Vs i, ARE hos of Mic, orinIme:the 
RN Sd /; 1 are.ripe in mne_and aboutwinter, | 
which nowe and then continue all the-winter 
Jong,bur inthe meanetime the leaues fall awaic, 
and i inthe ſprings newe come vp in their places, 


. Iris called in y Sew qe IG in Italian at 

this day Gwiſtrico, by a corrupt worde drawne 

from Lignſtrim: it is the Grecians enougee, and in 

| no wiſewe:for Cyprus is aſhrubthar groweth 

| = naturally in the caſt,and Priverin the welt, They 

be very ke one vnto another.as the 7 "PE do declare,bur yerin this they differ,as witneſſeth 

Bellonixs, bicauſe the leayics ot Priuet do fall awayin' winter ,,and the leaves of Cyprus are alwaics 

| greene: moreouer the leauesof Of: rus ves make the haire red as Dioſcorides ſaith ,and as Bellonius 
reporteth,do giue a yellow colour ; ut the leaves of Priueth! no vie at all in dying; And there- 

fore Plinie in his 24.books 1 a.chap.wag deceiued in that he iudged Priuet ro be the { oe ſame tree, 
which Cyprus is in the Eaſt which thing notwithſtanding he did not write as he himſelfe thought, 

bur as other men {uppoſe:for in his i 2.booke 14.chap, he writeth thus : Some ſaith heafhrme this 

(thar is to ſay Cyprus)to} bethar tree which is called in Italy Zignſtrum zand that Liguſtrwhot Pri: 

uer,is that 4 which the Greciang ca]l o-»4-:2,the deſcriptiqn doth declare. - |: .. | 

Phil yrea,faith Dyeſcorides j is atrec like in bignes x0 Cyprus, with leaues blackerarid broader then 
thoſe of the Oliue tree::it hath fruitelike ro that of the maſticke tree,blacke,ſomething ſweere, ſtan- 
ding in cluſters,and {ucha tree for all the worlde Tm 345 wc have before declated. 

Serapro the Arabian doth call Priverin his 44.chaprer Mabaleb. Thereis alſo another Mahaleb, 
which1s a graine or ſecede, of which Lex makerh mention in his 478.chaprer, thatit doth by 
his warme and comfortable heate diffolug and aſſwage paine, Serapio ſeemerh to intreat of them 
both,& to containe divers ofthe Mahafeb vnder the nile ofone chaprer: jtis namedin high Dutch 
Beinholtzlein, Bundtholtz hin oper Schullveident in low vu Keelcruyt, Fonthout: 
in French Troefne :in 2 6Y tf Dh pPrint, | "rio 


HISTORIE "OF PLANTS. : | 1209 
Some therebe that would haue the berries to be called Yaccinia and Yaceiniwm to be thar,ofwhich 
Pitrunizs hath made mention in his 7.booke of ArchiteQpre,or the Att of building 14.chaprter,of 
lecolours: after the ſame maner;, faith he; rhey temper Yecc/mmm and purting milke vnto ir,do 
make a gallant purple: in fuch breuitie of the olde writers,what can be certainly determined ? 
| * The terperature. | | 
The leaues and fruite of Priuer are colde, dry,and aſtringenr. | 
| * The vertues. 

The leaues of Priuerdo cure the fwellings,apoſtemations, and vicers of the mouth and throare, A 
being gargarized with the juice and decoction thereof , and therefore they be excellent good tobe 
put into mm .op waſh the ſecrex parts,and the ſcaldings with women, cankers and ſores in chil- 
drens mourns. | | | LE 

The berries are apleaſantmeare in winter for owſels,thruſhes,and diuers other birdes, B 


- 


| of mocke Prinet. Chap.54.. 


: - Phihres anpuſfifilic. 2 philhrde lire follo. | © 
| Natroweleafed mocke Priuet. The broader leafed mocke Priver, _ 


i | 
_ j £ { 


: 
- 5 
| £ 
i 
F 
\ 


| * The deſcription. 


F FNYprus is akindeofPriuet,and is called (ate nameall the forts or kindes thereof 

 ,doreraine, though for diſtin@ipn fake they paſle vnder ſundry titles :this plant groweth 

| likean hedge tree, ſometimes as bigge asa  qrnektamgins rf beſer with flerder twig- 
gie boughes | which are'garniſhed widheaues, growing by couples , very like the leaues, of rl 

Olive tree,but broader,fotter,and of a green colour : from the boſomes of theſe leanes come foorth 

great bunches gf ſmall white flowers, of a pleaſant ſweete ſmell, which being vaded there ſucceed 

Cluſters ofblacke bercies,very like the berries of the Elder tree. | 
i Liii 3 | 2 The 


1219 THE THIRD BO OKE” OF THE 


| | { * The d:ſerie | | | | 
2 Theſecond Cyprus « called alſo F bithrea — is very like / 7” Wind in body, branches, 
leaues,flowers, and truite: aud the difference is ore the leaues of "Y plant arc broader but in 
—_ they are like. | | BY þ | 


: 
, f 
5 4 % 

þ z 
{ ; ? 
j A E ; 4 


\ Philloes ſerrata2.C bbs. | | 
” The ſecond go thed Pruve a ofChſm deſcrip; 1.7 EL EW 
| | This kinde of Pruer, nſcth wp > like an hedge 
Bluſh of the height of five or ſixe I the bran- 
ches arc long , fragile qrbrittle , couercd with a 
whitiſh barke : whereon areſer ſeaves ſomewhat 
' broad, iagged on the eqges like the teeth of a ſaw, 
andof a deepe greene cglour: among which come 
forth the flowers, which neither my author nor my 
ſelfe haue (cence: the bertics grow vpon ſmall foot- 
ſtalkes, for the moſt parrthree togither, being 
round, &ofthe bi gnes of pepper graines, or Mir. 
rill berries ,ofa blacke colour when they be ripe. 
 _ *7he 
| Theſeplants do Bt aorta neerethe citic 
Aſcalon, and were tound by our induſtrious Peyg, 
in the mountaines neere Narbone, and Monepel- 
lier in France : the Iplanted inche garden 
at Barne Elmes neere London , belonging to the 
righr Honomble the Earle of Eſſex; 3Ihaue them 
growing in my garden likewiſe. 
I | * The tame. 
| The leaves ſhoote foorth in the firſt of the 
ſpring : the flowers ſhewe themſclues in Maie and 
Jube: the fruite is ripe in September. 
*% The names. 
| This Privet is called in Greeke waes:and in 
Latine alſo Cyprme , ard may be named in Engliſh 
Eaſterlin Priver,and Mocke Priuet,for the reaſon 
following; are deceined who taking Flinze 
for their author,do thinke that is Ziguſtr@mn,or our 
Weſterne Priuet,as we blue Nheredl inthe former chapter: itisrhe Arabians Alkanna,or Henne: 
andis alſo calledot the Thrkes Hewve, eyen atthis preſent time. : , 
| *Thetemperature. | 
Theleaues of theſe rdes of riuer hauea binding qualirie, as Dioforevwrivth, 
*% The vertues. 
Mt Being chewed i inthe mY h theyheale the vicers thereof, and are a remedie againſt inflamant- 
ons,orhot ſwellings, | 
B Thedecodtionthereofis ood againſt burnings and ſcaldings. Hl 
C Theſame being ſtampedand ſteepedin the iuice of Mullen, and lideba, do make the haire red 
as lt ear noterh. Bellnt4s wrueth, that not ety the haire,bur alſo the neather parts of mans 
borer nailes likewiſe Arc colourcd and died a fe corn ornament Hits th 
CS, | 
D The flowers bci matndd; in vineger,anll a | 
E Thereisalfo Ka 7 thele wh os | Cyprimam, lm 
"PPE the linewes. , |! | 


& 

4 % 
f p 
13 
4 Fe 
n:-4 3 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
0 baftard Priner.” "C hap.55. 


1 Phillrea — Macaleb. | _— Macehb Geſnert. 
' Baſtard Priuet, -- | CorallPriuer. 


{SThedsery ton, (EN 
Ns Se or Mibath; is alſo ohne of he rk irxiſerh vp 1! like vnto. 
er wilikevnto the Damſon or Bullet  treeghavirſs | vprighs ſtalks 
img bra hes:whercon do grow leaues not like rothaſe oft the © Fichree of Clu- 
M00 wh cometoarth moſſic flowers,of a whitecolout, and of {weet 

ersmanyhanging vpon one ſtem hich the grauer bath omnted:aftcr which 


-» 


4 re y : i attheficſt, and blacke when they be ripe, i a little hardftone within, 


ſnerus and" Mat have ſer foorth another Macaleb , being alſo zdcchervatlacd Priver :ir 
groweth to a ſmall hedge tree, having many greenc branches, ſer with roundeleaues like thoſe of - 
the Elme tree, ſomeWharſnipt abour the edges :the Rowers arc like thoſe of the precedenttthe fruit 
i5as hard as a bead of cofall;fomewhat rounde, and of a ſhining blacke colour, which che cun ning 
French Perfumers do bee through,making thereof bracelets, chaines, and ſuch like trifing roies, 
which they ſende into Englangimearedouer with ſome odde ſweet compound orother, and heere 
a DRY our curious L UCS and gentlewomen for rare and ſtrange Pome-ambers , for -_—- tums 
OM M64 % ASA 
9998's fy * The place. 
Theſe trees do grgw in divers places of France,as about Talon ſundry other ongny 
xe ſtrangers in En gland. 


* The time. 
 Thefldwers bud; foorthi in the fpringthc fruite is ripe in Nouember and December, 
__ * The 


J 


1212 THE ; THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


| *%Thenames. | 
This baſtardPriuert is that tree which diuers ſulpeR robe har acibathes Macaleb,of which Au. 
cex writeth in his 478.chap.S which alſo Serapro ſpeaketh of out of Ateſues: bur it is an hard thing 
to affirme any certaintie therby ſeeing that pak hath deſcribed it without markes : notwithtan. 
ding this is taken to be the ſame of moſt writers, and thoſe of the beſt 3 wemaycall it jh Engliſh 
baſtard Priuet,or Corall,ot Pomandet Priuet,being without doubt a kinde thereof, 
& The temperature and vertues.” 
Concerning this baſtarde Priuer, we haue learned as yetno vic thercofin Phiſicke, The kernels 
which are found in the ſtones or fruit, as they belike in taſte torhoſe of Chetries,ſo be they alſo an. 
frerable vnto them in temperarutfe: for they ace of a temperate heate, and do proucke vrine, 
and be therefore WA il the ſtone: Inore we wat not to fie, then _ © ſpoken i in the 


deſcription, 


| 


o 4 frier? Drive Chap 56! | 


I Aiaternss pong. | [1 | 2 (_dareraemiltr. 
Fruitles Priver,' | a | The lower 1 wa taza 
"= - 3 + "| : .T = 
; EN, 


pa = 


| Thediforitin, ntl gto0 17 rod tl 


His ſhrubbie buſh, called of Plimie and Caroles Cluſhs nt i ; promethpr to a (inall 
 hedgerree, in foemelike vnto the baſtard Prinet ; butthelcaties are more like t ofe of !lex, 
or the French Oke,yer ſtiffer and more rounder then thoſe of Macaleb:among which come 
forth tufts of red flowers like thoſe of the Lentiske tree: vnder and amo ngſt the Jeaues come foorth 
the berrieslike thoſe of Lanrma Tins, in which are conteined erokemel, like vnto the Acines or 
ſtones of the Grape, |: 
2 Theſecondkindof {| is likevride ofriides kindelof Be = ow leaues,fom- 
whar ſnipt about the wn ow che _— whereof —_ _— im iecoloured _—_— 
whic 


HISTORIE/OF PLANTS. | "wang 
which being vaded,there ſucceedeth the fruite whereof _Awicen ſpeaketh , calling it by the name 
Fagaras, being a fruite in bignes and forme like thoſe in ſhops called Cocculms-rma;, and may be the 
ſame for anything that hath beene writen to the contrarie :this fruite hangeth as it were in adarke 
ah coloured skin or htske,which incloſeth a ſlender ſtiffe ſhell, like the ſhell of a nur, conered with 
athinne aridblacke filme!, wherher jt be the fruite of this plant it is not cenſured 3 notwith ſtanding 
you ſhall firide the figure heereof among the Indian fruites,by the name Fagaras. | 


Theſe plants do grow it the ſhadowie woods of France,and are ſtrangers in England, 
| A - w* Theme. z | | 
The time anfwereth the reſt of the Pritiers, | ru4a | RE: 
| * The names. j 


Alatern of pliny , is the ſame Phillyea , which Theophreſtus hath written of by the name Pþ4- 
htz,and Belbnixe allo in his firſt booke 42 chapter of his fingularities,and the Cretenſes call it Z/x- 
non: the er rnot ir : in French Daladey, and Sangin blanc: in Engliſh barten or froitleſle 
Priver :hotwithſtanding fome havie thought it to bEate fruice , which at this day is called Pagay er, 


with vs Cocculus-ind} as we haue ſaide. l 
&% T he temperature and vertues. | 


Whether the plant be vſed in medicine I catitiot as yet learne: the fiſhermen of Portingale do A 
vie to ſeeth the batke rhereof in water, with the which decoftion they catch fiſh, as alſo colour their 
ners,being very fit forthar purpoſe. { 


In Englatide we ve the fruite called Cortalans-t#djin powder , to mixe with flower, honie,and g 
crums of breadto catch fiſh with, being a nummirig, ſoporiferous ora fleeping medicihe, cauferh 


—_— 


. 


the fiſh to turne vp theirbellies,as being fencelefle for a time. 


'x 


Of the white and blew pipe Prinets. Chap.57. 


I Syringa alba, | FA 2 art 4 Carules. 
Whrne Pipe. \ | S = B [ ye Pipe. { 


# , 4 Fa. A 


ALL _ 
Gyn Y 
"> 1 Fong 


AER SSYECT, ; AN 
- > 


ANGEL 
Q JI I43<=2 
REO 


ISS 


\ 
- % 
—_ 
Y 


. 
» 
: 
"4 
, - 
L %. / 
# \ 
bl 
4 Y 
- - - 
- ” . 
” % 
C 
4X 
»:# 


LIN 


*T he 


1214 THE|THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 


{| | & Thedeſeription, | | 

I ' He white Pipe groweth like aff hedge trec, or buſhie ſhrub : fromthe roote whereof ariſe 
many ſhootes, which in ſhort/rime growe to be equall with the: olde ſtocke, whereby in 
Irtlerime i increafeth vnro infinite numbers, like the common Engliſh Prim or Priver, 
whereof doubtleſſe it is akindef we conſider cuety circumſtance, The ET are couered with 
a rugged gray barke:the timber is white, with ſome pith or ſpungie martet in the middle like Elder, 
bur lctler in quanritie, "Theſe little branches are garniſhed with lenge leaues.of the ſhape 
and bignes of Peare tree Ieaues,and very like in forme:among which comefoorth the flowers grow. 
ing in tufts, compadt of fewer ſmall leaves of a white colour, and of apleaſantſweere fmeil: bur in 
my iudgefnent they are too ſiveete,troubling and moleſting the head in very ſtrange manner. I once 
gathered the flowers,and laid them in ty chamber window,which ſmelled more ſtrongly after they 
had lien togither a few hawers, with ſuch a ponticke and vnacquainted ſavor, that they awaked me 
 fromleepe, ſo that I could not rake any reſt vnull Thad caſt themour of my chamber. When the 
flowers be vaded, thenfollowerth the fruir, which js ſmall,cutled, and as it werecompaGt of many 
lirle folds,broad towards the vpper patt,and narrow towards the ſtalke ,and blacke when itis ripe, 
wherein is contained a ſlender and long ſeede. Theroote hereof ſpreadeth it ſelfe abroad inthe 
ground,afterthe mannerof the rootes of ſuch ſhrybbie trees, ; A 
2 Theblew Pipe groweth likewiſe inmanner of z ſmal hedge tree, with many ſhoores riſing from 
the roote like the former,as our common Priuer doth,wherotit is a kinde.The branches hauc ſome 
ſmall quantitie of pith in the riddle of the wood,and are conexed with adarke black greeniſh barke 
or rinde. The leaues are frying repne and crumpled or turned vp like the briros of an har, in 
ſhape very like vnto the leaues of the Poplar tree: among which come the flowers of an exceeding 
faire blewe colour, comPa@of mahy ſmall flowers , inthe! forme of a bunchof grapes, cache 
flower is in ſhew like thoſe of: a/erian4 rubra Dodaner, conliſting of fower parts likea little ſtar, of 
an exceeding ſweete fauopr and ſmel,bur nor ſo ſtrong as the former. When theſe lowers be gone, 
there ſucc nas flat cods and ſamwhat lang,which being ripe are of a lightcolour, with a thin mem- 

brane or filme in the midſt, wherein are ſcedes almoſt fower ſquare,narrow and ruddie.. 


Ng 


: 
4 7 


3 Balan Myrepſica,fwe Glaris ungneptaria, 


The oylic Acome. | | *% Thed: ſcription. 
1-1 3 G0'ansongutttaria orcheolic Acorttis.the fruic 
of atree le Falnmidhe, of ahe. bigneſle of a Haſcll 
nut : ont of thekernell whetcof, no otherwiſe than 
our of bitter Almonds,is prefled an oilie ivice,which 
is vſed in precious oin $,as Dioſcorides faith, nei- 
ther i$ it in ourtime reieed; for the oyle hereof mix- 
ed with {weete odors, ſerueth to perfume gloves and 
other chings, | WO: Rs. L 
Theſe trees grow not wilde in England,bur Ihauc 
_ themgrowing uw wy garcenjn very greatplentie. 
| | w% Thetome 


They flower in Avcill agd May, bur as yer they 
haue not borne{any fruire jn my garden, though in 
Tralie.and Spaine their wg eb in September, 
| | % The [£2 | 


The later Phiſitions call the firſt Syringe, rather 
M1 ory;,that is to fay,a Pipe,bicauſe the and bran- 

| | {7 ©! * _ chesthereof, whenthepithis takenout, archollow 

like a Pipe. Itis alſo manyrimes ſurnamed Candids or white, or Syringa carded flore, or Pipe with a 
white flower, bicauſe it ould differ from Lillach, which is fometimes name Syriga carmea, of 
blew Pipe: in Engliſh WhitePipe, | | | [8-0 | 


c Arabians 
Bey, 


Blew Pipe,the later phifitions,as we hauc ſaid do name it wr Likes, of ſome Sings £41u- 


. feagor blew Pipe, moſt doxxpound the word Lillach; and call it Ben : Saxapio his and 


L* 
' 
is 

hd o_ 


[ 


HISTORTE OF PLANTSIHT  ( we 


Ben.is Glens onguentavia, whichthe Greciansname favs waelind, from which Lillach doth very 
much diffet: among orherdifferences ir is very apparanr,thar Liftach bringethfoorch no nat, how- 
ſocuer Marhjolus doth fallly pifture it onely a little cod, the ſeede whereof hath in it no oyle at all. 
The figure whereof we liage thought good to infert in this COLE want of 2 more convenient 
C. | | 
po, wh}. 4 The erature and vertues. | 
Concerning the vſc and faculties of theſe ſhrubs, neither we our r ſelves have found our any 
thing,nor learned ov of others. | 


Of Wilew Wayle,or Spurge Olive.” + "_—_— 


VWidow Wayle. | | * T he de ſeription. ko") 
| Idow Wayleis a ſmall ſhrubabotte two 
'N SV2i a\'s / DN NE 1%; $ \ V cubirs high. The ta]k is of a woody ſub- 
A _ fuloflirtle leaues like Priver, bur ſmaller and blac- 
VN ih Ae Bt WAG AV ker:on the ends whereof growe ſinall pale yellowe 
flowers;which bein gpaſt,chere ſucceedetha three 
FA F it was called Tr7coccos, that is, three betried Cha- 
EE '  mc/2a: theſe berries axe green at the firſtgred after- 
Wy, watd, and browne when they be withered , and 
Oliues,being of a ſharpe and biring raſte, and thar 
doth burne the mouth, as do both the leaues and 
 rinde. The rooteis hard and woodie. [- 
Itis founde in moſt Nikilled iromellel lealie, 
and Languedocke in Fraunce, in _ and delarr 
- Places. I haue itgrowing in my garden. 
11 Iris alway grecne: the ſeede is ripe in * Bt 
ER % The names. 
The Grecians call it zz«4, as though they 
- Oleago and OlcaHelias , and likewiſe Citocaciwn : 
itisalſonamedof diuers Oftuels, as Mathews Syl- 
waticuslaith: itis called in Engliſh Widow Wayle, 
| h The fruit is named if ety rior wide: In L.a- 
| tine Coca cnidis,, bit he is deceived, ſaith Dro/© 
corides chatnamerh the fruge of Cine Oliue Coir emrdiue : Anicen and Serapio call Chameles ,or 
Chamegleons or Carlines,and ſo have they confounded I Olive withiche Car- 
lines and likewiſe Thyme Spurge Flaxe. , 
' | + Thetemprrature wh al -icb 
SINPEIBOUTC. fc9 6 
TheJeaues, faith Djaſeers he beak eandcholer, ahh pils, Shred A 
ru of yp 9g 9 ed with oneof Spurge Oliue, and made vp into pils with Meade or 


* The vernes.” 


Chamelea Ara bak Tricorcos. 
ſtance, branched with many ſmaltwigs 
D ws 7 "0 Tr ho 2 corned berrie like the Tirhywales, for which cauſe 
containein them an oylie fatneſſe like thar of the 
* The 
* Thetime. 
— ſhould ay loweor ſhpre'Oliit tree : the Larines 
| quia facit viduas, 
Spurge Oliue Aezereop :| vnder which name notwithſtanding they have alſo contained both the 
Bothche leaucs and frucof as Olku Wwehave fa fad, arcoſ's burnin dar eli 
acer. They melanotinth beltybu 25 manyas be takeware | IO 


| | OMeſues 


' 1216 THE THIRD BOOKE OF. THE 

B Meſees likewiſe hathadeſcriprion of pils of theleaues of Spurge Oliue (yer S1lvizsexpounder! 
it Spurge Flaxe) butinſtead of Warmwood, he taketh the RR lubGlance of the elle =_ 
balans and Cepula Mirobalats, and maketh them'vp with Tereniabin, that istroſay, with Manna 
andſower Dates,which zhey call Tamarinds, diſlalucd in Engine water, z;and zppointeth the {ame 
leaues tobe firlt rempered with very ſtrong vineget and to be(dried. | 

C Thelepils arecommended againſtthe dropſic, for they drawe foorth wateric humors, bur th 
'  beviolenttonature:therefore we muſt yie them as little as may be. Furt hexmore.Dre{coredes addeth 

that the leaues of Spurge Oliue beaten with hony,do clenſe hie and cruited vices, , 


| 
[ 


Of Germaine Ohue Spurge. | Chap.$9. 


Spurge Flaxe,or the Dwarffe Bay. 4 |, % Thedtſcription, | 
| TY |.  T" Hedwarffe Bay mo which the Dutch men 
| - 18 cal M3creon, is.a {mall ſhrub rwo cubires 
high, [Thebranchesbe tough, limber, and 
caſic to bend, very ſoft to be cur: wheron do grow 
\ Tong leaues like thoſe of Priver, bur thicker and 
farrer. The flowers come footth before the leaues 


j 


o 
Ai | % ATP \ 
4 b > £ Big 


Ow 
\ 


= 
— 


LY 


» 


* * Þ 9 \ 
V Ly a) : " & - 

= pF »* 

TD # GG _ oy —& + - V_— F ion x 
4s * <a - © — —_ Oo _ 
F Us « . «4% 
oy 

# Tn £3 

AY £ 
» 


\ 


Y; 
va; 


© 
pe w. F 
— hy þ 
A # 


prin of a moſt 
mell; afrer comErhe 


our g, which we call Meluin,in 
Polande, | whence I have had great plentic 
thereof tor my garden, here they flower,flouriſh 


and bring their fruit to maturitie, 
-\. Ir flowreth in the firſt of the ſpring : the (ruitis 
tipein Auguſt. q- 

| | *% The names. 


| Ids avi - Itis commonly called in high Dutch 5cllant, 
nA nn 1 4.» » Setdelbaſti; Lenſzkraut,/and Kelierhals : the. 
Apothecaries of our countric name it Mezereon, but we had rather call irChameles Ger) anica : in 
Engliſh Dutch Mezerepn,or it may be called Getmaine Oline Spurge. VVe hauc heard,thardivers 
Italians do name the fruit thereot Piper Monteanum, Mountaine Pepper,” Some fay that Zreole of 
Spurge Laurel! is this plant, but there is another 4wreota; of which we will hercafter intreate of: 
bur by what nawei is called of the old writers and whether theyknew itornogt is hard torell, It is 
thoughtto be Cncoron album T heophrats,but by reaſon of his breuitie, we can affirme nocertaintie. 
\ © Thereis,faith he,two kindes of |Cmeoren;the whice and the blacke, the white hath a leafe, long, 
- Ike informeto Spurge line; the blacke is full af ſubſtance like Mirtlezthel6w one is mote white: 
© theſamgiswithimell, and the blacke without @azell, The robteof borh which groweth deepe, is 
great; the branches be,gany &hicke, woodic, inmediatly growing out dfchaanh1or: a little _ 
SE bi | A TY c 


. 
. 
; 


[1 | deve 


1, as with ( ane They bud and ftower 


HIST ORFEE: OR! LAS 


| theearth, tough: With they vſe theſe to binde wi 
| whenthe 'Aurumne Equinoctiall is paſt,and a afcer. Thus muc braitws. 

The Getmaine Spurge/Olive is normuch ler Olnomecileton ones kvegie of 
ſmell: :the buds whereof as we haue written, come foorth after Aarne: heb! 
and pliablezheroore growingdeope "EDO wr hath £ SS 
i arper ey 6 oh? ryſame.) 5 Ur ot 20.0008 ati Wa: In EFF A, J th hg 

4 cumud bis zof! yr9y whe = 

This lantis likewiſe inall parts extreme ws chef he leanes;/and cl 
ndbicing: theybitet he chroteonfire, mw G1; j a3 
| 936997 1110) 1192) Thevertuts.” * | 

' Theleanes of Mexertiqndo purge Yownwatrd; Aegis, ebb. d 
violence, AaiI WY 8 

Atloifadrunkard do vate'one gtaineor berrie of this plant, heehtior beallured rolaigehny B 
drinke at thar time 3 ſuch will be the heate of his mouth and choking n.the throw:  * | 
rue like wriro heSeaTirhy-. C 


This plant is v cn dangerous to befaken/into the bodie, and ir nar\ 
male, ſeauing (if i it chewed) fuchan heare and barring in thet Ne, } thatitis hardrobequen- 
ched. (ont. roomy Toit | TIE 
requife;ve the leaveshereof D 


The ſhops of Germanie and of the Lowe counirits. dowhen! | 
in Te Oline hich maybe done withoiit error; for this Spurg like 
in vertuc'and operation —— therefore? it may be viedin tem urea and preparedaice 
the [0 ont Ir : Yo | 


\ Ofipme Flo is "Ob.66 open ab 
I Thymeles, '/ 2 Th W aw To INN 
Ih. 9, Flue prmomntaine Widow Wayle, RR Spurge Flax, 2: 


Woe M " | [9 * 
We \: i Nu 1 


{ 6 / 4 WY} 
Wh KA ; 
MA 1; / 
4 WING 
# 


T5 / 


_ THE TH RD! BOOKE/OF THE 


e bringeth;foorth mz (ik rf Fa 6 wor togh couered 
TwM porn narrow leauesiikethole of hay, jwernongeadietiedtien the leaues 
2:3) S.6f Spurge Ol UC, ] ers are white,fmall, ſtanding on vs nr ren} on 
fruitis round,greene at th firſt. buxredwhenit is ripe, le OR roohd berries. of the Haw. 
| thorne, inwhich isawhite kernell cpupnenpmayudes 6» > Ads 2c PPE 
Mezeteon : the rote is | "24 19mINgeg 7 
2 Branched Spurge Flaxe proveth. VP evil Sothe! phtof a ſmall ſhrub, Jer with-diyers 
rough branches;zwhereon;do growelong leayes.lukerhe ptecedent, bur greater : the flowers fruite, 
/ andlikewilethe caſte of $ friuic diff 1 Yn kak ra 221269) »171 


| net He apiece gona gran inmy paden 
{> #% Thatimeo 2151; od (v4 
. Icis greens at-apytimg of the yeare bur the fruie is perſBpg in Auruipns. .- PT FR 
. ifs IRETED WM, Thenenes. ( cipH! | i! 1 56 : 27 v TT 
The Grecianscallir up the Syrians, 2s Dicer ie quimnyduer alſo Chone: 
ay": Wofcoi idesfaich tbe leafe is called Cyeorowandrhe frur Coccos 


gihoſc chings » ophr Cweora, ſeemeto ditfer from Thy. 
melea,or tg: nw Wh Nag 4: for Theephraſtme ſaith that there be 
two kindes of C»e-ron,the one white;the other blacke.This may be calledin Engliſh Spurge Flaxe, 
or Mountaine VV idow Wayle. The feede of Thymeles is caleyi in —_ Granum Gnidiwn ; wher. 
Upon,came Coculus Indsfcom Corems Cniding. | | 
* The temperature. |. 
Spurge Flaxe is naturally both aleaves and fruitextremeho Cid an of aburning quite. 


| *% The wvertues. © 
The graines orberries, Duſeorides ſaith, purgeth by ſiege holer; flegme and water, if ewen 
: q 3 
A graines of the ner part be djunke,burir burnerh the mouth/and throtezwherfore i iris ro be os, 
with fine lower or Barly meale, or in | Raiſons, or coucred with \ Doren honie, thart may bee ſwal- 
lowed; 


The fame being Ramped with Niter and vineger, ſeruerhra annoine cthoſe with which can hardly 


ſweate. 
The leaues muſt be gathered abou harueſt, and being wie che ſhade, they areto be laide vp 
and referued. by 
y» Theythartwould giuet thenjuniſthes: them, & rake forth the ſtrings: che quantiryof two ounces 
and two drams put into ig with water, purgeth and draweth foorth wateric - nag 
bur they purge more gently if they be boyled with Lentils, and mixed with potherbes 
Theſame leaucs beaten'to powder and made vp intorrochies or flat pils,with theiuice of ſower 
grapes are reſerued, | 
E The berbe is an enirie to the Nomatke © on alſo cfg _ tie beapplicd 


G glee Laurell. Op. PE 4 


L171 4.48 The deſeription. ' be F124 
Purge Laurell isa ub of a cubit high,oftentimes alſo oftwo,and | with many little 
boughes,which are tough and aq oy” couered with a thick rinde,] wh can be long, broad, 
groſle,ſmoorh, blackiſh, ,ſhining, like the leaues of Laurell;bur leſſer, comming neere rothoſc 
of Myrtle,yet withourſinell, very many at the rop,cluſtering togither. The flowers be long, hollow, 
of a whiti ene beneath the leayes: the berries when = be ripe areblacke,with a hard kernell 
| wrickin jehichi is alittle longet than theſeede of Hempe : the pulpe or inner ſubſtance is white, the 
roote woodie,tough and diuerlly parted,growing deepe. The leaues,fruit,andbarke as well of 
the roote as of thelittleboughes, do wich their ſharpnes _ > ma. Par bire and ſet onfire 
thetoong and throte. | | | . 
- F Lawreo 


RR = CR CCC PRI, 2 - 


HISTORTE 'OF PLANTS.” 7 1219 
Lawrcola flortns. | Laureola cums ſFutu. 
Laurcll,or Spurge Lawrell fowring, . .()  . Lawgellwith his uit, 
24 | WI 44 
Io ; * 


=> SHY \ | 
| | * The place. | | 
It is found on mountaines,in vntilled, rough, ſhadowie and woodie places, as by the lake of Lo. 
zanna or Geneua and in many places neere . river of Rhene and of the Maze. | 
| | * The time. | | 

The flowers bud very foone, a little after Auromne zquinotall : they are full blowne in winter 
orin the firſt ſpring : the fruit is ripe in May and Tune: the plant is alwaies gzeeneandendureth the 
cold and ftormes of winter. | wy # | 
' Itis called in Greeke 42ree-/s, of the likenes it hath with the leaves of the Laurell or Bay tree: in 
Laine likewiſe Daphnojdes. The later Latiniſts for the ſame cauſe name it Z$vreo/s, as though they 
ſhould fay Minor Lew ws,or little Laurel It is alfo called >=iunecrd and mowr.notwithſtanding there 
is another Chamedaphne, and another certaine Peplion, This ſhrub is commonly called in Engliſh ' 
Purge Laurell,of divers Lavriell or Lowry, | 1 

Some ſay that the lIralians name the berries hereof Piper montanwy, or Motintaine Pepper, as 
alſothe berries of Dutch Mezereon: others affirme them to be called in high Dutch alſo Zetlant, 

It enay be Theophr oft his Cneoron,for it is much like ro Mittle in leate,it is alfo a branchedplanc, 
tough and pliable, hauing a deepe roote,without ſmel],with a blacke fruir, | 

| ©, The temperature. {FER 

Iris like in temperature and facultie torhe Germaine Spurge Oliue,throughout the whole ſub- 

ſtance biting and extreme hot. "a Me = 


f 


Thedrie or greene leaues of Spurge Laurell , faith Diſeorides, purgeth by ſiege Cegmarike Hu- A 
 mours,jitprocureth rondalanth ' downe the meriſes 2 and beings bor; it draweth water 
out of the head. | | | 466 | 


_ Itlikewiſecauſeth neezing zmoreouer I5.graines of the ſcede therenC drunke, are a purgation. B 


"". Of 


1220 THE/THIRD BOOKE. or THE 
0 Re of Baia Oleander. Gap 62. 


I IE IE TO EE EO OE I OE TIN —_ 


+ WEMECZ VT. ok, 


ot 


£ , 
E 
! 
k 


| ol 4 Thedyfrption | 


Oſe Baie is a Goal hrub of a pallant( ſhewe like the Baie rree, blatid leaues, thicker, grea- 
ter,androugher then the leaues of the Almond tree: the flowers be of a fairered colour,di- | 
uidedinto fiugleaues,normuch vnlike alittle Roſe: the cod or fruite is long, like 4/c/epi- 
45, or Vincetoxicum, and full of ſuch ow downe, among | hich the ſecede liech hidden: theroote 
is | ſmooth, and woodie. | 
he ſecond kinde of Roſe Baje i is like the fiſt ,and dfreth in that, that this isplane bath white 
flowers;buri in otherre ſpeAts: itis ſel, [| 


: 
i 


The 

Theſe grow in £4 other hor as "by TIO: ang ts ſea de 1 Raye them growing in my 

garden, | |: | © | 
es; The time, | j 

In my garden they tower in lh and Auguſt: thecods h ripe aeryards 

+ The names. 

This plant is nambd in Greeks Nidee . by Nicander Nneks.: in Latinelikewiſe Nerion, and alſo Rho- 
dodendren,and Rhodedaphne,that i i5 to ſaic Reſea arbor,and Ro 4 LAT 15:11) ſhops Oleander: in Italian 
Olcandro: inSpanilh vAdefa, E Ehendro, and oMendre: p in Fecnch Rgſigine in Engliſh Roſe Tree, 
Roſc Baic,Roſe Baic (TEc,arld Oleander. | 

* The temperature and we 1 
A This tree being oudrath appli hath as Gulenſaith, a ing facultie: but if it be _ 


| og | ”— | 
1 HATSTORTE) OS PLANTS, — au 
uken;tis deadly and poilonſomy not onely'to men,butalſo'to moſt kinds ofbeaſts, * 7 |. 
| The flowers and leatteskill dogs, afles,mules', and veryinany of other fower footed beaſts : bur B 
if men drinke them jr wine they area remedy againſt thebirings of Serpents , and the racher if 
Ruc be added. 1 | | , 
The weaker ſort of cattle,as ſheepe and goares if chey'drinke the water wherein the leagues haue C 
becne ſteeped,are ſure rodie. O43qQHatk: 3 ti; DSil217180p M1 by 3; 


- 
«JL , 
Cw 


TOt : 
$4 2. n © © > i $4 Þ! * +4 x 
ww. +4 % p l | 8 +1 &/ 


- "2 n } 13 3 £ # & we . 4 ; 
: ; [+ ” 
' | / "1 4 | 
". - . — b $ # £ > 'T. * FF * k © of - #4 * + 144 * 
| I hd LITE TONAL a | IIWHE 151 
7 : » 4 . '3 | y 
. . a 


1 Chamerhododendros alpigena. | 2 Chomerhododendros montans. 
DwartftcRoſe Baie, ,, _ 5s Mou 


Wo *% The deſeription. 


I Warlfe Neriwm or Roſe Baie , hath leaues, which for the moſt part are alwaics greene, 

rough,and ſmall,of a pale yellow colourlike Boxe, farse leflec then Oleander : the who!c 

plant is of a ſhcubbie ſtature leaning this way and that way,as not ablero {tande'vprighe 

Lhelpe; his branches are covered and ler full of {mall Aowers,ot aſhining ſcacler or crim(c n 

colour 3 Srowing vpon the hils as yee gofrom Trident to Verona .whichin Iune and Iulyarc as ic 

were coueted with a ſcarlet oloured.carper,of an odoriferous ſauour,anddeleable countenance, 

which heing fallen there commerh {cede and faire berries like Aporags,'..: 1 + 22419 27 

2 The mounraineRoſe Baie is like the firſt in proportion, growing like alittle ſhrub, ſomewhar 

morzthen a cubite high,with a rough barke , and branches euca like the Lentiske tree : the ieanes 

ae uke the wilde Olwe z on the o:mlide greene, but ynderneath gf aruſtic pale colour,whichof one 

as Wh Eo Kkkk 1 | originall 


__— 


1225 THE| THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 
original or beginning,dofpring forth almoſt by the very tops heaurifully,ſbewing themſchues after 


the maner of the crowned cups whichRewe zbur div edintofive little rops: the lowers i 
{mell and faſhion arc like: in mat ray pop pf 44t y4 Cn ye 


ly heating, | e = 
Theplace and rime are expreſſedin their deſcriptions. | | 4263 bail 215.4 - 
[1.1 7} | »* Thenawes, || | 2s 
The firſt is called in Engliſh Dwarffe Roſe Baie of the Alpes : the ſeconde monmtaine Dwarff« 
Roſe Baiczwhich ſmall difference in name ſhall ſuffice to diſtinguiſh the'onefrom the other.I finde. 
_ any thing extant of their Verrues, ſo that Iam conlſtrainedto leave thereſt vago your owne di. 
CIetion, 38+ | [1 | | | 


7 


- - 
1 
” 


ANY 


Ty 
. 
C” 


= 
% ' ih f —— 
: ls ; > 
LSE þ 
m / 
1 . Pn 
” "4 M- »* 
< SF a / 
«£4 F —C g" AL 


A_ LE 
- 
% _ 


. p. , - k _ 
==" 4 - > , 
ee «© 
p Ld 
* 
—_— 


ILY 
we [z 
VEL 


- v- ? » 
A TTL 
fr 
oY ' o 
. {3 


A eget woes open -elo grproy owt. e-otre=19=— od CGI eve ar Pe 996 EEG » = 
£2405" He Wo DES" 4-rah Ts voy (Ne * - g AE as 


| $ col ſ-þ 
with a little ſha a yellowiſh » lye 
2 There is alfa 


| ſending foorth out of the 
rootes 


ANT S, ; 1223 
nor ſo high as the former ; and the barkes 
,and not ſo harde; in other things noe 


= HYSTORIE © OE Þ 
| Coninga, whichnotwith 
rootes many 0 benllner 


of theboughes be ſomewhar red: the leaues 
ynlike, 
Theſe two Baie trees Diojeoridet was not ignoranc ofzfar;he fairh, tharche one is narrow leated, 
and the other broader eabpd.oc rather harder «pps is more like 
%*T 
The Laurell or Baie tree groweth naturally i in Spaine. and ſuch hoe regions z' we plank , and ſer 
itin gardens,defending it fxom colder the beginnin begnoig of of March eſpecially. 
4 1a not ſcene any onetree thereof growing in nmarke, S1veul, Poland, Liuonia , or Ruſ- 
ſiagor in any of thoſe colde countries hoe a, trauelled. | 
*% Thetome. | | | 
The Baie tree groweth greene winter and ſommer:icflowrerh in the ſptivg, and the blacke fruic 
isripein Oftober. *% Thenones. 
This tree is called in Grecke Som: in Latine Lava: in ralian "Ie in high Dutch Lozbeer- 
baum: in low Dutch L aurus boome: tin French Laerjer :in Spaniſh, Lawrel, L er, and Lonreryo : 
in Engliſh. Laurell,or Baie tree.  * 
Thefruite is namedin Greeke ili rin Latine Lauri bacee: in high, D Duch Looctbeeren : in 
low Duech Bakeleer : in Spaniſh Yoxer: in Engliſh Baic Berries. _ * 
ThePoers inethaci pole hloawiig oF Dephee, Lado his angie niihhon 4p _ 


; ; | * Thet ature andwvert 
£ Tri OS | 


y rhewzthequicepr Out NC 
\ Fiebadroppeltia pic > wine and 
chatroom, and 13 Ate 


H0O.48 iHf cramp3and drawin [4 herc 1 
We in our nmedonory Can! creving coghther FO 
| þfth ſtomacke,liver,ſplecne,and bladder : 
rc vpadecaicd appetite gu amp ; 

ſtopping of the liner & ſpleen, 


vrine, rin RR 

The oile preſſed out of theſe, or oe foorth y ded :oRior 
and ſuch like filth of the skin, 

It cureth them that be beaten blacke andblewe, 4 that bs bruſed by Gouare and fals, it remov- I 
ucth blacke and blew FR and OE: dipad ond digeſteth and waſterh awayt 
thered about ay IIa Uk 

Dioſcorides ſait Lg wp ar leaues are cood forthe diſeaſes ofthe mother and bladder,if a bath be K 
pade;thercof cobaheand(irin: hd chagevectgreds I 9s ov inde, that being applied they 
aro egain, the bingings of waſpes and bees zrhatwithb ed;and bn they 
ty en joflammations , arid that hajpgiaker i drinh eyanitigare the paine: of t 
procure vomite. vs ; 35809 ; ming = 1 hr1 1347 
"Then wo Bay tice ſtampedwidiſa liels Sehmmonie and Andlaboured ina mor- I. 
vineger and oile of Roſes to the formeof aliniment, and: ; nm 2oY| and fore - 
part of the head doth greatly ceaſe CO | 
Aris reported that common drunkardes wete ac to cate; inthe morning ating two M 


ot hin ſhort time "m away ſcabs H 


humours ga- 


haves thereof againſt druvkenes, | 
Fi 


Kkkk 2 | The 


[fl 


1224 THE THIRD BOOKB -OF THE 


1 ThelaterPhiſicions do oftentimes Vſetoboile the leaves of Laurell with divers meates eſpecial. 
ly fiſhes,and by ſo dooing there hapneth no deſir@ofvomiting: burthe meate ſeaſoned heerewith 
becommeth more ſauory and betrer forthe ſtomacke, 

'M Thebarkeof the roote of the Baie tree,as Galen writeth dren i in wide prouoketh vrine. beak. 
eth the ſtone, and driueth foorth grauell: iropeneth the ſtoppings of the liver, the ſpleene, and all 
other ſtoppings of the inwarde <. ; Which thing: alſo mn athrmerh, who likewiſe adderh, 

that itkil!crh che childe inthe mothers wombe. 

N ti helperh the wit and the AE WT: procureth vntowomen their deſired "rang 


of the wil Baietree. - Chp 65. 


; vs 


An 4 Lures Thimtabake, 
1 ; The be Ppcrigae wilde Baie tree, 


RI COP," . 


Cheng, WAS Fr 


Pl »\ 


\C\ 4 
"oy W A 
UT PAR 


AV; 
£9 { N 
[; 39a} arld a” / -:\ T3: % | 
#4 Þh > | V 
2.20! IELAIIOG | -10adx %. Yo 0 b 
2 BY: #5 329 tt 4's WAN "__ 
*# : | ST > £4 


F183 x" 


Ire f 
Foam + oa. RC _ 
of whitiſh flowers, turning at the edges intoa 
blew colour,conteining a 
rouge” apr y 114m ar lay rhe erence wo L | 
2 TinwLuſitanica, Q) vetic like to Corn a4, or the S hon etiderrcsy bir i the 
branches be thicker , and more ſtiffe ,coueredwith a reddiſh barke mixed with greene rhe leaves 


are like the former , bur (larger, hang manie finewes or vaines running thorough the _ 
6 | £ LE 


1HrIS0K12: "OF * PLANTS.”  n225 


| | like Riþwoore: : the flowers grow intufts like the precedent, bur they are of colour more de- 
| dliningtopurplethe ms real gram ant as the procoden, :the leaues have no ſmell at all, 
either good ox bad: the berries arcſmallerthentheformer, of as B06 ks 6 blacke- 


le. : 4969) 
*T/e 


The wilde Baie growerh plentifully in evcryfiiecf Traly "Re ng other regions, \ which dif- 
fer _ tothe nature and {cityation of thoſe countries : they owe in my LP and prof: 


ery we 
$008 hy The ths. 


The wilde Laurell is erdetid,and thay Peg be ſcenewiththe towers and ripe berries gro- 
wing both at one ſeaſon. 


/ 


o 


ak p The NAMES. | 
Iris calledinLatine Tinm and Laurn ſluefirizrin Greeke dtpm ooole. : Cato SEL it Z,gur% frlde- 
Mea :in Ttalian Lawre Siltatico in Spaniſh Ya: 4 Perrys, other Follads ; [and of diuers Daorzly : in En- 
gliſh wilde Baie. | £8. 
mnt Thetemperature and vertues. | 
Plinienor any other ofthe ancients, haue touched the faculties of this wilde Baie, neither haue 
weany vnderſtanding thejoof by the later wricers,or by our owne | 20s 


of the Boxetree, Chap. 66. 


© Bux. 


i : ITT 
| | He great Boxe is a faire tree peaking a great 


Wy 


body or trunkez the woode or timber is yel- 
Fas or and veric harde , and fit for ſundrie 
workes, hauin boughes &hard og 
beſet with ſan —_ hard greene leaues, both 
winter and ſommet like the Baie tree:the flowers 
are very little, gfoning among the leaues, of 4 
pou colour: which being vaded there fuccecd 
all blacke g berries , of the bigneſſe 
of the ſeeds of Capers which are incloſed in 
rounde greeniſh huskes , mY 7 three feetcor 
legs likea brafle ot boili Foote is like- 
wiſe yellowe, and harder t 4: wer be rimber, bur of 
greater beauty , and morefit for dagger haſtes, 
boxes, and ſuch like yſes, whereto ft trunke or - 
body ſerueth, then to make medicines 3 thou gf 
_ fooliſh emperickes and women leaches, do mini- 
ſter it againſt the; apoplexie and ſuch diſeaſes: 
Turners and Cutlers,it I miſtake not the matter, 
do call this woode dudgeon , wherewith chey 
make dudgeon hafted daggers. 

There is alſoa cerraine otherkinde heereof, 
growing lowe,and not aboue a yarde high, bur ir 
ſpreadeth all abroad : the brariches hereof are 
many and very flender ; the leaues be rounde and 
ofa light greene,) 


The place, 
Buxws or the Boxe cengromeh vpon inde waſte and barren hs in Englande. 
*% T hetime. 
The boxe tree groweth greene winter and ſommec : it flowreth , Februaric and —_ the 


_ ſeedeisripein tewpber, 
Pre Kkkk 31 | The 


1226 Thi THIRD: BOOKER oF: THE 
onde of ; [| whgh:(r:-5 4 loneDat: 
e Grecians c Int: in atine Buxus -. þSuchbaum in h 
boom: in Tralian Boſh : in French 1 odp mh Din WW i Bur 
The lefſer ma be called jausris 5,4 odin Late um Bac mil rar i Eng nar , 


Boxe,or groun Boxe., | | 
* oj 7 ane; UOTERES.., 
The leaues ofthe Bake trecare hotgdrie and afixingeats gf | 
in medicine,bur Yew: bj as I Rd I inthe deſcription. 


Vrile tree. 


| The kindes.” | | 
T Hee be diuers Fl! of the Myrcill trees, ſome with bro de leaues, ha: with narrowe Jemes, ; 
| * ſomewhoſcleaues are more __ then others, one ig jure with th deſcriptions of more ſhall 
diſtinguiſh the kinds, | [| 


(ys: | | i | 3+ The diſeription. 
| ie, | | "y FT" He hiſt and nt Arie is aegſtce, 
Up W\ q O44 | gro ingto the heagh rofaman,hauin 
6 7 NE JN ld q nic __ pliant ranches, COUCTrE with 
EN SA) 5 _abrowhe ug i fer full of leaues much like 
WW# vito the Laurell or Baie leafe , but thinner and 
ſmaller,ſomewhat reſembling the leaues of Per- 
uincle , which being bruſed do yeelde foorth a 
moſt fra ant ſmell, not much jnferior vnto the 
ſmell of Qlques, as all the reſt of the kindes do : 
among the + leaues come foorth ſmall white flo- 
wers,in ſhape like the flowers of the Cherry tree, 
bur much ſmaller, andofapleaſant ſauour which 
do turne into ſmall berries, greene at the firſt and 
afterwards blacke, | 
another kind of AMyrtzscalled Myr- 
tus Boetich latifolia, according to Cluſire Myr- 
tus pom that _ cauecs = = _ ot 
growing by. couples is pleaſantgreene 
brat, ph a 2tÞ) na 3 des the 
'{talkes, of tight greene colour, and ſomewhat 
thicker thenthe former, in ſent and ſmell ſiveece: 


the flowers BY fruit are not much differing from 
the firſt kin 


1s hkewiſe kinde of Ayres cal- 
'thati e ardnotcommon: it 


| ight ofa man like vn- 
| | to orc waa bur that it is reple- 

iſhed wi greater plentie of leaues, which doe 
fold in themſclues hollow uw almoſt tees der pointed, znd keepingno order in their grow- 
ing, but one thruſting within anothe andas it _ another confuledly ; in all other 
points agreeing with the þ recedent, | 

There is another ſort like ynto the formeri in flowers and branches, bur the leaucs are ſmooth, 
flatand plaine, andnoterumpled ot folded atal!. The fruit is in ſhape like the other,but chat itis of 
a white colour,whereas the fruit of the other is blacke, I] 

There is alſo another kinde of ks called Myrews ,or noble Myrrill, as being the chiefe 
of all the reſt ( although moſtcommon and beſt knowen) phe like a lirtle ſhrub or hedge 
buſh, very like vnto the former bur much ſmaller. The ng Sare ſmall and narrow, very much re- 
ſembling the leaues of Maſticke Tibecalled Marws.The flowers be ers cir differing trom 


: Me 
*Y: +.% 


the former ſauing in pepch and thay ſometimes ay are ”w_ double. 


|} 


; 


There 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, | x2a7 
There is yet another kinde of Myrt us called N ona ( as hauing been of late diſcouered, andnor 
knowen vnto them of olde gned that in ſhape and ſhew reſemblerhthe former, hauing lcaues like 
vnto our garden Tyme, and ſmall white om with afew yellow chiues or thrums in the middle, 
#$s % The place. iT. | 
Theſe kindes of Myrtus do growe naturally Low the woodie hils and ferrill fields of Tralic and 
Spaine. - | RE RY ” pokes S | 
| "MM" 9 % The time. { » | 
Where they ioy to growe of themſelues they lower when the Roſes do, the fruitis ripe in Au- 
comne 3 in'England they never beare atiy fruit. | ] Poon 
; : ; © The mares. | 
It is called in'Greekes24n: in Latine Atyriws: in the Arabicke toohg 4/45: inTralian Atyrro : 
in Spaniſh 4rr«yhan: in the Portingall Janguage Murrz, and Murtells: other nations do almoſt 
keepe the Larine name,as it Engliſhitis called Myrtle,or Myrtle tree.) | | 


[3 
} 


| —_—— Myrtles that-which hath the fine little leafe is ſurnamedof Plimic Tarentine : and 
_ tharwhichisſothicke andFull of leaves is Fxe#7ce, ſtrange or forren. Nygra Myrizs 1s that which 
hath the blacke berries : Candids which hath the white berries, and the leaues of rhis alſo are of a 


lighter greene : Sarzua,or he tame planted one is cheriſhed in gardeny and orchards : Sylueſtr*, or 


. 


the wilde Myrtle is that which groweth of ir ſelfe;he berries of this are oftentimes lefler,and of the 
other greater. P/zzje doth alſo ſer downe other kinds, as Patritia, Plebeza, and Contugalis; but whar 
manner of ones they are, he doth nor declare.: he alſo placerhamong the Myrtles O:cymyr ſive, or 
Knceholme,which notwithſtanding is none of the Myrtles, buta thornie ſhrub. | 

P{iniein his 14. booke 16. chapter faith, thatthe wine which is ek of the wilde Myrtle tree is 
called Myrtidanwy, if the Copic be true, For Dioſcorrdes and likewiſe {Soticz in his Geoponikes te- 
port, that wine is made of Myrtle berries when they be thorow ripe, butthisis called Finum Myr - 
rewn,or Myrtites, Myrtle wine. | -| 

Moreouer, there is alſo a wine made of the berries and leaues of Myrtle ftamped and ſteeped in 
Muſt,or wine new prefled from the grape, which is called, as Droſcorideslaith, 31yr/mitevinum, or 
wine of Myrtles, | | | | 

The Myrtle tree was in times paſt conſecrated ro Yenw. Plinieinhis 15.booke 29. chapter ſaith 
thus, There was an old altar belonging to Yerw,which they now call Murtzz. | 

| * The temperature and vertues, | | 

The Myrtle confiſterh of contrarie ſubſtances, a coldearthic thing bearing the preheminence ; A 
ithath alſo a certaine thin heare,therefore as G4/em ſaith,it drieth notably. 3D; 

Theleaues,fruit,buds and juice do binde, both outwardly applied and inwardly taken : they ſtay B 
the ſpetting of blood, and all other iffues thereof: they ſtop both the whites and reds in women, if 
they firin a bath made thetewith: after which manner,and by fomcucing alſo they ſtay the ſuperflu- 
ous courſe of the hemorrhoides. = 

They are aremedie for Jaskes, and for the bloodie flixe, they queneh the fieric heare of the eies, C 
if they be laide onwith parched Barly meale. | | | 

They be alſo with good ſucceſſe outwardly applied to all inflammations newly beginning, and D 


_ alſo tonew paine vpon ſomefall ftroke or ſtraine. 


Z 


They are wholſome for a moyſt and waterie ſtomacke, the fruitand leaues dried prouoke vrine : E 
for he greene leaues containe in thema certaine ſuperfluous and hurtfull moyſtue. 

Itis good to bathe with the decoQtion hereofmade with wine,lims that are out of joint,and bur- F 
ſtings that arc hard ro be cured, and vicers alſo of the outward parts} ithelpeth ſpreading tetrers, 
Tcowreth away the dandrafe and fores of the head, maketh the haixes blacke , and keeperh them 

from ſhedding; withſtandeth drunkennes, if it be taken faſting, and preuaileth againſt poyſon, and 
the birings va venemous beaſt, 4 . EG 
| . F 70-9, is drawen out of the greene berries therof a iuice, which is dried and reſerued forthe fore- G 
aid vſes, | | | | SE] 
Thereis likewiſepreſſed out of the leaues a iuice, by adding vntothemeither olde wine or raine H 
water, which muſt be vied when it is new made, for being once drie it putrificth,, and as D#oſcor;des 


$ 


lah loſettihis vertues, / 


no REbbo ts Wh oinottv dn Jr -.5 of 


? % 
o 
| ; 


1228 ThE THIRD pOorE UP THE 


Of foeev low Fe Gaule. | Cle 68. 


Aryrtu Bra bentich fue E -laoginl Cords, | | | | 
ile.lweete Willow, ar Foun Myrtle tree. & Thi | Aofriptins 
TY | | 4j Aulcis a lowe andlittle ſhrub or wondie 


lar, hauing | many browne and harde 
fender whereupon doe growe leaucs 
ſomwhatlong,hard, thicke & oileous, of an hor 


ſauouror {inell formwhat like Ayreas; among the 
branches forth other litle ones, wherupon 
.do grow many (| pokie caresor tufts,full of ſmall 
nd after chem {acceede great ſtore of 
| rogither,of a ſtrong and 
'bicter taſte. | 'The roore i is hard, and of a wootic 
ſubſtance, | | D'S 
| Li * 
| | This Gaule groweth runes in ſundry pla- 
ces of E 6 as in the Ile of Elie, and in the 
Fennie countries s thereabours, whereof there is 
ſuch ſtorein! thar country, thatthey make fagors- 
ofit and ſheanes , which they cal Gaulc ſheaues, 
toburneand heate their ouens. It groweth allo 
by Colbrooke,andi in ſundrie other places. 

*% Thetime. | 
| This Gaule rows” x in May andIlunc,and the 
ſeede is ripe in Augu 

| |» Thenames. 

This trees called of diners in Latine Arias 
Brabanticaand P ſeudamyrſme,and Cords calleth 
1t Eleag ns, Chameleag , andeAMyrtms Braban- 
tica. Eleagnus is delcnibed by Theophraſtusto be 
aſhrubbi plant] like vnto.cthe Chaſte tree, with 
a ſoft and downie leafe, and with the dowerof 

kao the Poplartfee, and char which we havedeſcri- 
bedi isno ſuch plan, Ie hath no name among the olde writers for ought we knowe, vnicile itbe 
R/tas [pneſtris Pliny,or Plinit his wilde Sumach,of which he hath written in his 24.booke 1 1.chap- 
ter. Theres, Cath he, a wildeherbe with ſhort ſtalkes, which isan cnumie to poylon, anda killer of 
moths, It is called in lowe Durch hr 2in Engliſh! Gaule. | | 


The temperature. 
Gaule orthe wilde Myrelegipecial the eede, is hot and dic inthe third degree: the leaues be 
alſo hor and dric,bur not ſo frpuch. | 0 RR 
| | 3 Thewerrars. || 
A Thefiuitis woublelhne to the brakne being pur into WY ale whileſti itis in boyling (which 
many vſe to do)it maketh the ſame headie-fit to make a manquickly drunke. 
B The whole ſhrub bly and al bep aid among clothes Serperh chem from moths and wormes, 


of W nog W bortle berrie ; Cp. 69. 


= | 1" be hind. 
\ / cine or Whobll. which Eintrear inthis place | die from Violets'; neither are they | 
flowers, bur becrics: of theſe Whortes there bet ſorrs found out by the auncicnts, recko- 


ning the marriſh VV hottle for one: ic later writers hauc found more. 
Ii -| 1 | | | : 1 Y accinid 


| 
| 
F. | 
i bs 
| 5 


| 
| 
[ 
| 
| 
| 
| 


: HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 


Kok 
BY 


born ro —-/.- vival ' 
Blacke Whortes,or Whortle berries. Red V hortes, ot VVhorlle berries, 


® The deſcription. | | 
1 FX 7 Accinia nigra the blacke Whortle,or Hurtle,is abaſe and lowe tree;or woodie planr,brin- 
V ing foorth many branches of acubite high, ſer full of ſmall leaues, of a earke greene co- 
guts much vnlike the leaues of Boxe, or the Myrtill tree : among which come foorth 

little hollow flowers,turning into ſmall berries, greene ar the firſt, afrerwarde red, and at the la{t 
ofa blacke colour,and full of apleaſant and {weete inice zin which do lie divers lictle rhinne whitiſh 
ſ&ds; theſe berries docolout the mouth and lips of choſe that catethem, with a blacke colou:the 
roote is woodie,{lender,and now and then creeping. {Hr | 


= 


[;. | 
. 2  Yacciniawbra orthe red Whortle is like the former in the/maner of growing, but that the 


leaues are greater and harder,almoſt like the leaues of the Boxe why | abiding greene all rhe winter 
long :among which come foorth ſraall carnation flowerslong,and round , growing inclulters ac 
the cop of the branches, after which ſocccede ſmall berries ih ſhewe and bignefle like the 
former,bur that they are of an excellent red colour, andfull of inice, of ſo orient and beautifull a 
purple tolimme withall,that Indian Laces is not to be compared - + al eſpecially when this 
wuice is prepared and drefled with allom accordingto Art, as my fete have prooucd by expFience: 
thetaſte is rough and aſtringent: and the roote is of a woody ſubſtance. | V 

3 Pacciniaaibaorthe white Whortleis like vnto the former, bath in ſtalkes and leaves, bur the 
berries are ofa white colour,wherein conſiſteth the difference. !. | 


'4 CarolmClaſime in his Pannonicke obſeruations hath ſet down another of the Whortle be rries, 


vnder the name of Y its Ide, which differeth not from the othet Whortle berries, not onely in 
ſtature bur in leaues and{:ruite allo. | | | 


3 Vaccinia 


— — 


12320 THE THIRD BOOKE/\ OF /THE 
3 Yaciniaalba. WE! "EM he YET 4 \Faccinia Pannonica [ame Vith 14 
The white Whorts, TIES,  _ |Hungarie Whortleberries. 4 


” 


5 Vaccmia rf, foxeVnd IV rfjapud Clu 


Beares Vhortle bextics, 47 2 The deſer] tion. 
HY | | 5 The ſame author allo ſerreth foorth another of 
the Whortle|berries , vnder the title of Yus Yrfo 
whichis likewiſe a ſhrubbic plant , hauing manie- 
feeble branches ; whereon do growe long leaues 
blunt at the prints ,& of an ouerworne greene c0- 
lour: among which come foorth cluſters of bortle- 
like lowers,of an herby colout:the fruit followeth, 
growing likewiſe in cluſters, greene ar the firſt, & 
blacke when they be ripe :the roote is of a woodic 
ſubſtance, |' mw Theplace. | | 
Theſe plantsproſper beft in a leane barren ſoft, 
& in vntoiled/woody places: they are now &then 
tound on hi gh /grounds, ſubic&ro the winde, and 
vpon mountajtes: they gtowe plentifully in both 
the Germanies, Bohemaa, andin diuersplaces of 
France and Eng!ande, namely in Middleſex on 
Hampſteed Heath, & the woods therto adioining, 
and alfo vpon the hils in Cheſhire called Broxen 
hils , neere vito Beeſton caſtle, 7, miles from the 
Nantwich; and in the wood by Highgate called 
Finchly woode,and in diners other x, 4-40 
The red Whortle berry groweth in Weſtmer- 
[id,at a placetalled Croſsby Ranenſwaith zwhere 
alfo doth growe the Whortle with the white ber- 
ric,and in Lancaſhire alſo'vpon Pendle hils. - 


&*+ The 


\% 


Myrtle rree,as the Aporhiecariesnamerhemar this day. Thisplanr 


''HISTORTE OF PLANTS. 1238 
The Whortle berries do flower in Maic,and theirfroice is ripe in 
Wo IN 201 7: The mane s; 


| 
ng | 
| LE: $3134.44 44 4 | | 
 Whantle berries arecalled ny Durch Heydelbirrent in lowe Dutch Crakebeſien, bicauſe 
e 


4 they make a certaine cracke whil 


they be broken betweene the teeth, of diuers Hauerbeſien:the 
French men Azrelle,or AureieasJobannes de C hou writech : and wen England Whortes, Vhor - 
tle berries,Blacke Berries,Bill Berries,and Bull Berries and in ſome places Winberries. 

Moſt of the.ſhops of Germanie do caltthem 2fy71i{4, burpropetly Atyrrilh are the fruite of the 
| | ath noname for or:ght we can 
learne,cithet among theiGreekes or auncient Latines: for whereas hoſt do take ir tobe Fitts 7:1es, 
or the Corinth tree, which P/znre ſurnameth Alexandria, it is vntroe 3 for Yerrws 7d ex is nor onelic 
like to the-common Vines bur isalſsakindeof Vine : and T heepbreftze who hath made mention 
heereof doth call it without an epethete gums {pus Rea a lirtle after we will declare: which with- 
our doubt he woulde norhauedone, if he had founde ir to differ fronj the common Vine, For whar 
things ſoeuer receiuedaname of ſome plant,the ſane are expreſt by ſome eperhire added,that they 
might - --1-ieie ro differ others; as Lawrus Alexandrina,Y itn albeit nigra, Vitt (yiueſtris, 
and fuch like, 71 x 12F4 [24 PE | 

Morcouer, thoſe things which have borowed a name from fomeplanc, are likethereunto, if 
not wholy, yet cither inleafe or fruite, orin ſomeotherthing . F:r4 albe and nigra, thatis ts faic, 
the rhite and the blacke Bryonigs, haue leaues andclafping tendrels, as hath the common Vine; 
they alſo climbe after che ſame maner; its flveityis,or the wilde Vine, hath ſuch like ſtalkes as ihe 
Vine hath, and bringeth foorth fruire-like rorhelicele grapes': Lauri Alexandring , and Chame- 
dephne, and alſo Daphnoides, arelike in leayes tothe Laureil tree : Sycomoras 15)ike in.fruite to the 
Figge tree,and in leaucs tothe Mulbetietree :Chamedrys bath the Ieafe of an Oke; Pencedanus of 
the Pine tree :{o of others which hauetaken'theirname from omepther . But this lowe ſhrub is 
not like the Vine,cither in any part,orin any otherching, | | 

This tis {dea,groweth not on the vppermoſt and fnowie parts of mount 11a ( as ſome would 
have it)bur about Ida,cueh the hill Ida,not of Candy,butof Troasn the lefſer Aſia,which Profemmce 
in his hft booke of Geographic 3.chapter doth call -_Aſexardri Troa,ot Alexardey his Troy:wher. 
upon it is alſo adurſedly named of P/zniein his 14 booke 3.chaprer Yi#is Mexanirinanc otherwiſe 
then\_Lexanarins Laurns is faide of Theophraſtmto grow there: Leyras,furnamed AHlexandrma, 
and Ficw quedamr a ccrtaine Figge tree,and-wnre,thatis to ſay, the Vine, are reported, faith he, 
to grow properly about Ida, Like vnto rl1is Vine are thoſe which Philoſtratme in the life of Apollon;- 
wteporteth to growe in Mzonia , and Lydia, fcituared not farre frqm Troy, comparisg them to 
thoſe Vines which grow it India beyond Caucaſus: the Vines,faith he,be very like,as bethoſe that 
growe therein Mzonia and Lydia , yet is the wine which is preſſed our of them , of amaruellous 
pleaſant taſte. | Tr IG | 

This Vine which groweth neere ro mount Ida,is reported to be like a ſhrub, with little ewigs and 
branches ofthe length of|a cubite, about whichare grapes growing aſlope, blacke,ofthe bignes of _ 
a Rn ſveere, hauing within a certaine winie ſubſtance,ſoft: rhe leate of this is rounde, vncur, 
and little, | | | if 

This is deſcribed by P4niein his 14. booke 3.chapter, almoſt in the ſelfe ſame words; Tris called 
faith he, _dlexandrina vitiand groweth neere vnto Phalacys: it is ſhort, with branches a cubire 
long,with a blacke grape,of the bignes of the Latines Beane, with a foft pulpe and very little, with 


_ very ſweete cliiſters growing aſlope, and alittle round leafe withourcurs. 


And with this deſcription the little ſhrub which the Apothecaries of Germanie do call Afyrrit- 
ln doth nothing at al agtee,as it is very manifeſt;for itis low,ſcarceacubire high,witha few ſhore 
branches,not growingrto acubitcin length : it doth nor bring foorth cluſters or bunches, nor yer 
fruite like vnto grapes, burberrics like thoſe of the Yew tree ; not fweete, but ſomewhat ſower and 
aſtringent,in which alſo there are many little white flat ſeedes:the leafe is notround, but more long 
then round.,not like to that ofthe Vine,but of the Boxe tree. Moreonuer it is thought that this is nor 
found in Italy,Greece,or in theleſſer Afia,for that Marhiolw affirmerh the fame ro groſv no where 
butin Germanie and Bohemia, ſo farre is it from being called or accouſted ro be Yiris 74ez, or 
Ale xardring. "+ | | 

The fruitof thismay be thought not without cauſe to be named Waccinia, fith they arc berries; 


for 


they ſhould be called Baccin;c, Yer 
'F accinia is:mwianzes ditÞ;e;, of 4 worde 
| tenth Eclog aftirmeth, that the Writ- 
< Frags Theoeritws his wexſe which 
; ( ;f þ IL SRL * 


: 
: "©. : 
L %. . 


Factinion from the 


wrple 
Jr Whortle bertiea,ie 
plants which} | 
nt | growe in Ira- 
Te with P , 75 and Y itru- 


m their ſcuerall deſcriptions, 
tees endof the ſecond degree,and drie 


$2 


. z 


o 


ric, and alſo binding, 
* The vertues. \\ | 
| cke VYhorde berries is boyled, cill it pllome thicke, and is preparedorkepr 
by adding honie and Sugar vntojr: the Apothecaries callir #ob, which is preferred in all things 
beforethe rawe berries themſelues, For many times whileſt|theſe be eaten or taken rawe, they are 
offenſiue to a weake and c9iQl ſtomacke, and ſo far are theyſfrom binding the belly, or ſtaying the 
laske,as that they alſo trouble rhe Jame through their cold and rawe qualitie, which thing the boy- 
led inice called Rb doth not/any whir at all, |; | 
B Theybegoodfor anhot ſtomacke, they quench thirſt, they mitigate andalay the heate of hot 
wo_ agues,they ſtop thebelly,they ſtay vomiting,they cute the bloody flixe proceeding of cho- 
ler, andrheyhelpe the felonie,or thepurging of, oe vpwardsand downwards. 
C Thepcople in Cheſhiredo cate the blacke Whortles in cxeame and milk, as in theſe ſouth parts 
weeateStrawberries,which ſtop and binde the belly,putting away alfoithe defire to vomit. 
D Thered Whortle is got of fuch a pleaſant taſte as the blacke, and therefore not ſo much vſed to 
be caten,but(as I ſaid before)they.make the faireſt carnation;colour in the world. 


rub Hartwoort of ZMthio a, Chap. 70. 


£ 


| 3-30: 144-74 * The deſcription. | Fo tte! 

His kinde of Seſely,being the Aethiopian Seicly,hath|blackiſh ſtalkes ofa woodie ſubſtance; 
this plant diuideth itlelfe into ſundrie other armes or hranches, which are beſet with thicke, 
far, and oilcous leaues, faſhioned ſomwhatlike the Wpodbinde leaues, but thicker andmore 

gumme,approching wry neere vatothe leaues of Oleander both in ſhape and ſubſtance,being of 
a deepe or darke greene colour, ahd of a very good fauour atid ſmell, and continueth greene in my 
garden both winter and fommer, likeithe Bay orLaurell, The flowers do groweat the top of the 


—— 
bf 


$ his bl branches 


: 
$2 
| | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS" 7 1435 
branches in yellow rundles like vnto the flowers of Dill; which being [MEN adark 
or duskie ſeede reſembling the ſeede of Fennell, and of a dicter uſiey eroote" is thicke and of a 
woodic ſubſtance, | 1 | | 


Selels AEthio ates, | 
Sfrub Sclly pe Hartwoort of Ethiopta. | '*% The ack 


Iris founde both bn ſonie places, al on the ſea 
coaltsnot farfrom Marfilles, and likewiſe in ocher 


places of : itallo growerh in Erhio- 
pia , jo che date and deſare woods 6 AER 
my garden 7 

*%'The time. © 


Ic ouriſheth, fowrech and hedgbin Lal and 


Auguſt, 
| N *The Harmes. | 
The Grecians call it Ailtomrer glow : the Lind 
likewiſe AErhiop jCumBs Seſels : : the ep PLiArs xores 
geben,that Dp horror : in Englith Se{clyof E- 
thiopia,ot Echjopian Hartwoort, ; 
* The temperature and vertnes, 
Seſely of Erhiopja is thoughtto have theſame 
faculties that the Se Re hath, where- 
vnto Lteferit,. ©; | 


# - 
Fa - : 
» 


Of the Chiron, = Ch: Tr. 


| - kipdes. he | 
T Hae be divers fab of if flder, ſome # Th land, bh. ho wat? ormarriſh or ; 
HeAPey jagged ee Ie REID? 1725 be declared. 


N / 


i : | : 


PO El. bioneoſ a meane tree, caſting hi 
| k TH: = 0 oghont frent d 2 memes cfg 
ws; very little pich " 57/0054; tine 
td,ar efull of pith wi ves | arkeof the bodie and great armes 
is gg and | : thatof be rate 
nemo there is another yndericnecrer © 
tothe wood. nd ſomewhat yellow, and that may 
eh. 0-01 ſtened to onerib, lke thoic of the 


| >colc vineger: pr robe in Ce arg 4 ke 
growerh oftentimes vpon, the,] lics of thoſe olde trecs.or ſhriths; a certaine excreſcence called 
Auriculs Inde, or lewescare, which is ſoft, blackiſh, couered) with a kin, ſomewhar like now and 
then to a mans care, which being plucked offanddried, (brinkech togither and becommirh hard. 
This Elder growerheuerie where, and is the common Elder. j 


1915S 1 Sombucus 


OF [THE 


: % 
j k 
- , "I ” » = 
H » » 4 o 
—— 0 
PRs \ 
AM NE IgE 
% A 
” : ju 


WF [ 
CE OO. 
1 


n 


SC#A 


\ 
\ 


SJ) 


vxlCrraing, 
Harts Elder,or Cluſter Elder. 


| i : 
£ | | « 
F 


\ "VIE 
X19 
Wh 


thatno 


ecand uti ; 
i a kind, | T, he hath 


| | 
4 ; 4 


©" eſhie exctelcetic 


. 
* 
- 
« 


4 . act 2 - FEE. = 
_—_ & = >, S 
" ; Ia. $ 474 _ $7 3 
| {5 
1a: Stiz?t yy at YI F bs | 
© 41 _ , 0 
hers of the- r 
eas $41 i TS * bo 
#4@* 14 L5 a © 4 
FY F'e% 
- - 


- 
4 QI .. X Dy 
. F' % Y =y " , . 
—=/ f A Yet 
A ,% 
E SAMAD 14 x Wh,\\? 


HISTORTE. OF PLAN 


| | Is x 1235 
the Conies;but that with the white berries is rate: the otherkinds kinds how in like places;but that with 
the cluſtered fruir groweth vpon RR thatwith the iagg leaues growerh in my garden. 

% The time. 
Theſe kinds of Elders do flower in Aprtill and Maie,and theit fruxeis ripe in Indy; BETS, 
* Thehames. T's, 


_  Thisrree is calledi in Greckes 2x7: in Latine and ofthe Apothecaries Semburus : of FO $4 + . 
Jicetus, Bex4: in high Dutch HÞojunderholder : inlowe Dutch Zin Icalian Sambuce:in French 
Has and Surx : in Spaniſh Sauco, Sauch, Sambugneyro: in Engliſh Elder ; and Elder tree; that with 
the white berries divers would haueto be calicd Sambucus ſulue ftris, x wilde gger 9; CMathinlis 
calleth ir Mont ana,or Mounraine Elder. | by 


% The temperatureand vertues. | 


Galen attribureth the like faculty to Elder: athe'dothto woort, and hither it isof a A 
drying quality, 8.48 modetately digeſting: & ithath not jr, faculties but others al- 
ſo; for the barkes 


,thefirſt buds, flowers, and fruit of Elder, do not onely drie, but alſo heat, 
| abdhave dowry a purging quality; bur not without trouble and hurtro the ſtomacke, 

_ : Theleauesandrender crops of commonElder taken in ſome broth, or portage, the B 
belly,purging both (limie legme andcholericke humours :the migate barke is of the ame nature, 
bur {tronger,and purgeth the ſaid humours more violently. 

| The ſeedes contained within the berries dried,are good for ſuch; a haue the dropfie,and fuchas C 
are toO fat,and would faine be leaner, if they beraken ina morning! oo the quantitic of a a dram with 
wine for a certaine ſpace, 

The leaues of Elder bojled in water vntill they be very ſoft, anh when are almoſt boyled D 
inough,a lirtle oile of feet Almonds added thereto, or a little Lineleed ole ; taken forth and 
laide vpon a red cloth,or a pecce of ſcarler, and a plied vnto the Hemorthoides or Piles, as hor as 
can be ſuffered,and ſo remaine ypon the part affected, vntillir be ſamnewhar colde , having the like 

in areadines, applying one after another vpon thediſcaſed part, bythe ſpace ofan hower or more, 
andin the end ſome bounde to the place, andrhe patient warmea bed: it hath nor asyer failed at .. 
= = dreſling,tocure the laid diſcaſe;but if the patient be dreſſed wriſe, it muſt needes do good,if 
the firſt faile. | 
_ | The greeneleaues rome with Deeres ſuet,or Buls rallow,are good to be laide to hor ſwellings E 
and "a. pempher doth afſwage the paine of the gour. 

The inner and greene backe doth more forcibly puryes it drawerh foorth choler and wateric F 
humours: for which cauſe it is good for thoſe that haue t he dropſie, being ftamped and the liquor 
graſped out isdrunke with wine or whay, 

Oflike operation are allo the freſh lowers mixed with fome kinde of meate,as fried withegges: G 
they likewiſe trouble the belly and mooue to the ſtoole: beingdried they loſe as welltheir pur- 
80g. qualitieas their moiſture ,andretaine the digeſting and ag qualirie, 

he vinegerin which tlc dried flowers areſtceped , is wholeſome for the homackbbn vied H 
with meate it ſtirrerh v p an appetite , it cutterh and atterwateth oF makerth thinne grofle and rawe 
 humours. 

The facultie of the ſeede is fomewhar gentler then that of the other parts: it alſo mooueth the 1 
belly,and draweth foorth wateric humours, being beaten to powder and given toa dragm waight: 
being new gathered, ſteeped in vineger, and afterwards dried jt is taken,and that effectually with a 
like waight of the dried lees of wine,and with a few Annis ſeeds; for ſoit worketh without any man- 
ner of trouble, and helperh thoſe that have the dropfic, Burir muſtde giuen for certainedaies rogi- 

_ therwith alirtle wine,to ſuch as haue neede thereof. 

The gelly ofthe Elder, otherwiſe called ewes cares,hath a binding and drying qualicie: the infu- K 
fion thercof in which it hath been ſteepeda fewe howers,raketh away inflanmarions of the 
andzlmonds of the throte in the beginning, jfthe mouth and throte be waſhed therwith,and doth 
in like maner helpe the Vuula. 

Deofeoridesfaith,that the tender and reene leaues of the Eldereree with barly megle parched, L 
doth ue hor ſivellin $,and is G for thoſe that are burnt or fealded, and for luch as be bit- 
ten with a mad dog,and > they glew and heale vp hollow vicers. 


Thepirh ofthe yoong boughes is without qualitie,this being dried and ſomewhar prefled or qua- M 
thed flcogebergs g 200d to lay open the narrow orifices or holes of fiſtulaes & iſſues ft it be put therin, 
Of 


i | 
; 
! 


tht - wy or Fs. +. 


iS oy i ad | | 
1235 ' THE THIRD BOOKE' OF THE 
Hb Mr arrifhorwites Elder! * Chap: 52. 
laftr s.Mairih pr Water Eller [FA | 


| how '! w% Thedefeription: 


»% 


NA Elder js vor le to thecam- 
mon Elder inJeaues but inborghes : 
..:\itis much!lower, and groweth after 
| the manher ofaſhrubgthe boughes aze coucted 
._ withabatkeofanill favoured Aſh colour,as be 
|. thoſe of the common, Elger ; they areſer with 
ioints by ccrtaine diſtances, and haue in them 
eat plentie of white pich, rherefore they haue 

eſle wot @,which y hite and brittle:the leates 

be broac pros ike a\moſt ro Vine leaues, 


1 

but leſicrand ſofter:zmong which come tooth 
ſpoked rimdles, that bring foorth little flow. 
ers , the vttermoſt whereo! alongſt ihe bor. 
ders be greater,vf a gallant white cvlour, eucry 
© lirtle onetonfiſting of fine leaues ; the other in 
the middeſt andwithin the borders be ſinaller, 
and floweth iy degrees, and the whol: tuftis 
of a moſt ſivect ſmel;after which come the fruic 
or berries, that are rgund like thoſe of the com- 
mon Elder,bur greater, and of a ſhining red co- 

lour,andhlacke when they be KOOLnS | 


: 4 


2 conburied || 
The Roſe Elder, || 


+ 
ONO 
: " 


3 Sonbucw hoe fore pwr purante, 
TheRoſc Elder with the purpliſh flowers, 


Cone WOT ee 


HISTORIE OF -*, f S. 1237 


{| 


* The deſcription. 


\ Ambucus Roſe or the E1der Roſe groweth like an hedge plant, or hedge tree, having many 

" Yknoxtie branches and ſhootes comming from theroore,full of pich like the common Elder : 
the leaves arelike the Vine leaues; amongſt which come foorth goodly flowers of a white 
colour, ſprinckled ot daſhed heere and there with a light and thinne earnation colour, & do growe 

thicke, andcloſely confÞact togither, inquantitie and bulke of a mayzs handes, or rathet biggerof 
great beaurie,and ſauoring like the flowers of the Hawthorne; bur inimy garden there groweth nor 
any fruir vpon this tree, norin any otherplace, whereof as yet I haue any vnderftanding or know- 

ledge, | i FE. 
2 This kindis likewiſe an hedge tree, verie like vnto the former in ſtalkes and branches. which are 
jointed & knotted by diſtances,and itis full of white pith : the leauesbe likewiſe corneret: the flo- 
- wers heerof grow not out gf ſpokie tundles,bur ſtand in a round, thicke and globed tuft, in bigneſle 
alſo and faſhion like to the former,ſauing that they tendeto a deeper purple colour, - | 
| | | *% The place. tf 


| 


Sambucus palaſtris,the water Elder,groweth by running ſtreames and water courſes, and inhed- 
ges by moiſt ditch ſides. | | | 
The Roſe Elder groweth in gardens,and the flowers are there doubled, by Art as itis thought, 
| *% The time. | | | 
. Theſe kinds of Elders do flower in Aprill and Maic; and the fruite ofthe water Elder is ripe in 
September, | OT 
*% The names. 


The water Elder is called in Latine Sombacus aquatics, and Sembucu paluſtris: it is called 
Ooulus, and Platanss, and alſo Chamaplatanus, or the Dwarife op 5p 0 not properly;F a/ers- 
ws Cordua maketh it to be Lycoſtaphytos: the Saxons, faith Geſner,do call it Yue Lupina; fromwhence - 
Cordus muented the name xunornpuauy: it is named in high Dutch UWalt holder, and Hirfch hoiver : 
in lowe Dutch Swelcken, and Swelckenhout : of certaine French men Objere : in Englith Ma- 
tiſh Elder,and Whitten tree,Ople tree, and Dwarffe Plane tree, | | 

The Roſe Elder is calledin Latine Sawbucus Roſeaand Samburu aquatrca being doubtlefle a kind 
ofthe former water Elder, the flowers being doubled by Art as we haue ſaide : it is called in Durch 
Ghelderſchz Rooſe: in Engliſh Gelders Roſe,and Roſe Elder. | 

| *% Thetemp'rature andvertues. | 

Concerning the faculties of theſe Elders, and the berrfes of the water Elder , there is nothing 

fund in any wricer,neither can we fer downe any thing hcerof of oyr owne knowledge, 


: 
: 


4 


Of Dane woort, Wale woorte, or Dwarſſe Elder Cbap.73. 


; 
| 
” 


_— 


* The deſeri; tion. i 
Ane woort as it isnota ſhrub, neither is it alcogither an herby plant, but as itwere a plane 
participating of both, being doubtleſſe one of the Elders as may appecre both by the leaues, 
flowers,and truite,as alſo by the ſmell and taſte. © 

Walewoort is very like vnto Elder in leaues, ſpoked tufrs, and fruite : but it hath not a woodie 
ſtalke:ir bringeth foorth onely greene ſtalkes which wither away inwinter ;theſe are edged and {ul 

of ioints, like ro the yoong branches and ſhootes of Elder: the leayes growe by couples, with di- 

ſtances,wide,and conſiſt of many ſmall leaues, which ſtande vpon 4 thickeTibbed ſtalke, of which 

euery one is long. broad,and cut in the edges like a ſawe, wider and{greater then the leaues of the 
common E1der tice : at the top of the ſtalkes there grow tufts of white flowers , which turne into 
blacke berries like the Elder, in which be little long ſecde:; the roote is tough, and of a good and 


reaſonable lengrh ; better for phiſicke vies then the rootes of Elder, 
= SE Gaines | Lill x | Ebulut 


FF 
: . 
4 
W+ 
£12. '© 


1258 E THIRD BOOKE|OF THE 


| | Danewopttgrowethin vntoyled places neere 
| common whies, andin the borders of fieldes:ir 
| grower plentifully in the lane at Kilburn Abbey 
| by London} alſo ina field by'S. Iones neer Dar:.. 
ford in Ke ty and alſo in the high way at olde 
| Brainford rownes ende nextrLondon, and many 
| cher places. d | 
| | The flowers are perfefted in ſommer, and the 
| berries in Auturone, | 
Loh |: * Thenames. 
; | It is na din Greeke,22,a)]n, that Is 3 Humitts 
| capkades. ” rh:2\prm : it is called in Latine 
' Ebulus and (Ebutwn : in| high Dutch Attich t in 
lowe Dutch Yamch: in/Irajian Ebfo + in French 
 Hieble : in Spaniſh Teeges:in Engliſh Wallwort, 
| Danewoort,and dwarte Elder, 
* | | % Thetemperature. 
; Wall woprtisof temperature hot and drie in 
the third degree, and of a ſingular qualitic, which 
' Ga/en doth attribute vnto it, to waſte and con- 
fume, andalſgirhath a/ſtrange and eſpeciall fa- 
 cultie to purge by the ſtoole : the rootes be of 
greateſt foxce, the Jeaues haue the chicfeſt 
ſtrength to digeſt and conſume, 
[. | \ } * T/evertues. 


*: 


Ri.14 | | _  Therootesbf Wall woort boyledin wine and 

drunken,are good againſt the dropſie, for they purge downwards wateriſh humors. . 

B Thcleaues do conſume and waſte away hard fwellings,ift hey be applied pulcuſviſe, or in a fo- 
mentation,or bath. ſat ns [1 &: bc 14-o.0 

C Dioſcorides faith , that the rootes of WW all woort, doe ſoften/and open the matrix, and alſo cor- 
recterh the infirmities thereof, if they be boyled for a bath to fi in, and diflolucth the ſwellings and 
paines of the belly, Hi Eb is | | | 

D Theiuiceof the roote of Dane woort doth make the haire blacke. [E355] | 

E Theyoongand renderJeaues doth quench hot inflammwatiqns, being applied with Barly meale; 
that it is with good ſucceſle layd vpon burnings, ſcaldings, ant ypon the bitings of mad dogs; and 
that with Buls taltow,or Goares ſuetit is a reinedie for the nap | 


'F Theſcedof Wall wagrr drunke in the quantitie of a dram,is the moſt excellent purger of wate- 
riſh humors in the world,and therefore moſt fingular againſt che droplte. | | 

G Ifoneſcruplc of the ſeede be bruſedjand taken with ſirupe'of Roſes andalittle Secke, it cureth 
the dropfie,and eateth the gowre,mightily purging downwards wateriſh humors,being taken once 
in the wecke, bd: 44-45} | | | b; = 


Of Beane T refoyle. Chap.74-. 


| ||| $+Thedefeription. | | | | 
I He firſt kinde of Anegyr#,o7 Laburnum, groweth like ynto a ſmall tree, garniſhed with ma- 
ny ſmall branches,like the ſhootes of Oziars,ter full of pale greene leaues,alwaics three ro- 
gither,like the Logue,or Medow Treſoile, or rather like the leaues of Yitex, or the Cyriſus 
buſh:among which come foorth/many tufts of lawers,of a yeſlop colour, not much vnlike the flo- 
wers of Broome: when theſe awers be gone, there ſucceede ſmall flat cods, wherein are conreined 
ſeedes like Galega,or the Ciryſus buſh: the whole plant hath lictle ſauour pr noneat all: the roote 
is ſoft and gentle,yet ofa woodicſubſtance. pee pre [1 | 


: 


( 
| 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | 1239 
| 4 Stinking Trefoile is a ſhrub like to a lictle tree, riſing vp tothe height pffixe or eight tubjrs, of © 
| | merimes higher: it ſenderh foorth of the ſtalkes very many flender branches z the barke whereof 
 is6f a deepe greenecolour: the leanes ſtand alwaies three togither; like thoſe of Lorws or medowe 
| Trefoile, yer of alighter greene on the vpperſide: the lowers be long as yellow as gold, vety like 
| rorhoſe of Broome,rwo ot three alſo ioined togither:after them come vp vey cods,wherin do lig 
hard fruit like Kidney beanes,burtlefler,at che BR white,afterwards tendihg to.a purple, andlaſt of 
| allofablackiſh blew: the leates and flowers heerof haue afilthic ſmell, ike thoſe of the ſtinking 


| 


| Gladen,and {o ranke withall,as euen the very pallers by:are annoied cherewich. | 
| [  - 2. Canagyris ' tide. =] FT 
Be ane Trefoile, 


1 CaAnagyre. F:1 | | 
Beane Trefaile. | | | Stinking 


| | BE | *% The place. [ | 
Theſe grow of themſelues in moſt places of Langvedocke and Spaine, and in other countries 
alſo by high way ſides,as inthe Ile of Candie,as Zellonjw teſtificth: the fit Thaue in my gardenghe 


other is a ſtranger in England. % The time. | 
They flower in Iune,and the ſeedis ripe in September; | 
| | % The names. 


The Beane Trefoile is called in Greeke erdyvers,which name remaineth vneorttptin Candyeuerr 
_ tothis day: in Latine alſo Anagyris, and Liburnam: of apeople called |Ananienſes,named Fghelo, _ 
which is referred vnto Labarnum of which Pliny writeth in his 16.booke 18.chap.in Engliſh Beane 


Trefoile,or the Pealcod tree. *% The ——— 
Beane Trefoile,as Galen writeth, hath a hot and digefting faculrie. 
*% The vertues. © 


The tender leaues faith D-ofe.being ſtamped,& laid vpon cold fivellings, do waſte away the fame. 

They are drunke with Cute inthe weight of a dram againſt the ſtuftipg ofthe lungs,ang to bring 

downe the menſes,the birth,andthe afterbirth, » "bd TOI 

y cure the headach being drunke with wine z the iuice of the roote digeſteth and ripeneth, if 

the ſcede be caten it procureth vomite,which thing as Aſathzolus writerh,, the feede not onely of 
Rinking Beane Trefoule doth etfe& bur that alſo © note likewiſe, | | 

ils wy” $6 ice ts 2 [| HE 2 


THE| THIRD BOOKE) OF THE 


Sy \., | Of Fudas tree, (hap. 75: 
xrina'> gx k £306 2 Wee Mt pwr (FP 
udas mes 1134 {jo ji #4 * The deſcription. 

TP PE TÞ Vdastreeiblikewiſe oneof the hedge plants: 
it groweth vw'vntoa tree of a reaſonable big. 
nes , couered with a darke coloured barke, 

whereon |do growe many TrIggic tough bran- 
ches of a þrowne colour , garnithed with round 
leaues , 11 fron E Ro Birthwoortt, or 
Sowebread, but harder, andofa dee cence 
colour: among which.come foorth or} aan 
| aſon , ofa purple colour , mixed 
with red, which tune into Jong flat cods,preſſed 
hard rogither,ofa tawnieorwancolour, where. 
 inis contained ſmall far ſeedes, like the Leniill, 
or rather likethe ſeed of Medica,faſhioned like a 
little kidneythe roore'is great and woodie, 


| * Theplace, 
| This ſhrub is founde in divers provinces of 
Spaine, in hedges, and among briers and bram- 


ml 
” 


bles: themountaines of Iraly,and the fieldes of 
Languedocke are not withour this ſhrub : it gro- 
wethin garden, b. 
| *%* Thetime. 
| Theflawerscome foorth in the ſpring, &be- 
forethe leauts: the fruite or cods be ripe in ſom- 
mer. | | » %Thenames. | 
Itis coi ly named in Latine Arbor Inde: 
a ſome haue called it Syromeras, or Sycomore tree, 
Hm 365% IM | and that bicauſe the flowers & cods hang down 
from the bigger branches: but the right Sycomore tree is like the figge tree in fruit,and in leaues to 
the Mulberie tree, whereupon it is ſo named, Others rake it to be «4x5, of which Theophraſtue wri- 
teth thus, Cercis bringeth footth fruite in a codzwhich words are all ſofewe, as that of thisno cer- 
raintie can be gathered, for there be more ſhrubs thar bring foorth fruit incods. The French men 
call it Guainiey , as though they ſhoulde ſay Yag/#u/s, or a little ſheath * moſt of the Spaniards do 
nameit A/gerouo loco;that is ,SHiqua ſylueſtrts,ot fate, wilde pr fooliſh cod, others CArbe/d' wner, 
for the brauenes fake : irtnay be called in Engliſh Iudas tree, whereon Judas did hang himiclte, and 
not ypon the Elder treeas itis faide. | | 3 | 
| | |  Thetemperature and wertues, 


Mu 
Fe 4 
T1 JS 
| HC 


By 14 
CS 


= \ T- 
't 


> . 
SI 


4 
. * - 
$ 


The temperature andyertues of this ſhrub are nnknowne,and not found out: for wheras Merhi- 
ol maketh this robe Aeacia, by adding falſely thornes vnto it, it is bur a ſurmiſe. 


Of the (arob tree,or Saint Tobns breed . Chap.76. 


"THe Carob tree is alſo one of the ſhrubs that bearecods ; jt is a tree ofa middle bignes, verie 
| follof boughes:: the leanes long, and (con(iſt of many| ſet rogither yon onemiddle rib, like 

thoſe of the Aſh,bur euery pazricular one of them is beveder Farder, and rounder: the fruite 
| orlongcods in ſomeplages are a footelin lengrh, in other places ſhorter by halfe: an inch broade, 
ſmooth, & rhick,in which do lie flat and broad ſeeds ;the cods themſelues are of a ſweete taſte,and 
are eaten of diuers,but not befotc they be new gathered and (dried ; for being as yet greene though 


ripe,they are vnpleaſant to be eaten byreaſon oftheir ill fauouredraſte, —_— 


i 
| 


- 2 1.chap.of Lewis, Theſc kindes of creeping things neither the Hebrues nor the ones ru S 


"HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |: 1241 


Ceratia og \/aue Ceralonts. *% The place. | 
The Carobrree., | |.) | This gtowerh in Apulia, a prouince of the king- 


| domeot Naples, & alſoin divers vntoiledplaces 
- in'Spaine::it is likewiſe ffounde in India and other 
& countries caſtwarde , wherethe cods are fo tull of 
RS  {weet iuice as tharir is viedro preſerue Ginger and | 
- other fruites,as Mathiolws ſhewerh, Srrabolrbry.15, 

ſaith, that Ariſfobu/ws reporteth how there js a tree 
=, inIndia ofno great bignes which hath grear cods, 
eg ten inches long, full of hony ; Q#4s gui ederint non 
facile ſernaripwhich thing peraduentureis onely to 
| bevnderſtoodeofthe gieenecods, andthofe thar 
- "are nat as yet gty:it is very well known inthe coaſts 
| ofNicea& Liguria in Italy, as alfo in a!l the tracts 
Y, and coaſtes ofthe weſt Indies,$& Verginia. It gro- 
SAC .. weth alſo in ſur $ of Paleſtina,where there 
_ [is ſuchplentyofit,thar jtis left vnto ſwine & other 
| wildebeaſts ro feede vpon,as our acornes & beech 
 maſte, Morequergboth yoong & old do feed there- 
_. onforpleaſure,8& ſome 


& F | and the neceſlarynoriſhment of theicbodies, 
= = \ | - his of ome iscalled $,lohns bread, and thoughec 

/ | AN  tobethat whichis tranſlated Locuſts, whereon S. 

John did feed when he wasin the wildernes,befides 


_ thewildehony wherofhedidalſocate ;burthere is 
| ſinall certaintyof this: bur moſt certaine, thatths 

E PI>FIW WE propyen that countrey to feede vpon theſe cods, 
ENS S>. IH" inGreckcalledKene: in Latin Silique: but S.tohns 

ited Fo Lbs - 'foodiscalledeze:f in Greek, whichwordis often 
viedin the Reuelation,wricten by S.zohn,and tranſlated Locuſts. Now we'mult alſo remember thar 
this Greeke worde hath two ſeucrall interpretations or ſignifications, for taken in the good part, 
it ſignifierh a kind of creeping creature,or flie,which hopperh and skippeth vp & down,as doth the 
gra zof which kind of creatures it was lawfull ro eate,Levit.1 1,2 2.8% Aſarh.3.4. It ſignifieth 
alſothole Locuſts which came out of the ſmoke of the bortomles pir,mentioned Apoc.9,7.3,4.c. 


! 


which were like vnto horles prepared for battell, The Hebrue worde which the Engliſh tranſlators 
haue turned graſhoppers: Tremel;us dares not giue the name Locu## vnto iebur calleth it by the He- 
brue name Arbiafter the letters and Hebrue name, ſaying thus in chengte vpon the 22.verl. of the 


nor our ſelues do know whatithey meanc:wherefore we ſtill reraine the Hebrue words, for 


| kinds thereof: bur itis certaine thattheeaſt countrey graſhoppers and Locuſts weretheir meate, 
as Math,3,4.8& Marc.1.6. Plin lib.1 1.natar. hiſtor.cap.26. & 29, Thus farre Tremelius and Juni. 
| Bythatwhich hath been faidit appecreth what S. 7oþnthe Bapriſt fedde of, vnderthe title Locuſts: 
| andthatitis nothing like voto thus fruit Ceratis ſuiqua, L rather rake the husks or ſhels of the fruite 
| ofthisree,co be the cods or husks whereof oj wy, childe woulde haue fedde,but none gaue 
| themvntohim,though the Swine had their fill 
| asThaueoften ſeen, I haue ſowen the ſeeds in my gardeE,where theyh 


rof, Theſe cods being gy are very like bean cods; 


proſperedexceeding wel. 


| | %Thetime, ; | 
The Carob tree bringerh foorth fruite in the beginning of the ſpring, which is not ripe till Au- 


| turne, | t% Thenoanes. 


The Carob tree is called u2z7viz: imLatine likewiſe Ceratonia: in Spaniſh Garous: in Engliſh Ca- 


| rob tree, and of ſome beane tree,and S.Fohns bread. The fruir or cod is named we#nw: in Latine Szlj- = 
| gu, or Sil:gaa dulcis : in diuers ſhops Xylcaratta:in other ſhops in Italy Carebe,or Carobole: of the 


> 


| Apothecaries in Apulia Satrqua: itis calledin Spaniſh A/farobas, or u/garous, and without an 
| anicle Gayog45:in high Durch 


+ S,Johans b2otzthatis to fay,Santts loban.pan, or S.lohns bread, 


| neitherisitknowne by any other natugin the lowe countries : ſome call ic ty Englith Carob, | 
| | | LIL 3 | | | | + The 


1242 rat mon BOOKE|QF THE 


: |. &The temperature. F > 434 Ki my 
The Carobt tree is dry ind altingens as is nan ay fruite, and containeth initacertaine ſweete- 
NCS,As Galen ſaith. | [! : Vi, 2 7 ” © 


| * The vertues. | 
it is greene,doth ntly 
itis hardof digeſtion,andſtopperh S lly, it prouckerh vrine, 
nouriſherh well,and much bercer then when i it greens ny | 


Of Cul ſtu amo. Phe. ap. 77- 


Caſia fiftula. 


am "pe ree.. 


__ and - pay of this 
wit ood! 
ie 54) the Wall —_— ng 
 foprth ſmall flowers of DINE Cco- 


tr hoe 
= die ebtance: in theſe = 3 78 
W raincda blacke » Yery ſweete and ſoft, of a 
SR pleaſantraſte,and to many vles in Phiſick, 
7 ' | in which e licth the ſeede couched in lictle 
Ra iti DS : : this ſeede is flat and browniſh, 
of Ceratia S:1:qna, andin other 

ke vnto italſo. 
Ws Tho E eſpecialli 
m r, eſpeciallie 
| and Alexandria” & a of 
Barbary,a i isa ſtrangerin theſe parts of Europe, 

| | + Thetime. 
| winter and ſom- 
; his Id leaues when new are com, 


flowreth earely' in the qring,and the fit bs ripen Aurunine, 
* The names. "| 
This tree was vnknowne rothe olde writers , or ſolittle accounted of, as that they hatſe made 
no mention of it at al: the Arabians were the firſt that d of ir-by reaſon they knewthevſc of 
the pulpe,which is found in the Pipeszand after them the later Grecians, as Ac7erims & other of his 
time,by whom it was nangedgeiz wacyre, thatis to ſay in ,Caſia nigra. The fruite thereof ſaith 
Attuay ins! in his fifr bogke, is like a long pip » hauing withih ita thickel or moiſture,which 
' is notcongealed all alike thorow the pipe, bur js ſeparated a halted yich cc wh being 
thinne woody skins. The yinrvhns call ir her pr form tha ah is oof 
ledin Engliſh after the aporhecaries word Calle Ran, me be Engl Ar 
cauſe the cod or pipe is ike a pudding: : but theold Caſſia = orwveryin 4 wr eos thark mh. Ho 
odoriferous barke that is rolled rogither;after themaner of along &round pipe,now named of you 
Apothecaries Canclla which they | ſein ſteed of the righr Cinamome,bu deccirfully. 
1608 * The temperature. be 
Thepulpe of this Pipe which pm Pe” is mpilt in the laterende of the firſt degree, 
and little more then | (G0 joy | "4 
| ry 


H1STORITE OF”PLANTS. 1243 
|; % The Ver tue T. | | 

Thepulpe of Coſdz fitul extract, with violer water, is amoſt ſweere and pleaſant medicine, and A 
may begiuen without danger to all weake people ofwharage andfexe focuer they bezyea it may be 
miniſtredrowomen with childe;torir gently purgethcholericke humgurs and flimic flegine, if ir be 
taken the waight of an ounce. - tt; {.- 

Cafiais good for ſuch as be vexcd with hot agues, pleuriſics, taundife, or any other inflammati- B 
on of the liuer,being taken as afore is ſhewed, | | | 

Caſdiais good for the raines and kidneies, driueth foorth grauell and the ſtone, eſpecially if it be C 
mingled with the decoction of Parſley,and Fennellrootes and drunke.. 

Ic purgeth and purifieththe bloud, making it more cleane then before , breaking therewith the D 
acrimomicand ſharpnesof the mixture of bloud and cholet rogither. | 

I diſfolueth all phlegmons and inflamwarions of the breſt, lungs, andthe roughartery, called E 
Trachta erteria, caling thoſe partsexcceding well. = | 
| Cafdaabaterhthe vehemencie of thirſt in agues;orany hor diſcaſe wharſoeuer,eſpecially ifitbe x: 
taken with the iuice of 7 Cichoreum,ort Solanmn, depured according to Art;.ir abateth allo 
the inremperate heare of the raines,if it be receiued with diuretick ſimples,or with the decoCtion of 
Licorice onely,& wil not ſuffer the ſtone togrow in ſuch perſons _ receiue & vie this medicine. 

The beſt Ces for your viezis ro be taken outof the moſtfull, heauy ;.and faireſt Eods, or G 
canes, and thoſe which do ſhine withour,and are full of ſoft pulpe wirhin;that pulpe whichis newly 
taken foorth is better then that which is kept in boxes,by what Arr ſoeuer, 
-. Caſaabeing outwartly applicd,ittaketh away the roughnes of the Skin,and being laide vpon hor xx 
fwellngs,it bringeth them to ſuppuration. 3h Miigha | 


Many ſingular compounded medicines are made with this Caſen which heere torecitebelong.- 1 


eth not to my purpoſeor hiſtory, | 12290 Þ bo 
Of the Lenticke,or «ML. aſticke tree Chap. 78. 


Lentiſews. The Maſticke tree, :. 03% + The aeſerigtion. | 
lt] He Maſticke tree groweth commonly like a 
- ſhrubbe without anygreat body , riley I 
| with many ſptings& thoots like the Hatell 
\{S - andoftentimesis is ofthe heighr and bignes of a 
mean tree: the boughes therof are tough, 8& flexi- 
'blezthe barke is ofa yellowiſh redcolour, pliable | 
; likewiſe, & hardtobe broke: there ſtand vpon one 
: Tih for the moſt part'8.leaues , ſer vpon a middle. 
rib., much liketo:the leaues of Licorice; burhar--/ 
der,of a deepe greenecolour,$ oftentimes ſome- 
whart redin the brims,as alſo hauing divers vains 
' \tunning along of a; red <dour , and ſomething - 
| Nrong of ſmel:the dowerabe moſlic, and grow i 
cluſters vpon long ſtems: after them come vp the 
\ + + berries; af the bignes of Vetches, greene at the 
F -- firſt;aftetwardes of þ purple colour,and [alt of all 
"- 2. blacke far andoilic with a bard black ſtonewith. 
| | ert ofis white;of which allo is 
« witneſleth 7 it bringeth » 


| , : 
J - 
4 ( " '£ : 
Y + 
—_ \ 
\ _ bo. yy 7 5 
? . | kw 
+ 3 % x 
.. 4 SEE» . 1 
- » / k * 
4 L 
_ 4 -4 
; SIE nar oe. 
1 — 
þ » . —_ 
_ 8. = bb _. by. %. , £ 
” , 2 . l - 
i tos : F X 4 
* 6 % 
” « 4 
*% 


\% ©: 

NE 

dQ 
q 0 


1244 THE THIRD: BOOKE: or THE 


| | | Theplace. | 
The Maſticke creegrowethi in man oats Pen Syria Candy ocke and in 
prouinces rent ae rye Sy Candy ay Languedoc an inn: N 
cially looked vnto,and tharfor the Maſticke rages Ys is there gathered from the hnsbanded Ma- 
_ _ by the — ey alam man careially , andis is ſent from thence intoall parts of ' 
the wo ; 
| | ' The time. | 
The gowersbeinthar ſid nh pingrmerand ther in Aurumne: the Maſticke muſt 
be gathered abour the tire when thegrapes be. | 
Ls eh Gree | th | *% Thenanmes. bis] | 
is tree is named in ehiher :in Latine Lexriſcus: in Ieakarl Levy) in Spaniſh Mata 
CArcoyra : in Engliſh Maſticke tree,ahd! of ſome Lunnf tree, - _ 
The Roſenis called in Greeke mrirn geriry , and waghg! 1 *m Latine Lentiſcina Refing, andiikewiſe oy 
ftiche : in Pe Maſtix : in Italian <Aeſtzce: in high and lowe Durch ——— allo Aa#tic : 
Spaniſh CMimaZige, Maſh eftech,and Almeceea: in Engliſh Maſticke. 
Cluſius wriceth, atthe < Spaniard cal alte _ that's prelſed our: of the berries Azeyte de Mate. 
[| T remper ature. [| 
The leaues barke,and on of che Maſticke rree,are of ameane pane remperare heat, and are dry 
in the ſecond degree,and { what arkjgers 


The Verines. 


A The leaues and batke of the Maſticke tree" ſto ——y [the bloudy flixe, a3 rang Ho 


C 


D 
E 
F 
G 
H 

I 
K 


bloud, the piſſing of bloud,and all other fluxes of bloud: arcalſ ainſtthe & 
neſle.the falling downe of the morther,and comming foorth ir rele mu4 


B The gum Maſticke haththe ſame yerfue,if it be relented he Gryrnay to drinke, 


Maſticke chewed in the mouth is ggod forthe ſtomacke ,] wg , Increaſcth appetite, 
rn he braines Mtaierh healing downeof cheumes 4 | wareric humours, and maketh a 
weete breath. 
The ſame infuſedin Roſe watety's excellenc ro waſh the mouhwithall,t faſten looſe teeth,and 
rocomfort the iawes, = 
The ſame predvpona prect fleaeror ele 2nd laide plaiſts oviſe pon the emples ſtaieth 
the rheumefrom fallin S rothe jawes ahdreerh,and caſerh the paines thereof. 
Ic RY much a moans poquayes poet al jos =) nk and healing Vn- 


i dabeikfogcb | rad TE 
age rr ickirnt aſe ſe and make faire dhicewl 

ial emmmerwhc hollow vicers with fleſh if be bated hervit 
Ir oy ah broken pon Nai vicurrjang | | | 


ical vi Sraiote ice th dc ne erondo 
not any at out etrees,if yo 

curor wound them, chewhich aire andeletc, and beer china which s gathered from h : 
barke ofthe Firre tree. | |} + | *! Th 
Ih 4 ; 2 c 


HISTORIE OF: PLANTS. 


* 
o 
: 
3 


| I2 
2 Theſecond kinde of Tnrpentine' tree is very like vnto the former,'but that it groweth m_—_ 
greatzyet the leaues are greater and broader, and of the ſame faſhion, bur verylike tothe leaues of 
the Piltacia tree. The berries are firſt of a ſcarletcolour, and when they be ripe of a skie colour, The 
great horned.cods are ſharpe pointed, and tamwhar cornered,confiſtingas it were of the ſubſtance 
of griſtles. And out of thoſe horned bladders being broken, do creepe and come ſmall flies or 
| _ gnats, bredofa fuliginous excrements, and 12gendres i: thoſe bladders, The wee doth alſo yeeld 
| his Turpentinebydropping like the former. Wy 98 | JA | 


I Terebinthu. 2 Tercbinthas "uy: | 


FI 


| The Turpentinetree, nUP The'broad|leafed Turpentine tree. 


% The place. p- 

Theſe trees growe,a&®D/oſcorides (aithyn ined; Syria, Cyprus, Aﬀeike gafid in the Ilands called 
Cyclades. Belomm reporteth that there are found great ſtore of them in Syria and Cilicia, and are 
brought from thence to Damaſcus to be f{old.Cluſz faith that irgroweth of it ſelfe in Languedock, 
and in very many places of Portingale and Spaine,.bur for the moſt parr like a ſhrub, and withour 
bearing Turpentine, | / | [| | | 

Theophrajtue writeth that it groweth abour the hill Ida, and in Macedonia, ſhort,in maner of a 
ſhrub and writhed; and in Damaſcus and Syriagrear, in manner of a {inall tree: healſoiſerterh 
downe a certaine male Turpentine' tree and a female: the male, ſaith he, is barren; and th&ferpþaic 
fruitful, And of theſe he makerh'the one with a berrie red atthefirſt, ofthe bignes of a Lencili, 
which cannot come to ripenes;and the other with the fruit greene at the firſtjafterwards ſornewhar 
ofa glovh red, and in the end blacke, waxing ripe inthe ſpring, of thel ignes of the Grecians 
'Beane, and roſenie. 1, wy 8 | | 
He alſo writeth of a certaine Indjan Turpentine tree, that is roſay, a tree like in boughe's and 
leaves totheright Turpentine tree, but — in fruit,which is like vato Almonds, © = 

| "NT t- * There. | G7 


| $23 | 
The flowers of the Turpentinetree come foorth in the ſpring togither with the new buds: the 


berries 


mat |-- THE THIRD BOOKE' OF THE 


berries are ripe in Seprember nd Oſteher in the rime of Grip groan 5c} The hornes appeere 
abourthe ſame time, | || L | 
This tree is calledin Cree Tipu © land alſo many times/myecht@: in | Latine Terebinthuy in 
Italian Terebintho: in Spaniſh Cornicebys : in French ages oh inEngliſh Turpentine rree: 
Arabians call it afar wer an artich Mbotin,. uns, _ 
The Rofin is furnamed| 74wtlen: in Larine Terebinthing e A high Dutch Terminthim: 1inEn- 
gliſh Turpentine,8& right! 'Turp ing:in the Arabian language qo namethe fruit Granum 
viride,or greene berrie. | 
A: * Theremper awe cadvertals. | 
A Thebarke, leaues, and Fir ofthe « Tipps tree doth ſomewhar binde, they are hotin the ſe. 
cond degree, and being greene they dric moderately, bur they are! dried they drie in the ſe- 
cond degree z and the fruig wand br more neet to Me. fedriin i ihe Wedlgrey, and alſo 
hotter, This is firto be Fo pirate faith por CORY it 
th thoſe popes bad Dlene,enl 
TheRofin of the Turpentine tree ex llerh all other nal Accc 
on? bur Galemwriteth, that {rbe OR 0 he Maſticke tree ROY the 
Turpenrine. 
is Roſin hath alſo an 


rare. wine —_ the bitings 


h more than thatof the 
ſeaby.in his 8.booke of thi Maura of arg medicines: butjnhis book of medicines according 
co the kindes, he a an of the Tipe 4 tree to be Ln like the Rofin of theLarch cree, 


nkpro 

; ',\ hich is the jo Taree oferh 

of the liver and fpleene, provokerh vr vrine,and drigerh foorth gf vell, bei 
twoor three Beanes, | LE} | 

G Thelike quantitie wafh in wall ders times vntill it benkicethalwattbe puethercrothe 
like quantitie ofthe yolke of ane yan} laboured rogither, lingthereto by little and little (con- 
tinually ſtirring ir) a ſmall draug white wine, and giuen to drinke inthe 
morning faſting, hel ly the Gonorrhzagor ruining of the taines, commonly at the 
firſt cimezburnever the varath etaking of iegrich giueth ſtooles 
from fowerto cightac5orfinge to te Fndlingh ofthe we ppens 


i4 » : oy 

N i þ ; | 1 a” 4 7 
14 : 4 . OY . 
is ' 2 f , — tf : 
i ; : : TR : 
1 £ £ 
i; ; A [51 : 
2 ; 1 
22 


-0 j the Fri tree. Gs Þ o. 


| % The hrs. | 
Hetree fromwhich Foc | Like Wc Eh leaues like the Maſticke rec; 
fe as injonthar the lea is like the leafe of aPearerree, and ofa grafhic colour: 
therinde is like chat cf the Bay tree whereof there are two kindes, the one groweth in moun- 
eaines and rockie places: the other in vr bur thoſe inthe plaines are much woorſe than 
thoſe of the mounraines:the gum whercgf is allo, blacker fiteer co mingle with Pirch,and ſuch other 
ſtuffe to trim ſhips,than for other vſcs. | 
Theaet in his Colmographie faith ta che Priakincenl cree doth reſemble a gummic orrolinic 
Pinerree, which yeeldeth a iuice that in rime groweth hard, andis called Thas, Frankincenſe, in 
whomis ſomtigie found Frans 1% 0606 het Fich theycallehe Mane of Fran- 
kincen(e. | : | 


1 
[ 
& | boy 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS | _nag7 


Aber Thurifere. Thuris Limpidi folium L'O *; SRe 
The Frankincenſe tree. The "oe leafe ofthe fre ſhining elkincen tree. 


* The deſcription. 
Ofthis there is in it rwoother ſorts,the one, 
the gum aa } is gathered i in the Dogge daics 
_ whenthe ſunis in Le Sebich] is white, pure, clecre, 


and ſhining. Pere moo he hath ſeene the 
cleere rebel andycelding 
: IOEnY 1 it "7 nt, butthe leajc 

. hath ſeldome ſee - which the Phifition Laa- 


nanx ſcemeth to ſer 0 Tis itbenot ccr- 


Gr oe PECi v4 Ages incenſe, orof 
ſome her PREG el gthelike iuice or gum. 
Ir is ſaith We in other 
leaues, from thelc wars or foote of the leafe, 
tothe Vpper cog were doubled, conſiſting of © 
two thinne rindes od Ain In 'S, wich a ſheath aſpanne 
& a halfelong,aret 2g openlike a whoode 
or fooles cockeſcor wth ]. as 1t werecouered with 
hel, which $atl army wes alcafe, 
bur is proper to Lecke hitis, as writers af 
firme. The otheris in the ſpring, which is 
reddiſh,woorſer thenthe other in price vr value,bi- 
cauſe it is not lo well colcotedi in *% heate of the ſiinge. The Arabians this tree with a 
knife,that the liquor mayl floweour tnore aboundantly, wherof ſome cc yeeld ken pounds 


of Frankincenſe. | | hi 
| * The place. "| | 

Dipſeorides faithit uy in Arabia, andeſpeciallyin that quarter which is elle Thank, 
the beſt in that countr iscalled Stagoniu, and is roundzand ifi oken,is fat within,and when 
itis burned doth quickly yeelde a ſmell: next vntoit in goodnes is that which TAN © in Smilo, 


leſſer thenthe prYagp more yellow, a 3d 
% The time. IM 
The timeis alrea dy declaredi inthe deſcription. jd | 
| *% The names. 


Iris calledin Greeke 1--ec: in Larine Thas: in Iealian Incenſs: in Drch Uuetrauch: i in Spaniſh 
Encienſo : in French Enceas: in En glih Frankincenſe, and Incenſe; in the Arabian Ong Lowan, 
and of ſome few Conder. 

* The temperature andvertues. 

Ithath ,as Dioſcorids faith, a power to heate and binde. 

Ir eriverh away the dimnes of the cic ſight,filleth vp hollow vicers k cloſerh rawe OY OY 
eth all corruprions of bloud,although it flowe from the head, | 

Galen wrieeth thus of it, Thas dot heate in the ſecond degree,and dry i in the firſt, an@hath ſore C 
ſmall aſtriftion 3bur in the white there is manifeſt aſtriftion : the rinde doth manifeſtly binde and 
dry excredingly,and that moſt certainly in the ſecond degree, for it is of more pote r parts then 
Frankincenſc,and not ſo ſharpe, byreaſon whereofit is much vſcdin ſpitting of b ſyellings in 
the mouth, che colicke pafſion,the fluxe in the belly riſing from the ſtomacke, and bloudy dixes, 

The fume or ſmoke R hath a more drier and hotter qualitythen the Frankincenſe itlelte , be- [ 
ing drie in thethirde degree. | | 

Itdoth alfoclenſe and fill vp the vicersi in the ties, like vnto Myrrhe .thus facre Galew. E 

Dte of torides (aith,that if itbe drunke by a man in bealch jit driueth him into a frenfic; burthereare F 
fewe Greekes of his minde. 


Canrcen reporteth thatitdoth helpe BY ſtrengthen the wit and erat the often ta- G 
of 


king of it will breed the headach,anditroo much of it be drunke withywine it killech, —=_ 


1248 THE THIRD BIOKE|OF THE 
Of Fiſticke N 
. Piftacia. | I | | 


The Fiſticke Nur, | fq 
; « \bearerh Fiſlicke Nurs i like 
Ti ine tree: the leaues hecreof 
| greater-then thole of the 
| burſer after t ſame 


iehour is greene, the ſhell bricklc and 
. taſte ſweere and ſomewhat bitter, pleaſant to be 
' caten,and ſomthing ſweete of ſmell, 


Fiſticke Nuts 


This 

_ 17 *% Thenames. | 
|. This Nut tscalledin Greeke maluer: in Athe: 
' naw, Nicander Colophonize in the booke of Trea- 
. cles namethit ey Poſidowiu rom it Begd- 
, xzoy: Others Pigizucy: tines obſeruing the 
' fame tefmes have named ir pr encgrey do 
; or Phiftacion + the Apothecaries Fiſtici:the Spa- 
| niards Atbetigos and Fiſticos:in Italian Piftacchi: 
- inEngliſh Filticke Nur, 
| * Thetemper ature andvertnes. 

A ni.t1 | | | The kernels of the Fiſticke Nuts are often- 
times eaten,as be thoſe of the Pine apples;they be of temperature hot & moiſtzrhey are nor ſo calily 
concoQted,burt much eaſier then common nuts: the inice is good,yet ſomwhat thicke z they yeelde 
ro the body no ſmall nouriſhment ; they nouriſh bodies that are conſumed z they recouer ſtrength, 

B Theyare goodfor thoſe that crap ond pies _ away of the lungs. | 

C Theyconco&, ripen, and clenſe foorth rawe humours that eleaue to the lightes and cheſt, 

D Theyopgnthe ſtoppingsof the liver, angbe good forthe infirmities of the kidneies ; they alſo 
remooue out of the kidncies fande and igrauell ;/and aflwage|their paine: they are alſo good for 
vicers. Ns OO # FF 

'E Thekernels of Fiſticke nurs condited, or made into comfits, with ſugar and caten,do procure 
bodily luſt, vaſtop the lungs and the breſt, are good againſt the ſhorrnes of breath, andarean cx- 
cellent preſeruatiue medicine being mipiſtred in wine againſt the birings of all mannez of wilde 


of 
be - 
£ 1 
» 
_ 


» 


beaſts. 


£ : 
I k [4 L 7 
£ i . F* 
* F 
+ [7 fl t 
»; : : n 
- : 
"ES | | ; | » 
:, rr + b [- 
= be" of = 
p : : £ - 
: p : I i 
o þ.) - 
RF q P 
L þ ff : 
: [ [8] J : 
S4 + Y x 6 | 
4 : [4 & * 
> 
: 
y 4 $ 
x £ 
. 
o 
Li 
« 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. AT 54-47 


Of the Bladder AS > 


y  # =? 
TF% 4 


. C/ edeſeriy ; 
His is a low tree,hauing = yong ſprings 


growing = of the roote: the ſubſtance 

of the wood white, very hard and ſound; 
the barke is of a light greene: the leaues conſiſt of 
five little ones, which be nickedin rhe edges like 


thoſe of the Elder, , tor fo nor 
rankeof finel. It ep ios I 


of Bryonie or Lab {cs both in ſmell 4 
wth rurne into ſmall cornered 


Tebrained two ga new a9; 


ſometimes no more þut one, lefſer than the Haſelt 
nut, bur greater than theRam Cich, with awoo- 
&+- ſhelland fo har red : thekernell within i iS 


ſomething greenezjin taſte atthe firſt ſiveere, bue 
afterwards lothſome hos ready to proucke vomit, 
*! 

It growerh in Iralje, of u=99 andFrance i it 
growerh l:kewiſe at the houſe otfir Walter Culpe p- 
per neere Flimuwell in the Weald of Kent, as alſo 
in the Frier yarde without S.Paules garc in Stam- 
ford, and about Spalding Abbay, and in the gar- 
den of the right honorablethe Lord Treaſurer my - 
very good Lord ang Maſter, by his houſe in the 
Strand, It growerhalfo in my garden, and in the 
garden holes es of ſit Francis Carew neer Croydon 
ſeuen miles} from London. 

* The me. 
This tree flowreth in May,the nuts be ripe! in Auguſt and Sepremkger 
* The names. 

Itis commonly called in high Dutch Pimpernuſs, which fignifieth in lows Dutch Ptmperno- 
ten; divers call it in Latine Piſt actum Germanicum :; we thinke it beſt tocall it Nax ve raria .. Ma- 
thiolws in his Epiſtles doth iudge it the Turkes Conkon! and Hebuiben to agree with this : Guliclmus 
Quacelbenus afftirmeth, Coulcoul tobe vſed of diuers in Conſtantinople for a dainrie, eſpecially 
when they be new broughtout ofEgypr. This plant hath no olde name, vnlefſc icbe Spzbyled-n- 
dron Pling, for whichitisraken of the later wrirers, and Plinie hath! written of it in his 16. booke 
16 chapiny: There is alfo(ſaith he) beyond the Alpes atree, the timber whereof is very like ro thar 
of white Maple and is called $ra;hylodendron,it beareth cods,and in thoſe ketnels, hauing the rafte 
ofthe Haſel| nut. It is called in En liſh S. Anronies nuts, wilde Piſtatia/or Bladder nuts: thetrali- 
anscall it P ;ftachio Satuarjck : the 'French mencall ic Biguenandes 8 wr noſtres, tor rhat the Friers 
do vic toamake Beades of the nuts. 2s 

' uh The temperatureandwertues, | 

Theſe nuts are ;emoylt and full of ſuperfluous rawe humors, andt dr they eaſily procurea A 
readinefle ro vomit, and/rrouble the ſtomacke, by reaſon that withall they be ſomewhat binding, \ 
and therefore they be not to be eaten, 
©  Theſehaueas yet no vſein medicine, yet notwithſtanding ſome bj attributed vnto them ſome B 
vertuesinprougking of Venerie. | 


of 


: 


2259 THE THIRD! BOOKE+ OF {THE 


7" £: ' f - ' | £ 
F4 ; : z ' ! F 3 
b [ x ; $ 2 : -* q 8 : - 
Of the H, ree, .\Chapi63,- - 
(EAT YCH IFEC, - DiO3y,- - 
iz : by 5 : 


1 Nux Avellone int Corrs. ® | 2 Corpo ppc 
The FibeQMWug} 74. | | | ThewildeHedge Nor, 


- 


TilY 
« 78 


TH poet thy 
X , b.C p : $1 "oh 
' "%. i L 
4 L F A v2 : 
_ ts F..5 
Er ; q : Le OE RT Town 2, © "La 6th Cahn 
WY af > —  —— — 
JRd \Þ\ » abr. > A ub. 1 >» 
E \ 
TTL p # 
k - _ "1 
# wt hs _ l 
# & » IF 


C 


bs 


ig 


Lit 
o 
. 


bo 
: 


$*. . 
$1347.74 
21* 445 W- 
: g * 
al” (1 


: J Y Pd 
1/7 


, 
—"# 
4 
; 
\ d b - 
A 
i 4 
ot 
SQ 
» 
' 
C : - 
- 
Rd I 
T 
- LS £ 
, 
bY a -\ 
: bs P 
7 . : 
' ” e . 
_ % ; 0 
. 


* The aeſerittion. 
I He Haſell tree groweth like a ſhrub or ſmall rree,partedinto boughes withour knotsfough 
andpliable: rhe leaves are broad, greater and fuller of wrinkles, than thoſe of the Alder 
tree, cut in the edges like a ſawe, of colour greene, andon.the backſide more white; the 
barke is thinnez the roote is thicke,ſtron g and growing deepe; inſtead of flowers hang downe cat- 
A or blowings,flender and wellicompadt; after which come the Nuts ſtanding ina wy 
cup of agreene colourand 1agped at the vpper end,like almoſt tq the beards in Roſes, Theſhellis 
ſmooth and woodie ; the kerne[l within conſiſteth of a white, hatd, and ſound pulpe, and couered 
"_ athin skin, oftentimes red, moſt cqmmonly white; this kernell is ſweere and pleafanc to the 
Corylus fylneHyisis our hedge Nut or Haſell Nut tree, which is very wellknowen, and therefore 
neederh not any deſcription rs þ are Af ok ys hy A great, ſome lirtle, ſome 
rathe ripe, ſome later, as alſo one that is manured, in our gardens, which is very great, biggerthan 
any Filberd, and yer akindeof Hedge Nut. This then that hath bcene ſaid, ſhall ſuffice tor Hedge 


Nuts, | 
HF || | NN —_— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS| 1251 
_Auellana pronila Byzanting. | { | 
The F:ulberd nut of Conſtantinople. . * W e place. 
| | The Haſel! trees do commonly growe in woods 
and in dankiſh vntoiled places; theyare alſo ſerin 
Orchards, the Nuts whereof are better, and ofa 
ſweeter taſte, and be oſt commonly red within. 
* The time. 5, 

The carkins or aglets come foorth veryrtimely, 
before winter be. fully/paſt , which fall away in 
March or Aprill fo ſoone as the leaues come 
foorth: rhe nurs be ripe in Auguſt, 

* T be names.  _—© 

This ſhrub is called in Larine Cory/ascin Greeke | 
ripua mad, that is, Nax/ Pontice,or Pontike Nur: in — 
high Dutch Haſel ftrauck: in low Dutch Haſe- 
leer : in Engliſh Haſelltree, and Filberd tree ; but 
the Filberd tree is properly that which groweth in 
gardens and Orchards, 
The Nut is namedin Latine N «x Pontics , te- 


lowe Dutch baſel 


Anelline,Nocelle:in _— Noiſettes,8 Noiſelles: 
in Spaniſh Avelanas:; in Engliſh Haſell Nut, 
and Filberd. f — 


Theſe Nuts that hauc their skinsred arethe gar- 
den andplanted Nuts,andtheright Pontike Nuts 
or Filberds zthey are Sled in high Dutch Rhur- 
| nuſ3,and Rotnuf5 : in lowe Dutch Roode Haſcl 
| | Noten: in Engliſh Filberds,and red Filberds. 
Theother Nuts which be white are iudged to be wilde. [ 
| | uh The temperature and vertues. | | 
Haſell Nuts newly gathered,andnotas yet dry,containe in them a cettaine ſuperfluous moiſture, A 
| byreaſon wherof they are windy; not onely the new gathered Nuts,butthe dry allo be very hard of 
| digeſtion; forthey areofanearthy and colde efſence;and of a hard and ſound ſubſtance;for which 
| cauſealſo they veryſlowly pafle thorow the belly,therefore they are rrqubleſome and cloggingrto 
| | theſtomacke,cauſe headach,eſpecially when they be eaten in too greata quantitic. | | 
|  Thekernels of Nuts made into Milke like Almonds , doth mightilybinde the belly and is good B 
forthe laske and the bloudy flixe. | | | 


_ 


- 


The ſame doth coole exceedingly in hot feuers,and burning agues. | 
' Thecarkins are colde anddry,andlikewiſc binding; they allo ſtay the laske. 


Of the Walnut Tree. Chap.84. 


* The deſcription. | 


His is a great tree witha thicke and tallbody; the barke is ſomewhat greene , andtending 


g_— 


x 


ta the colour of aſhes, and oftentimesfull of clefts : the boughes ſpread thethſelues farre 
abroade; the leaues conſiſt of fiue orſixe faſtned ro oneribbe , like thoſe of the Aſh rree,and . 

' withoneſtanding on the top; which be broader and longer then the particular leaues ofthe Aſhz 
imooth alſo,and of a ſtrong ſmell : the carkins or aglers come foorth before the Nuts : theſe Nuts 
| Qogrow hard tothe Ralke of the leaues by couples,or by three andthree , which ar the firſt when 


they 


i232 _ THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

\ they be yetbur tender,haue a ſiveere ſimel,and becouered with a greene huske;vnder that is a woo- 
die ſhell,in which the kernellis contained, being couered with/a thin skin,parred almoſt into fower 
parts, with a woodie skin as it were ;z the inner pulpe whereof js white, ſweete and pleaſant to the 
taſte,and that is when it isnew gathered; for after it 1Sdric it becommeth oily and ranke, 


Nux Ingians. | |: 
Ine Walnut tree, | 


' ; | * The lace. 

| The Walnuttree groweth in fields neere com- 
mon high wajes in a fat andFinirfil ground, and in 
orchards; it proſpereth on high fruicfull banks ; ir 
loueth not to growein waterieplaces, 

36 * © + Werime. 

; . The leaues togither with the catkins come 
foorth atthe fuſt ſpring : thenuts are garhercd in 
Bug, T1 


| | wt Thenames. 
| The rree js called in Greeke we, in Latine 
'Nux, which name doth fignifie both the tree and 
{fruiczin high Ditch Nutzbaum t in lowe Dutch = 
J?oote tocm, and Noptelaer ; in French woz- 
fer : in Spaniſh Nognezya : in Engliſh Walnue 
tree, andof ſome Walſhinut cree, Thenur is cal- 
ledin Greekerapor amuniz, that is to ſay, Nux Re- 
2:4, ortlie Kings Nur : it is likewife named Iv ax 
Inglans, as though you ſhould ſay Jouts glans, lupi- 
ters Acorne,pr./uuans glans, the helping Acorne, 
and of diuers Fer/ica Nux, or the Perſian Nut: in 
high Dutch UWelich Jul, and Baumnuls : in 
lowe Durch Pgternoten,UTalſch noten: in Ira- 
lian Noez :in French Notx: in Spaniſh Nuzzes and 
Now: in Engliſh Walnut, and of ſome Walſh 


Nee. 1 1 | 
%t 4 The temperature and wertues. 
| wn t | *? |! The freſhikernels of the nuts newly gathered 
are pleaſant tothe taſte; they are a little colde, and hauc no {mall moyſture which is not perfealy 
concocted;they be hard of digeſtion, they nourith little, they [lowly deſcend, : 
B Thedrienuts are hot and drie,and thoſe more which become oylie and ranke,theſe be very hurt- 
full ro the ſtomacke zand beſides that they be hatdly concoRed, 16 increaſe choler; they cauſe 
headach,and be hurtfullfyr the cheſt,and for thoſe that be troubled with the cough. 


s 


A 


- C Drienuts taken faſting with aFig andl a littleRue withſtandeth poyſon, preuenteth and preſer: 
ucth rhe body from the Pf: of the plague, and being plentifully caten they drive wormes 
foorth ofthe belly. |! |. FE2 0-3: LE td 

D Thegreene and tendex nuts boyledin ſugar and eaten as Suckade, area moſt pleaſant and dele- 
ctable meare,comfort the/ſtomacke,ang expell poyſon. 3 WY I A 
E Theoyleof Walnuts madetin ſuch jnanner as oyle of Alczonds, maketh ſmooth the hands and 
' face,and taketh away ſcales and ſcurtfe;blacke and blew marks that come of ſtripes or brules. 
F Milke madeof the kerhels, as Almond milkeiis made, cogleth and pleaſerh the appetiteof the 
languiſhing ſicke body, | | *h BEEEE. +> 
G Withonions, fal: andhonyzthey are good againſt the biting of a mad dog or man,if they be laid 
vponthe wound, IN. 14 F_Ss KEE 4 | 
H Beingborheaten and allo applied, they heale in ſhort rime, as Dioſeorides ſaith, gangrens, Cat- 
buncles, zgilops, and the pilling away of the haire; this alſo is cffetually done by the oyle that 1s 
preſſed outof them, which is of thin paxts, digeſting and heating. | | 
© I Theoutwardgreene huske of che nuts hath ainotable binding facultie, 


K Galendeuiſed and tayght romake ofthe ivice thereof a medicine for the mouth, ſingular good 
again all mlammationz thereof, | | - | | th 
We a bs | , 


HISTORIE: OF PLANTS./. 1253 


| Theleauesandfirſt buds hane acerraine binding qualitie, as the ſame author ſheweth; yet there L 
| | dothaboundintheman hot and drie remperature. Mic F 

' Someof chelater phuſicions vie rhete torbathes and lotions for the bodie, in which they hauc a M 
| forcetodigeſt andallo to procure ſweate, fy Is = It} 


| Of the Cheſinut tree. (hap. $5. | 4 


1 Caſkanes, | | 2 Caſtanes Equina. 
 Cheſtnuttree, | =_. ; Horſe Cheſtnut tree, 


| | % The deſeription. | 
He Cheſtnut tree is a very great and high rec; ircaſterh foorth very many boughes ; the 
body is thicke, and ſometimes of ſogreatacompalle , as that tow men can ſcarily fathony 
it: thetimberor ſubſtance of rhe wood is ſound and durable: the leaues be great, rough, 
wrinkled, nicked in the OP greater than the particular leaues of the Valnut tree. The blow- 
ings orcatkins be {lender,long and greene :the fruitis incloſed in a round,rovgh,and prickly huske 
like to an Hedgehog or Vrchin, which opening it ſelfe doth let fall the ripefrunt or nit. This nutis 
not round, but flat on the one fide,ſmooth and tharpe poinred:it is couered with a hard ſheli,which 
is tough and very ſmooth,of a darke browne colour :the meate or inner ſubſtance of the nur is hard 
and Mike and conered with a thin skin,which is vader the ſhclI, { | 
2 The Horſe Cheſtnut groweth likewiſe to be a very great tree, ſpreading his great and large 
arrnes or branches far abroad, by which meanes it maketh a very good goole ſhadow, Theie bran- 
ches are garniſhed with many beaurifullleaues, cur or divided intofiite, {ixe, or ſeuen {eftions or 
diviſions, like to rhe Cinkfoile,or rather like the Jeaues of Reins but bigger. The lowers growe at 
the top of the ſtalkes, conſiſting of fower ſmall leaues like the Cherrie bloſſom , which tune into 
ma rough and prickley hcads like the fetiaer, butmore ſharpe ant! harder: the nuts are alſo 
rouhder, | | | 


Mm mtn 1 *+ The 


The firſt groweth on mountaines ang ſhadowieplaces,and manyrimes in th 
aſoft and blacke ſoyle. There be ſundrie woods bf Cheſtnuts imEngland,as 
Feuerſhain in Kent, and ih ſundrie other places; | 
in others ſmaller, and of worſe taſte. | ' |: | FE. 
The Horſe Cheſtnut groweth in Italic and in ſundry places of the Eaſt countries, 
ba: TEND wTke ther 00048 
The blowings or aglets come foorth with the leaues in Aprill,but the nuts later, and be not ripe 


1254 THE/THIRD BOOKE\ OF THE 


c vallies ; they loue 
inEn ,as a mile anda halfefrom 
in ſome countries they be greater and pleafanter, 


*T he names. 1 my | 
of the nut both in| Grecke and Latine : in. hi 


1 


Thenurtisca 


ted: | 


LY ie dt and 


n 


£ 


le, hardly concoQed, and very flow 
painſt the laske and bloody flixe. 
good againlt the cough, and fpittin 
of blood: ; = is 4 So 3s Wide 
F Thebarkeof rhe Chef | edin wine and drunke ,\ſtoppeth the laske, the bloody flixe, 
and all other iſſues of blood. | Fer] Kan [4 | 


J 
f 
[ 
f 
: 
[5 


| Of theBeechtree. Chap.86. 


| * | tk Thedeſeription. 


'F 


He Beech is an hightree,with boughes ſpreading oftentimes in maner of acircle, and with 2 

thicke body,hauing/manyarmes : [the batke is ſmooth; the timber is white, barde, and very 

profitable: the leaues be ſmooth, thinne, broad, andlefſer then thoſe of the blacke Poplar; 

* the catkins,or blowings be alſo leſſer ahd ſhorter then thoſe gf the Birch tree ;and yellow:the truite 

or Maſte is contained in a huske or cup'thar js prickly,and rough briſtled z yet not ſo much as that 

ofthe Cheſtnut; which ffuite being taken foorth of the thels 'of vichin huskes, be coucred with a 

ſmooth and ſoft skin, like in colour and ſmoothies to the Cheſtnuts, but they bemuch leſſer,and 

of another forme, that is ro ſay triangled or three cornered: the kernell within is ſweete,with a cet- 

caine aftriction or binding quakiiez the rootes be fewe, and grow not deepe, and little lower then 
vnder the turte, ini ih Eat-1 [| 


Fagus 


%. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS!!' 8 rx5 


' FAgHs. 
4, The Beech, 


og '* Theplace.- 

The Beech tree loueth a Plaine and open coun- 
trie,and groweth veryplentitully in many forreſts 
and defarr places ot |Suflex, Kent, and fundric 
other countries, | SONS NG 

* Thetome, 00! | 

The Beech flowreth in April and May, and the 
fruit is Tipe in Septetnber,atwhat rimeche Deere * 
do carethe ſame very greedily, as greatly detigh- 

ting therein , which hath-cauted forreſters and 
huntſmenco caltirBuckmaſt, © EF 
-2 The tree is named in Greek: in Latine Za 
{ gw : in high Dutch Buchbaum, or Burh » in 
& low Dutch Bukenbogmzin Italian Fager:iin Spe, 
"Miſh Hajd Ftia,avd Fax: in French Pas,or He#Hvc: 
av mEnglifh Beechtree, ecch maſt,and Buckwalt. 
SY - Thefruitiscalledin Latin Naces Fagiin Gree). 
\Ga>harot 7 gut in low Durch Biuekennootkens ; 
m French Faize:in Engliſh Beech malt. Dioſcorc- 
aes reckoneth the Beech among the Acorn niges, 
and yet isthernaſt nothing like at alltro an Acorn. 
Of Theophraſt tis called Oxya, of Gaza Stiſcins. 
Plinie alſo maketh mention. of this rec, bur , 
vnder the name of Offzya(iffo be in ſtead of Otrys * 
we muſtnotreade Oxys)in his 13. booke 21.chap. 
It bringerh foorth, ſaith he(meaning Greece) the 
[| tidairt4e | | tree Offr5s, which they likewiſe call Ofrys, grow- 
| | Ingaloneamongwarerie ſtones,like to the Aſheree in barke and boughes, with leaues likerhole of .. 
_ thePcarerree, but ſomewhat longer and thicker, and with wrinkled cues, which runquirerhorow, 
| withaſcedlike in colout ro a Cheſtnut(and not vito Barly :)the wood is hatd arid firme,which be- 
| Ingbroughtintothe houſe there followeth hard trauell with ohilde, and miſerable deathes, as ir is 
| reportedzand therfore tobe forborne & nor vſed& fire wood,if Pl;uichis copies be not corrupted, 
| | MEL 3 The temperature. i 
The leaues of Beech do coole; the kernell ofthe nur is fomewhat moyſt. 


o 
| 
- 


| | | _ wThevwertues. | | 
|  Theleaues of Beech are very profitably applied vnto hot ſwellings, bliſters, and excoriationis';- A 
| andbeingchewedthey are good for chappedlips and paine of the gums. 


Thekernels or maſt within are reported tocaſe the paine of thekidneies proceeding of the ſtone'B 
| tftheybeeaten, and rocauſe the grauell and fand the caſter to come foorth ; withtheſe mice and - - 
| fquirrels be greatly delighted, who do mightily increaſe by feeding thereon; ſwine alſo befatrened 
| herewith,and certaine other beaſts ; alfo deere do feede thereon very (greedily. They belikewiſe 
| pleaſant tothruſhes and pigeons, | q | 
Petrus Creſcentina writerh, that the aſhes of the woodis good to make glaſle with, C 
'  Thewaterthat is foundin the hollowneſſeiof Beeches, cureth the naughtie ſcurffe, tetrers, and D _ 
| kabsofmen,horſeskine,and ſheepe;if they be waſhed therewithall, | 


Of the eAlmond tree. Chap.87 | 


| | % The deſcription. 1 

He Almond tree is like to the Peach tree, yetis it higher,bigger bodied, of longercStinuance; 
theleaues therof be very long, fharp pointed, ſnipved abour the edpes like thoſe ofthe Peach 
treezthe flowers be alike;the ſruit is alſo like a Peachhauing on one {idea clefr,with a foft skin 


| without, and coucred with a'thin cotton; but vnder this there is none of very little pulpe, andthe 


q 
: 


Mmmm 2 : ſame 


1255 , THE THIRD BOOKE:OF THE 

fame hard like a griſtle, whichis not earn ; the nur or ſtone within is longer thanthar of the 
Peach, not ſo rugged but ſmooth; in which is coptained the kernel, in taſte ſiveete? and many times 
bicter, The roote of the tree growethidgepe : the gum which ſokerh out hereof is likethar of the 
Peachtree. | BOSy ; F | | Fl. 


| all place of the Almondisio thehor 
&<'we haue them in-our Loadon gar: 


\mond, **7/| ® 
4 | % The ature and vertues. 
- Sweete Almonds when they be withered be 
7hot and drie, butthe bitter ones are 
SN - '£ drieJn the ſecond degree. Thercis in both 
\ +: ofchema certaine fat and we ſubſtance which is 
; drawen out bypreſling, | 
|, Sweete Almonds being new gatheredare plea. 
 ſanttothetaſte'; they yeclde ſome kinde of nou- 
'riſhment, but the ſame grofle and ecarthic, and 
| groflerchan thoſe that be dric, and notas yet wi- 
\.thered, Theſe do likewiſe ſlowly deſcend, eſpeci- 
1-41 | | ally being cpren without their &kins z foreuen as 
| }! _.,,. the huskes or brannie partes of corne do ſerue to 
drive downe the groſle excrements of the belly, ſo do likewiſe the skins or husks of the Almonds: - 
therefore. thoſe that be blanched: do ſoſlowly; deſcend, as chat they do withalb binide the belly ; 
whereupon they are giuen with good ſucceſle to thoſe that haue rhe laske,or the bloGdie flixe, 

C There isdrawenoutof ſweete Almqnds, with liquor added, a white iuicelike milke, which ouer 
and beſides that it nouriſheth, andis good for that are troubled with the laske ard bloodie 
Glixc, it is profitable for thoſe thathaue the plepriſic and ſpetvp filthic marter, as Alexander Tral- 
liana witneſieth. For there is likewiſe mthe Almonds an opening and concoRting qualitie, with a 
certaine clenſing facultje,by which they are medicinable tothe theft andlungs,or lights,and ſeruc 
for theraiſing vp of flegive and rotten matcer, | | (9 ol = 

D Almonds taken before meate do ſtop the belly, and nouriſh bur a lictle 3 notwithſtanding many 
excellent meats and medicines, arc therewith made for ſundry greefes, yea very delicate and whol- 
ſome meats, as Almond burter, cteame of Almonds,maichpanes,and ſuch like, which dric and 
Kaic the belly more then the extracted iuice or milkez and they are as good for the cheſt and 
lunges. 1 + Late [| | 

I Theydo ſerue alſo to make the Phiſicall Batly water, and Barly creame, which aregiuen in hot 
feuers zas alſo fororher ſicke and feeble perſons for their further comfort and nouriſhment. | 

F Theoile which is newly preſſed ourof the ſweete Almonds, is amitigater of paine, and all ma- 
ner of aches. | Lo bro pils obilgþ ot bes: . 


[ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS! 7 1157 

Icis giuen to thoſe that haue the pleuriſic being firſt ler bloud ; bur cſpeciallyto ſuch as are rrou- G 

| bledwith the ſtone of chekidneies) itflacknerh the paſſages of the vrine, andmaketh them glib or 

 {lyperiey/ and more readie to ſuffer the ſtone to haue tree pallage: hmekgh the belly ſoluble, and 

 thereforeitis likewiſe vid for the collicke. 

' Iris goodfor womenthat are nt, deliuered, for it quickly remoougth the hrowes which e- H 
maine after the deliuerie. _ 

The oyle of Almonds do make ſmooth the hands andface of Hliztperins and clenſerh the [ 

_ «in from all fpots,vimplesandlentils, 

Bitter Almonds do make thin and open, they remaoue flopp $ Al of the liverand ſplecne, K 
thecefore theybe good againſt paine inthe ſides: they makethebody ſol, e vrine, bring 
downe the menſes helpe 1 the ſrqngafend clenſe toorth of Sy on rae tclammie humors: 
 ifthey be mixed with ſomekinde ot lo6chormedicinetolicke on,with ack theyſtay the ſpetung 
of blood: 

Andit ts xeported chat fiue or ſixe being taken faſting Cokeepea a being drunke, © L 

Thelc alſo clenſeand take away tpots and blemiſhes in the face, and in other parts of the Dgey: ;M 
they mundifie or make cleane foule cating vicers. 

With hony theyare laid vpon the bitings of mad dogs; being applied tothe a with vinc-N 
ger or oyle of Roſes,they rake away the headach as Dioſcorides writeth. | 

They are alſo good againſt thecough andſhorrnes of winde, O 

They are likewiſe good for thoſe that {petbloo4,it they be taken with] c fo fiber #7, <<" P 

There is allo preſſedoutoftheſe anoyle which proucketh vrine,bur ſpecially if a few pep! ipns Q- 
be drowned and ſtecpedrhetein, | 

With oyle it is ſingular good forrhoſe rhat hauc the ſtone, and cannot cali ly make 204 IM R 
with extremitie of paine, if the ſharcandplace betweene the cods and fundamenr be annoynred 
therewith, 

Disſearides ſaith, that the gum doc hea and binde ; which qualities dgickRanding arenot $ 

erceiued in it, 
: Ichelpertrthem thatſpet blood not bs a binding facultic, butthorow the clammineſſe ofhis ſub-T 
ſtance, and that is by cloſing vp of the paſſages and pores, and ſo mayitalſo: cyreoldecoughes, 


-  andmitigate extreme paines that procecde of the ſtone, and eſpecially yake awaythe ſharpricile of 


vrine, if itbe drunke with Baſtard, orwith any other ſweet potion, as with the decoRion of Lico- 
rice,or of Raiſons of the ſunne. The ſame doth likewiſc kill tetters in the outward partes of the bb. 
Qie(as Dioſeorides _ iy be diſlolucdi in vincger. | 


: 
: 
; 


of the Peach tree. ..(} hap 8 8, | 


The hindes. || 
There be diuers ſortes of Peaches,as may appecre in their ſeuerall del Friptions, 


*% The deſcription. IS 

| He Peach tree is atree of no greatbigneſle:it hadedliath 71h boughes, which be fo 
 brirtle,as oftentimes they are broken with the waight of the fruit or with the winde. The 
leaues belong, nickedin the' edges, like almoſt o thoſe of the Willow tree, andinraſte 
 dirter : the lowers beof alightpurple Dove: The fruit or Peaches be found, and haue asit were a 
<hinke or cleft on the one {ide ; they are coucred with a foftand thin ne. Or hairie cotton, being 
white without, S& of a pleaſant taſte zinthemiddle wherofisa rough orfugged ſtone,whetin is con- 
rained a kernel like vntorheAlmond; the meate abour the ſtone is of/a a white colour, The roore 
is tough and yellowiſh. | 
2 Thered Peach tree is likewiſe attee ofno great bigheſſe: e: italſo ſender foorth divers boughes 
or branches, which be very brittle.- The lcaues be long and nicked in/the-edges like tothe prece- 
dent,The flowers be alſo like vnto the former ; the fruit or Peaches beround, of aredcolour on the 
ourfide; the racate likewiſe about the ſtone is of a gallant red colour. Thelckinde of Peaches are 
very like towinc ingaſte, and Gntpiepc macuellous pleaſant. | 

Mmmm's |" : Per/ica 


HIRD BOOKE| OF THE 
bene $42! Flnhy 2 Perſearnbra. 


; | Q Sf 
a(C>>,= << SD 44; 


SE: V 


THE T 
1 Perſicaalba. 
The white Peach, | | 


% , \ {/ 
. W / 
A be 5 
I WES 


1258 


: 


x 


A. F 
— 


- fi L487 - $5 
% w 
F, RY 
% \ % _ - y 
& ys J ; OY ® % — oy ———_— 
« FP " » < ” pn 
4 ” v/ 
by cs. "oY - 6, ugh 3 k x = OY 4 4 L %. " $- 3 
p On IIS _w _ TC ” 4 _ # &,v 


| 4 Perſicalutea. 
| _ TheyellowPeach. 


3 Perſicaprecocia, 
The d'anant Peach.! 


= 
\928;\\\ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, = 


*% T hedeſeription. | 
The d'avant Peach tree is like vnto the former,bur his leaucs are geaterand| arger, Thefruitor 
Peaches be of a ruſter colour on the one fide, and on the other fidencxt varothe ſunne of ared co. 
Jour, but much greater than the red Peach: the ſtones whereof are like ynro the former :the pulpeor 
meate within is of a golden yellow colour,and of a pleaſantraſte. | | 
4 Theyellow Peach tree is like rnto theformerin leaues and flowers : his fruitis of a yellow co. 
Jour on the outſide, and likewiſe on the inſide, harder chan the reſt ; inthe middle of the Peach is a 
woodie, hard and rough ſtonegfall of creſts and gurrers,in whichdothlie a kernel much like to that 
of the Almond,and with ſuch alike skin: the fubitance withinis white,and in raſte ſomthing birter, 
The fruit hereof is of greateſt pleaſure, andbelt raſte of all che other of his kinde: although chere 
be found ar this day diuers other fortes that are of very.good tale, not remembred of the ancient, 
or ſer downe hy the later writers, whereof to ſpeake particularly, would not be greatly to our pre. 
tended purpole,confidering we haſten toan end. ; 
| % T he place. : 
They are ſet and plantedin gardens and vineyards: Ihaue themall in my garden, with many 


. 
p 
T 


by. 


other ſorts, | | 
* Thetime. | 

The Peach tree ſoone commeth vp: it beareth fruit the third or fourth yeere after it is planted, 
and it ſoone decaicth z and is not of long continuance; it flowreth in Aprill, or a little whileafter 
chat the leaues appeere,and hath his fruit ripe in September, | 

| % The names. 1 

The Peach tree is called in Grecke wie mea: in Latine Malas Perfica 8 Perfiea : inhigh Dutch 
Perſichbaum : in lowe Dutch Perſe boom zin French Pexeher : in Engliſh Peach tree, 

The fruit,as Ge/enteſtifieth,is named wiaer mos, and mrs alſo withourany addition: in Latine 
Mahon Pcrſicwn and Per ſiews : in high Dutch JIferſing 2 in low Durch Perſen: in Icalian Feſch: : 
in Spaniſh Pexegos: in French Peſehes: in Engliſh Peach. | | 

GY * Thetempetature and yertues. | 

Peaches be cold and moyſt, and that in the ſecond degree; they haue a iuice and alſo a ſubſtance A 
thatdothcaſily purrifie, which yecldeth nonouriſhment, bur bringeth hurt, eſpecially if they be 
eaten after other meares3/for then they cauſe the other meates to puttifie, Bur they are leſſe hurr- 
full if theybe taken firſt 3 for by reaſon thE they are moylt and flipperie, 'they eatily and quickly 
deſcend; and by making the belly{lipperie', they cauſe other meates roflippe ' Taree ſooner. 

The kernels of the Peaches be hot and dry,they open andelenſezthey are good for the ſtoppings B 
of the liner and ſpleene, |. 'F 

Peaches before they be ripe do ſtop the laske, bur being ripe they looſe the belly, andingender C 
naughtic humours,for they are ſoone corrupted in the ſtomacke, 

The leaues of the Peach tree'do —_ the ſtoppings of the liver, and do gently looſen the belly: D 
_ bang applied plaſterwiſe vntothe nauels of yoong children, killeth the wormes,and driveth 
tnem toorth, vl | 

The ſaine leaues boiled in milke,do kill the wormes in children very ſpeedily. a E 

The ſame being dried,ane caſt vpon greene wounds, they curerhem.. ack BE 

The flowers of the Peach tree infuled in warme water for the fpace'of ten or twelue howers,and G 

ſtrained, and more flowers put tothe ſaide liquor to infuſe after the ſame maner , and ſo iterated 
ſixe or eight rimes, and ſtrained againe; then as much ſugar as it will require added to the ſame 
liquor,and boiled vnro the confiſtence or thicknes of a firupe;, and ewo ſpoonefuls heereof taken, 


_  dothſofingyulatly well purge the belly.thatthereisneicher Rubarbe, Agaricke, nor any other pur- 


ger comparable vnto ity for this purgerh down wateriſh humours mightily, and yer withour griefe 
or trouble,cither to the {tomacke,or lower patrs of the m_ [8 Ls 
The kernels within the Peach ſtone ſtamped ſmall, and boiled with vineger vntillic bebrought 14 
to the forme of an oyntment , is good to reſtore and bring againe the hare of ſuch as be ls- 
He. " | | 

" There is drawne foorth of the kernels of the Peaches with Penirgjiall water, a iuice like vato I 
milke, which is good for thoſe that haue the apoplexie : if the ſame be oftentimes held in che 
mouth,ir draweth foorth water,and recouercth the ſpeech, : ' 

| | Mm mm4 | The 


 1260/ THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

.  Thegumisofa meanetemperature,bur the ſubſtancethereoff is tough and clammic, by reaGn 
whereof it dulleth the ſharpnes of thin humors zit ſerueth in a looch or licking medicine for thoſe 
thatberroubled with the cough and haue rotten lungs, and {topperh the'{petting and raiſing vp 
of blood,and alſo ſtaicth other fluxes. | | [ 


Of theeA precocke, oneA brecocke tree. (hap.89. 


I CHrmentiaes Malus mater. | | 29 2 Armeniaca Malus mmor. 
The greater Aprecocke tree, | Thelefler Aprecocke tree. 


WAVE ERAS Ne: 
' I8 *F4C IL. f 'F 
18) ©77 xl # . F , : 
2» \ DA N 9% 
CNS 
NE SETS 
Q Y=by - 


| | The Fs. T | 

I His tree is greaterthan the Peach tree.,and hath a bigger bodie,it laſteth longer,eſpecially 

if it be graftcdor inoculated :theleaues hereofare broad & ſharp pointed, like thoſe of the 

blacke Poplar, bur lefler,and comming more neere to the leaues of the Birch,nicked inthe 

edpes. The flowers are ſomewhat white: the fruir round like a Peach, yellow both within and with- 

our, in which doth lie a browne ſtone nothing roughar all, as is that of the Peach, ſhorter alſo and 
lefſer,jn which is included aſweerekernell, © _ [' | 


2 Wehaveanother ſorrof Aprecock,whoſetrunke or bodie is equall withthe other in greatnes z 

itislike alfo in leaves and brictle branches ; his time of lowting , flouriſhing, and manner of 

growing accordeth. The onely point wherein they fer is,that this tree bringeth foorth leſſer fruit, 

and notſo good in taſte, in cuery other reſpeRt it is like, pl 5o:, 95. 25j | 
| | 3% The pace. 


Theſe trees do grow in my. earden,andnow adaies in many other Gentlemeps gardens through- 
our all England. -- En Rt (- | 


621 1} w Thefine. By 4 
They flower and flouriſhin Aptill,andrheir fruiris ripe in July. = | 


*% The 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
| | *% The names. | | 

This rreeis called in Greeke #mmiz Apuwari:in Larine Maus CArmeniace: in Engliſh Abrecock 
tree,or Aprecocke tree. | | | 

The fruit is named 227 Apueriexty and pf diuers oegwirmer, or Beewieuey, which be wordes corrup- 
red from the Latine; for Pracox inLatine is diuers times called Pret : itis named Mahon 
Aymeniacam, and commonly c_Armeniacam : itis called in high Dutch Wolletten Pollelin,S. 
Johans Jferſing: inlow Dutch Uroege Perſen, Auant jIerſen in Iralian 4rmeniache, Baco- 
che,Griſomele,, Montache : in French M6bricoz: in Spaniſh AMluarcoques,. Aluarchigasand Abey- 
cocs : in Engliſh Abrecock,and of ſome Aprecock,and Aprecox. | p | 

Galen ſeemeth to make a difference betweene Precocia and _Armeniacs in his booke of the fa- 
culries of nouriſhments: preferring Precocia before _Armeniaca, yet he doth confeſle that both 
of them becalled Armeniasa; others pronounce them CArmentza with fower ſyllables. And in his 
bookes of the faculties of ſimple medicines he affirmerh, that both the fruit and the tree are called 
2e2ixu0y : diuers of the later Phiſitions dobetweene theſealfo makea cerraine difference , ſaying, 
that the greater ones and thaſe that are grafted be Armeniace z which the French men call Avaze 
Perſesand the leſler Precocta: in French CAbrices. | 

| ' w% Thetemperature and vertues. LESS 

Aprecocks are coldeand moiſt in the ſecond degree,bur yet not ſomoiſt as Peaches; for which A 
cauſe they do not ſo ſoone or eaſily putrifie : and they are alſo more wholeſome for the ſtomacke 
and pleaſant to the taſte, yer do they likewiſe purrifie,and yeelde nouriſhment, and the ſame colde, 
moiſt,and full ofexcrements: being taken after meate, they corrupt and purrifie the ſame; being 
firſt eaten before other meate,they eaſily deſcende, and cauſe the other meates to paſſe downe the 
ſooner, like as alſo the Peaches do. | 

The kernels within the ſame is ſweete,and nothing at all like in faculty to'that of the Peach, - 


1261 


8 


The yertues of the leaues of this tree are not as yer found our. : 


Of the Pomegranate tree. Chap.9o. 


* The kindes. 


AS there be ſundry ſorts of Apples, Peares, Plums, and ſuch like fruites; ſo there are two forts 
| © Tof Pomegranates, the garden,and the wildezand a thirde fort which is barren and fiuitles : the 
' fruite ofthe garden Pomegranarte is of three forrs,one hauing a ſower iyice,or liquor z another ha- 

wng a very ſiveere and pleaſant liquor ; and the thirde the taſte of wine; of the wilde alſo there be 
wo forts, and the difference betweene them is no more then bertwixt crabs and wildings, which 
are both wilde kindes of apples: therefore the deſcription of the garden Pomegranate ſhall ſuffice 
for the reſt. | | | 
* Thedeſcription. | 
I He manured Pomegranatetree groweth vp to the _ of a hedge tree, being ſeauen 
or cight cubites high, hauing many pliant and twiggie branches,verylimber ,tough, and 
| ofa browne colour : wheron are ſet very many leaucs,in ſhape like thoſe of the Priver, but 
| more like the leaues of the Myrtil tree , of a bright ſhining greene colour tending to yellownelſle : 
among which there ſtande cectaine ſharpe thornes rondynſy ſer, andlikewiſe hollow flowers 
| lkevmtothe hedge Roſe, indented on the edges like a ſtar, ofa arnation colour, and very ſingle: 
after which commeth the fruit couered with a hard barke, of an overworne purpliſh colour, full of 
graines and kernels, which after they be ripe are of a gallant crimſon colour, and full of juice ; 
which differeth in raſte according to the ſoyle, climare and countric where growez ſome be 
| lveete,orhers ſower,and the third are in amiddle betweene them both, having theraſte of wine. 
| 2 Thewilde Pomegranatertreeis like the other in leaues and twiggie branches , ing flowers 
| veriedouble,as may appeere by the figure, which wither and fall away, 7 pp. no fruit behind it,as 
| thedouble flowred Cherriedoth, and divers other herbes and trees alſo ;and is altogirher _—_ 
| © 


. 


[| þ 


1262 THE THIRD BOOKE/ OF THE 

of fruite: ofthis Dsſcorides makerh ſundry ſores, differing in colour: one is white ſaith he, anorh 
ny red,a third fortofthe colour of the Roſe: this wich red flowers is beſt knowne among the 
' Apotheearies, | = <1 


1 Malus Granats ave Punics. 
The Pomegranate tree. 


' |þ | | o Thepplace. = 
Pomegranates grow in hotcountries rowardthe ſouth in Italy, Spaine, and chiefly in the king- 
dome of Granado, which is thought tq be ſo named of the great multitude of Pomegranats which 
be commonly called Greats: they grow in anumber of places alſo without manuring ; yer being 
manured they proſper better; for in gargens,vineyards,orchards,& other like husbanded R 
they come vp more cheerefully ; I hauerecouered diuers yoong trees heerof,by ſowing of the ſeed 
or graines,of the height of three or fower cubirs jt attending Gods leiſure for flowers and fruite. 
| | TRE ES 21.71... - | | 
pe = Pomegranate flowreth in the moneth of May and Iune: the fruite is ripe inthe ende of 
ugult, Fi ; es Blk 


: 


> | 3 Themes. $8 

The Pornegranace tree'is called in Latine Ata/ws Punics : in Greeke ab CHticic fie, and ab Jonibus 
£2.25 Galen ſaith: in Engliſh Pomegranate tree : the fruite is alſo named je, or jie: in Latine Ms- 
lun Panicum:infhops Milwn,or Pom Granaturn + in high Dutch Gzanatopffell : in low Dutch 
©2anatapple : indealian Mec/agrane, and Parr Gr anato : in Spaniſh Granades, and Komen : 1n 
French Pommics Granades : in Engliſh Þ late, 9h 3 

Fock eons of rhe mpeny fraE re + Suro of the Grecians wine : which is not 
withſtanding pro 1e cup of che flower :the Latines name it alſo Cyrince. | 

Theflower of nab Sn barren Pomegranate tree is called Lats the Apothecaries do 
likewiſe rearme ir Balzzſttm. |? ©: [1 

The pill or rinde of the Pomegranate which is ſo much in vic, is named in Greeke «er: in Latin 
Aalicornan and Sidmm : in ſhops itis called Cortex granatorym,or Pomegranate Pill. 


+ The 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. ''7 £563 
| we HL. The temperatureanduertnes. hob exert Ve aur yer 
The ivicie graines of the Pomegranate are good to beeaten, having in them a meerel A 
inice: they arc holſome for the ſtomacke, but they all conreine 2 hes dee y good 
ment,or none at all. CF 


The ſweete ones benot ſo colde as the reſt, but they eaſily cauſe hor ſwellings toariſe, and they B 
are not ſomuch commended for agues, = | ad , 


0 


_ 


The paws _ , andeſpecially if they be wichall ſomthing harſh, do enidently coole, dry, and C 
ſomthing binde. | nr LE - 
are for the hart burne, they reprefle and ſtay the ouermiich vomiting of i 

lhe Feomeyth arearemedya inſt he Moudy rr ee to vomit, and yomite it{clfe 

There is made of the iuice ofihoſs ſower Pomegranates a ſyrupe , which feruerh for xhe 
purpoſes,and is alſo many times very  peeapuny4 for women with childe, ks Laborantibus, wnleſle 
the coldnes of the tomacke be a hinderance thereunto, = / | pLEe 

The feedes ofthe graines, and eſpecially of the ſower Pomegranate, being dricd, ds likewiſe F 
coole and binde. —a>. 71 8 + a 

They ſtop che flixe,ſtay vomiting, and ſtanch the ſpitting vp of bloud, they frei gthen che ſto- G 
macke. | : x hy | yy 9.5 
Of the ſame ceffe be the lowers,both of the tame and wilde Pomegranate tree,being like to the H 
ſcedes in remperature and yertues, TC EOAN1F {- ; ii.” 

They faſten the tcerh,and ſtrengthen the gums,ifthe ſame be waſhed therewith, T7 I 

They rojes againſt burſtings that come by falling downe of the guts, if they be vicdin plai- K 
ſters a11d appked. | j | | 

Therinde or pill, is not onely like in faculty to the ſeedes,and both the ſorts of lowers, but alfo L 
more :availeable ;for itcooleth and binderh more forceably;it bringeth downe the hot ſwellings of 
the almonds in the throte, being vſcd in a gargariſme or a lotion for thethrote, andit is afingulac 
remedy for all things that neede coolingand binding, Ty RIS 

D zofſcorideswriteth, that there is alſo gathered a iuiceour of both thoſe ſorts of lowers, which is M 
very like in faculty and vertue to Hypeciſtis, as the ſameauthor py 

The bloſſomes of the tame and wilde Pomegranates,asalfotherinde or ſhell thereof made into N 
powder, and drunke in red wine,or boiled in red wine, and the decodtion drunke , is good againſt 
the bloudy flixe, and all other.iſſucs of bloudz yea it 1s oood for women to fir oner, and bath them. -: 
ſelues in the decoRtion heerof: theſe foreſaid bloſſomes and thels are good alfo to be pur into re- 
ſtraining powders,for the ſtanching of bioud in wounds, = 

Theſeedes or ſtones of Pomegranates dried in the ſunne,and beatentd powder, are of like ope- P 
ration > 45 eh they ſtop the laske andall iſſues of bloud in man or woman, being taken in 


Of the Quince tree. Chap.g1. 


. 
- 


| 4 The kindes. 1-41) 47 b, 
Olem ella maketh three kinds of Quinces,Strathia,Chry ſomeliane, and Muſtels, but what maner 
ones they be he dot! not declare , notwithſtanding we finde diyers forts differing as well in 
| —_ caſte and ſubſtaiice of the fruite, whereof ſome haue much core and many kernels, and 
ers tewer, | | | 


| * The deſeription. | b 

"He Quince tree is not great, but groweth low,and many times in manerof a ſhrub: jr is cove- 
red with a rugged barþ,which hath on it now and then cerrain ſcales: it ſpreadeth his boughes 
in compaſſe [ike other trees ;abourwhich ſtand leaues ſomewhat round, like thoſe of the com- 
mon Apple tree,greene & ſmoggh aboue, and vnderneath ſoft and white : the flowers be of a white 
colour: the fruite is like an apple, ſaue that many times ithath certaine embowed 'and wel. 

| Ingdivifions;ir differeth in faſhion & bignes;for ſome Quinces are leſſer & round truſt yp togithec 
| . Uthetopwithwrinckles,others longer & greater : the third ſort be after a widdle as 4 2"0n'> | 

£ | O 


7 
- 
; 
a » J 


Y 
L 
&# -: 


1266 THE! THIRD) BOOKE(OR THE 


both; they are all of them ſer witha thigngcotton.arfreeze,andbe of the colour of gold,and hurt- 
 { fullco thekiead byzealon of theirfirong lipell ;they all likewilg have akindepf chokingraſte : the 
pulpe withia is yelloywg4. and the fecde blackiſh , lying, mn hardeskins, as:dochekernels of other 


wr % 
F, : - : | 46 

*g Fa ; g 

Fi BI 1M ns. BE4 yy? Wo 4. i 4 ; TS | 

- Fi þ a A 1 * ES. ; 8 

+ % © . x 


*. 4 - bo = TT dy "  » W" 
"TY , | 4 ? : | £4 *% # F + " 
The Quineerne®. 1 ik} \11,% Theplace.... .. 
Mat 4 *% a #448 $f 5s & * .£©£* &Þ a #7 «4 i s. 4 or ; $7 Y 
- : ” F: f7 4 1 


>= Wi Fg CLAP x " »f os | | The Quince rec oye in gardens and or. 
(- L A RF  cbatds, andis plantes oftentimes in hedges and 
[2 Nl £4 IN -/ 1 Fences belonging to gardens and vineyards : ic 
7b > ; E f « { &/ '.(.., dclighterh to grow on plaineand euengrounds, 
\ > 1 .% Thetime,; 


. 
IQ 
* 
Ne 
" _ 
- 


OY }) ol, i Theſe Apples be ripe inthe fall of the leafe, 


and chictcly in October, | 

Cl} /, xe > | '- Therree iscalled in Greek unaie whoric: in La- 
1 \& tine Malxs Cotonea :1h Engliſh Quince tice, 

; Thetruite js named wiger wdtirer;. Ilalum Co 

1 $oneum,Pomun Cydonium, and many times Cyde- 

'._ in, withoutaby addition; by which name ir 

y is made knowne tothe Apothecaries :it is called 

.\; alngh Duchy Quitten, Quittenopſell, or 


| 3.in lowe 


& boy 


ning 
it likewiſe ſtaieth all kinds of fluxes 


tiniatets made in thismaner. | 


h 
lirke 


nottoſeeth.at Wl :& vnto euery poun 
rand in the cooling youmay putinroſe war 


There 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. . | Hos 


one of Naples,called _4ronia. 
LOSE | __ | 
| Themanured Medlar. 


i 2286} | % The deſeription. | 
I He manured Medler tree is not great; the body whereof is writhed:the boughes harde, nor 
eaſic to be broken:the leaues be longer, yernarrower then thoſe of the apple tree; the flo- 
wers are white and great, hauing five leaues a peece : the fruite is ſmall, round , and hath a 


broadcompaſled nauell or cxowne at the top: the pulpe or meats is at the firſt white , & ſoharſh or 
M | | | | choking 


1266 THE THIRD :BOOKE- OFTHE 
choking,that it cannot be caten beforeir become inp which arc container tuue ſeedes or ſhones, 
which be flat and hard. 


itnes of an apple rree, hauin 
SEE white Theme Hamchom th 


of »< #4 


es 4 na 
are Bene and pobm fe 8 olong 


ch be ripe,rhe are boghi mod the: PPG pleaſantzaſte,, wherein, is conte 
ce hard peep ar in the former, \ whic be 4 ah 4s hh or ſeeds thereof. ined thees 


There is a dwartffe kinde of Medlar growing natural! 5 the Alpes, and hils of Natbone and 
Verona, which hath beene rs ſome of the beſt learne eſteemed for a kinde of Medlar : others 
whoſe iudgements cannor ſtan 3th truth or « ſuppoſedit to be Evonimus,of the 
Alpes: this dwarffe Medlargroweth like a ſmal hedge tree, of fower or fiue cubits high, bearing 
many ſmall ewiggie wandes Or crops, beſer with.many ſlender leaues , greene aboue, and of a skie 
colur vaderneath, in ſhewe and $0 beholde 2 dwarfte A OIPs nee bur the truite is Yo like the 
Hawezor frute of Ye white Thorne,and of a ogy colour, 

"#7 


The Medlar trees do grow in 1 Orchards,and ofte; cs in bedgh ; anon briars and Nd 
| being graftedin a white thorne it proſpereth woo derfull well, and og foorth fruite twiſe or 

chriſeb gerthen thoſe thararenat mT atall, ini as real] as little apples : wehaue diucrs 
ſorts yrs ou in ou orchards, | &1 | | 


Iris very late before Medlar be ripegwlich is in c end dOAaberbu the tonerscomeſonh 
timely inough. | 1 | 
| * The nas 7 


The firſt is called in Greeke by Theophra PETE 
baum: in lowe Dutch rench | ET 
The Apple or frizedis nawalip\Grecks wlemer tir Lati iſe in high 
Neſpel : ; 7 Dutch Mipele : in Iralian Neſpub: in French Reſfle: 1 | Spaniſh Neſperas : in 
Engliſh Me 
Dioſtorides affirmeth,that this Medlar rree is alſo called Fngadc, &of divers.Sraniow: Gulenalſoin 
his booke of the Goilties of Simple medicines, narmerh this a which js called as he ſaith, by 
che countrey men in Iralic Y xeds ,and wo plentifully in Calabria; for vnder the name of AMe- 
ſpilms,or Medlar tree,he meanerh! no other then Tricecemghichis alſonamed _aronie. 
The Neapolitane Medlar tree is calledin Greeke wana: and wearian: Galen callerh it Epimelis. 
The fruite heereof is called Trzcoceos, of the three grainesorſtones that ithath: they of Naples 
call it Lzerolo; arid we may nameit in Engliſh thee FT ; of Neapolitane Medlar, or 
Medlar of Naples: 
= Ther 


The Medlars are cold,drie,and aſtringent ;the - _ 

laris dry,ſharpe,and aſtringent,, | [| 
Pt The a 

Medlars do ſtop the belly , chievially when they [be greene and hands: 5 for afivr thac they haue 
been kept 2 while,ſo that they become! oft and render, chey do'notbinde or ſtop ſo much, bur are 
then mare fit to becaten. 

The fruite of the three graine Medlar 5 is eaten both tawe 2hdboiled, and is more wholeſome 
forthe ſtomacke. 

Theſe Medlars be oftentimes preſened with ſugar ot honyz and being ſo ptepared they are 
pleaſant and delightfull ro thetaſte, = 

Morcouer,they areſingular good for women withe childe; for they ſtrengthen the ſtomacke,and 
ſtay the lothſomnes thereof, | 

Theftones orkernels of the Medlarrae into ponder anddrunke ,do breake the ſtone, expell 
graucll.and procure vrine, [} l of 


> 4 

k | 
[2 

\, 4 
.F 


- = 


: 1 


ature. 


ts Arc oy Cenature the dwarffe Med- 


'Y 
| | 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS! ” 


| | [| 
Of the Peare tree. Chap.gz..|. 
% The kindes. &L5 


To write of Peares and Apples in particular , woulde require a part 
or kindred of Peares are not to be numbred: cuery countrey hat 
knowe ſome one, curious in Graffing and Planting of Fruites, who hath 
at the point of three ſcore ſundrie ſorts of Peares, and thoſeexce >d, not 
his minde had beene co ſeckeafter multitudes, he might haue gore þ 4.59 the like | 
thoſe of worſle kindes ; beſides the diuerſities of thoſe that be wilde', experience ſhewerh fun- 
dry ſorts : and therefore I thinke ir not amiſle to ſer downe the figuresof ſome ſewe with their ſe. 
uerall titles, as well in Latine as Engliſh, and one generall deſcription for thar,thar mightbe ſaide 
of many,which todeſcribe apart, were toſend an Owle to Athens, orto number thoſe things that 
are without number, | LUR< x Ky | 
I PyraPrecocia. 


he Iennetring Peare. 


i 


LL AK 


-_ - 
- 


' 


PE =o 


— . 


# 


T7 
| \ / 
I #1 CG 


: * . 
mY 
= & 1 {a 
k - 
» TH -” %. , 
if & ' - m—« . 
- - - _ 
k 4 < k 
4 / ; 
F 4 
vW f ) , LU OS) 
"4 : Fo 
, x: g. 5 J 
7 % 
" % - of 
a, 2 
i. », 
£ 
. . #,.% - - 
F 
bo 4 
, "4 
< \ 
— 


| | "*%* Thegenerall deſeription. . "i F 

He Peare tree is for the moſt part higher then the Apple tree , hauing boughes not ſpreade 

abroad. but growing & ia height :the body is many times great : thetimber or woode it ſelfe 
| 1s very traRable orcafiero be wrought vpon , exceeding fit to make moulds or prints:to be 
 Erauen 0n,of colour tenfling to yellownes : the leafe is ſomewhat broad, finelynickedin the edges, 
 greene aboue,and ſomewhatwhiter vnderneath:the flowers are white: the Peares,thatis toſay,the 
 fruite,are forthe moſt part long,andin forme like a Top; bur in greatnes, colour, forme, and taſte, 
very much differing among themſclues : they be alſo coucred with skins of coats of ſundry colours: 


: 


 thepulpeor meate differeth, as well in colour as taſte : there is conteined inthem kernels, blacke 


: : 


” 
ba 


hen theybe ripe: the roote groweth ſtraight downe,with ſome branches 'running aſlope., 
| | | | | 3 P ra 


1268 THE THIRD BC 
3 Prom Regele, ||| | | | | 
e Pcare Royall.' |!) 


© # _ 


S25 


: " 


5 Pyrum Cydonium. TY ll | 16 Prom Epiſcovatum, 


The Quince Peare, | | 1 [ | | ; The Biſhops Peare. 


\ 


"1 : 7.2) 
ZEND 


— 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. © 269 


8 P hyemalis. : 
Winter Peare tree. 


. 


” — 
, —_ 


*% TY — > 
- \ - _ | | / VF "2 


\ [) 
" 
W 


« 
> 


| | ThetamePearetrees are planted in orchards,as be the apple trees, Onorwn v4ris inſitione ex agre- 
| flibuamites ac edules fructus redditi ſunt, All theſe before _—_— and many fortes more, and thoſe 
| moſtrareand good, are growing in the ground of Malter Richard Pointer, amoſt cunning and 
curious graffer and planter of all manner of rare fruites, dwelling in a ſmall village neere London 
| called Twicknam andalfoin the ground of an excellent graffer and painfull planter,Maſter Henry 
| Banbury,of Touthill ſtreere neere vnto Weſtminſter ; and likewiſe in the ground of a diligent and 
moſt affectionate louer of plants Maſter Warnay neere Horſey Downe by London , and in divers 
| om grounds about London(but beware the Bag and Bottle) ſecke elſewhere for good fruit faich- 
| tullydelivercd, | | l/ | 


1 


| *% Thetime. [| E3- 
 Theflowers do forthe moſt part come foorth in Aprill, the leaues afterwardes : all Peares are 
| Norripe at one time; ſome be ripe in Iuly,others in Auguſt, and diuers in September or later, 
| | $11] *% The names. i 
' Thetarmeororchard Peare tree is called in Greckedm,or with a doublerr ni: in Latin Þ 
vrbana, or Cultiaa : of Taxentings in his Geoponikes «5: in high Dutch Bijrbatum t in 
lowe Durch Precrboom tin French Poyrier. [ 
|  ThePeareorfruit it ſelfe is called in Greeke 4mvr: in Latine Pyrurn + in high Dutch Birn ; in 
lowe Dutch Peere: in Italian Pere : in French Poyre : in Spaniſh Pers: in Englith Peare, 
| '  *% Thetemperature and wertues, | 
Leauing the divers and ſundrie ſurnamgs of Pcares', let vs come to the faculties which the A 
Nnnn z | phiſicians 


125990 © THE:'THIRD BOOKE:OF- THE 
hiſitians ought to knowe z which alſo varic according to differences of the taſtes : for ſome 

Peary ſweere, diuers fatand vnyous, others ſywer, and moſt are harth, eſpecially the wide 

— ſome conſiſt of divers mixrures of taſtes, and ſome having no tafte at all, bur as ic 

were Of watcr. | Hi 0 PER 

A AllPeares are colde, andall hauCabinding jqualitie and an earthie ſubſtance ; but the Choke 
Peares, and thoſe that are-harth be more earthie, and the ſweere ones lefle-; which ſubſtances fo 
full bf ſuperfluous moyſture in ſome, as that they cannotbe eaten rawe, All manner of Peares do 

p binde and ſtop the belly,efpecially rhe Choke and harſh ones, which are good to be eaten of thoſe 
that haue the laske and the bloodie flixe. 18 | 

B Theharſhandauſtere Peares may with good ſucceſſe be Jaide ypon hot fivellings inthe begin- 
ning,as may be the leaues of the tree,which do both binde and coole. 

C Winemadeof the inice/of Peares called in Engliſh Perry,is foluble,purgerh thoſe that are not 
accuſtomed to drinke thereof; 4009 eh is as wholctoms a Sinke being raken in ſmall 
quantitie as winez it comforteth and warmeth the ſtomacke, and cauſeth good digeſtion, - 


4 & 


Of the wilde Peart tree. Chap. 94. 


HAEE | uh The kinds. 

E Ven as there be diuers ſorts of che manured Peares,ſo arethere to be found ſimetrie wilde;ſome 
greater than others, ſome of berter taſte, and orhers worſez and yet ail of them wilde or bedge 

fruit, whereofto write apart were to ſmall purpoſe : therefore this generall deſcription following, 


with their ſeucrall ritles,fhall be ſufficjent forcheir diſtinRionz, 


1 Pyrun ftrangulatorium mains. 18 2 Pyrioms flranzulator im min. 
The great Choke Peare, | | ||| The ſmall Choke Peare. 


, : = S \ } \ 
I» Y I CY Ez | \\;Þ ; 
. , 3 . + 4 
HE l V «&-" | 2 no 
* 4 a. P _— \ 
E & \. - G F - D> . \ . 
j. 984 x DJ -” ” . £ 
. — - i = s,* 


[P—y- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. | - 1271 


* The generall deſcription. 


Hewilde Peare tree growethylikewiſe great, vpright, fall of branches, for the moſt part Py- 
| g wen like, or ofthe faſhion of aſtceplc , nor ſpread abroad as is the Apple or Crabtree: 


voode yery ficro makediuers ſortes of inſtruments of, as alfo the haſtes of flndry tooles ro worke 


Aarke; verie 


leſler: the flowers arg 


leſſe of men: they allo differ in colour,cuery circumſtance wherofts diſtinguifh apare would greac- 
ly enlarge our volume , and bring vnto. the Reader ſmall profite or commoditie; therefore in 
kricfe theſe fewe words ſhall ſerue for their ſeucrall deſcriptions, - ' RF 


3 Pyrus ſplueftris. 4 P ws tris minima. 
| Thewildehedge Pearetree. . Le ru, Peare tree. 


} 


1592 THE THIRD "BOOKE!OE THE 
: _ j 6. Pyru Coruter. 
2119-42 2 Ahe CrowePeare tree, 


SS ERS | 
; 2D % ENV NA - 
LXIER? RN 
A *-4& 


7-4 43-5 | Ie The Mace. 3 CEN at. ond El 
The wilde Peares groweof themſelues without manuring inmoſt places, as inwoods, orin the 
borders of fields, and neere vnto high waics., || [4 | | _ 
E LED OE Thettwe. 7 hag: BIN Ip 
The rime of wilde Peares anfwererh the ramc or manured Peate, notwithſtanding forthe moſt 
part they are not rive much before winter. LY oy Hed Rd FIG PSS bh 
| | 1. | w% Thenames, | 


 ThewildePearetree is called in Latine Pyrus {y{neitris and Pyrafter : in Greeke ex: by which 
name both rhe fruitand trfareknowen, Paares have divers ſurnames among the old writers, and 
ſpecially in P;enzein his 1LYbooke r5.chapter,none of which ate knowen to the later writers(ornot 
defited) euerycitic or euery countric haue names of themiclueszand Peares hauc allo diuers names 
according totheplaces. | - 4 18 1 8 2B | 


. 


All Peares areof a colde temperature, and the molt part of them of a binding qualitieandan 
earthic ſubſtance, APIS 24 4 i | % SEES 2 PC 


The vertues of the wilde Pearesare referred mito the garden Peares as touching theit binding 


faculric,bti are not to becaren, bicaule their noutiſhment is little and bad, 


Of the eA pple tree. | Chap. 95. 


 % Thekindes. 44 ” 


4 z 


T He Latinename Muluirencherh faramong the olde writers , and is common to many trees, 
=._ but we will brictely fickt mzcare of 2444, properly called Apple trees, whoſe ſtocke or kinred 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1273 
« ſo infinite, that we haue thought itnot amiſſe, to vſe the ſame order or method with Apples. 


that we have done with Peares, thats, to giue them ſeucrall ticles in Latine and Engliſh, and one 
_ | general deſcription for the whole, 


1 Malus Carbonaria, 2 Malu Cerbonaria longo frutts. 
| The Pome Watertree, . The Bakers ditch Apple wee. | 


IJ 2— 
% k 
. . 2) © SV 
\= WA: , 


* ©. 


9... 
{ g F E x 5Þ0 ' " 
\ 4b; * +* ag g {4 3 
AXIS SINE NG »> 
\y =FX\ / at. O F/ ny CS 
4 \ G ————x 4 me of 
T" \ VN Y - DI) E WES .. 


*% Thegenerall d:ſeription. 


He Apple trec hath a bodie or trunke commonly of a meane bigneſſe, nor very high, ha- 
uing long armes or branches, and the ſame diſordered : the barke ſomewhart plaine, and 
not very rugged : the leaues be broad, more long than round, and finely nicked in the edges. 
The flowers are whitiſh rending to a bluſh colour. The fruiteor Apples do differ in greatnes, 
forme, colour andrafte ; ſome couered with a red skin, others yellowe or greene, varying infi- 
nitely according to the ſoyle and climate; ſome very great, ſome little, and many of a middle 
fort; ſome are ſweete of taſte, or ſomething ſower z moſt be of a middle taſte berweene ſiveete 
and fower, the which to diſtinguiſh I thinke ic impoſſible z notwithſtanding I heare of one that 
' Intendeth ro write a peculiar volume of Apples, and the vie of them ; yet when he hath done 
that he can do, he hath done nothing rouching their ſcuerall kindes ro diſtinguiſh them, This 
thathath becne (aide, ſhall ſuffice for our hiſtorie. | 


Nnan 3 | | 3 Malun 


1274 THE THIRD BOOKE' OF THE 


3 Malun regle, "| | 4 Malin reginale. 


__—_ 


_—_ 
. 


5 Platomelaſine P\ra afftens;;! | 6 Platarthe) 
The fommer Pearemaine. 2 ll | 'The wint 


/ 


> Vid 
= 


fp 


” *, , : y — wr | Wn 4 
4s \A\ W | 
-fitw. = 


HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. |: 1275 


| | {3 % The place. if [2 EVE. 

The rame and grafted Apple trees are planted and ſet in gatdens and orchards made for that 
purpoſe: they delight ro growe in- goodand fertill grounds : Kent doth abound with Apples of 
moſt ſortes. Bur I haue {eenc in thepaitmes and hedge rowes about thegrounds of a worſhipfyll 
Gentleman dwelling rwemiles from Hereford called M. Roger Bodwome, ſo-many trees of all ſoutes, 
that che ſeruangs drinke for the moſtpartno other drinke, but thatwhigh is made of Apples. The 
uantitje3s ſuch,that by chercportofthe Gentleman hunvielfe, the Parſon hath for tithe mavy hog- 
| wary of Syder. The hogsare fed with the fallings of them, which-ate ſo- many; that they\make 
choile of thoſe Apples they do eate, whowill not rafte of any but of che be(t;; An example doubr- 
leſſe to'be followed of Gentlementhat haue land andliuing: (but enuie ſaith, the poore will breake 
downe our hedges,and we ſhall hauethe leaſt part of rhe fruit) but forward in thenameot God, 
gratfe, ſet, plant and nouriſh vprttees inenery cornerof your grounds, theJabour- is ſmall, the coſt 
is nothing, the commodities great, your ſclues ſhall have plentie, the pooe ſhall haue fomwhag 

m time'of want to relicue cheir neceflicie, and Godſhall reward your good mindes anddiligence. 


| * The time. | 
They bloome about the end of Aprillor in the beginning of May. The forward Apples be ripe 
about the Calends of Iuly,others in September, | 
| * T7 he names. | 
The Apple tree is called in Grecke «-2ia; in Latine Malwand Poms : in high Dutch Opffel- 
baum: in lowe Dutch Apptlboom: in French Pormer : in Englith Apple tree. 
The Greciany namethe fruit war: the Latines Malumor Porwn : jn high Dutch Dpffell ; in 
in lowe Dutch Appel: in French and Spaniſh Manſeras : in Enghth Apple, | 
| *% The temperature. | 
. All Apples be of temperature cold and mciſt; and hauc ioyned with them a certaine excremen- 
tall or ſuperfluous moyſture.; bur as they be nor all of like coldnes, fo neither hauc they like quart- 
titic of ſuperfluous moyſture. They are ſooneſt rotten that haue greateſt ſtore of moyſture,and they 
may be longer kept in which there is lcfle (tore; for the abuncance of excrementall moyſture is the 
cauſe why theyrot. , gf ith 
Sweete Apples are horfo cold and moyſt, which beingrofted or boyled, orotherwiſc kept, re- 
taine or keepe the ſoundnes of theirpulpe, f | 
They yceld more nouriſhment, and /not ſo moyſt a nouriſhment as do the other apples, & do nor 
ſocaſily paſſe through thebelly. _ . [ ow 
Sower Apples arc colder and alſo hoy : the ſubſtance orpulpe of theſe whenthey be boy- 
led, doth run abroad, and retaineth nothis ſoundneſle ; they yeeldea lefler nouriſhinent, and the 
ſameraweand cold. | | 184-4 
They do eaſily and ſpeedily paſſe through the belly,andrherfore they do mollifie the belly, eſpe- 
cially being raken before meate, _ _ | j | 
Harſh or auſtere Apples being vntipe, are cold; they ingender grofſe blood, and great ſtore of 
winde,andoften bring the collicke. [| REF 4 
Thoſe Apples which beof a middle taſte containe in them oftentimes two or three ſorts oftaſts, 
and yetdo they retaine the facultics of the other. Ya. 


| *% The vertues. | 

Roſted Applesare alwaies better than the rawe, the harme whereof is both mended by the fire, A 
and may alſo bz corrected by adding vnto them ſeedes or ſpizes. [ | 

Apples be good for an hot ſtomacke: thoſe that arcauſtere or ſomewhat harſh, doſtrengrhen a B 
weake and feeble ſtomacke proceeding of heare. | | 

Applesare alfo good for all inflammarions or hot ſwellings, but eſpecially for ſuch asarein be- C 
ginning,ifthe ſame be outwardly applied, [25 

Theiuiceof Apples which be ſweete and of a middle taſte, is mixed in compoſitions of diuets D 
medicines, and alfo for the tempering of melanchulic humours, and likewiſe to mend the qualities 
of medicinesthar are dric : as ate Serapium ex pomis Kegis ſaporis, Antidotum ex granis Cotes Bathict, 
and ſuch like compoſitions, 14.4 | | 

Thexe is likewiſe made an ointment with the pulpe of Apples and Swines greaſe and Roſe E 


ann4 | water, 


1276 THE THIRD BOO KE' OF THE 
water,which is vicd to beautifie the faceandto take away the rotghnes of the skin, which is called 
in ſhops Pometun;otthe Appleswhereof itismade,* ts of 5 | 


: S [ 


E Thepulpeof the roſted Apples, in number foweror fiue;accotding to the greatneſle of the Ap- 
 ples,eſpeciallofthe Pome-water, mixed in a wine quarr of faire water, labourcd rogither vntill ir 
come to be as Apples and Aley whichwe caltLambes Wooll, andthe whole quart drunke 1aſt 
at night, within tne ſpace of an hower, doth/iin one nighr ture thoſe that piſle by droppes 
with great anguith anddolour; the ſtrangurie, and all other diſeaſes proceeding of the difficultie 
of makin waterzburt intviſe taking it, ixneuver faileth in any : oftentimes there bapdnh with the 

foreſaid diſcaſes the Gonerrhea, or running of thebajntegvldeh it likewiſe healeth in thoſe perſons, 
butnort generallyin all; which my ſelfe; haue ofcenprooucd , and gained thereby both crownes 
and credite. 3 S906 HG 10 Req 27 Re ; | A 

F Theleaves of therree do coole and binde, and be alſocounted good for inflammations, in the = 
the beginning, 95111174 42509 1} #1 yl. | | 

G Apple w in pecces, and diſtilled with a quantizic of Camphere and butter mike, rakerth away 

_ the inarks and ſcars gotten by the ſmall pockes, being waſhed therewith when they grow vnto their 
ſtate or ripenes :prouided that you gius vntothepatient alittle milke and ſaffron, or milke and mi- 
thridate to drinke , to expell to the extreme parrs that venome which maylic nd, and as yer not 
lecne., | +3 14-04 ES  PY oi - 


Of the Wilding and Crabtree... (hap. 96. 


]_Ieas there be divers manured Apples , fo is there ſandry wilde Apples, or Crabs, whercof to 
write apart were to ſmall purpoſe, and therefore one deſcription forthe reſt ſhall ſuffice, 


7 


Wi 
: 


1 Malu fplaeftris rabens. 2 Malue ſylueftris alba. 


- 


The great \ilding,o ab eee, | | | - Thewhite Wilding,or Crab tree, 


"> by 
. . n \ F 
”a 
- C F 
: 
, 


- 


HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS. 1972 


* The general defeription. 


Here be diuers wilde Apple trees not husbanded,that is to ſay,not grafred;the fruitwherofis 
T tat and binding : for by grafting both Apples and Peares become more milde and pleaſant, 

The Crab or Wilding tree growerh oftentimes toa reaſonable greatnes, equall with the Ap- 
ple tree : the woode is hard, firme, and ſolid ; the barke roughzthe branches or boughes many; the 
flowers and fruite like thoſe of the Appletree ſome red, others whites ſomegreater,others lefler: 
the difference is knowne to all,therefore'it ſhall ſuffiee what hath beene faide tor their feucra!l di- 
ftinRtions: we haue in our London gardens a dwarffe kinde of fweete Apple, called Chamenmalus, 
the dwarffe Apple tree,or Paradice Apple, which bearer]; Apples very timely withour grafting, 


3 Mal frluettrieminor. 
The ſmaller Crabtree. 


| % 7 he place. I 
The Crab tree groweth wilde in woods and hedge rowes,almoſt cuery where. 

Fe v% The'time. j 
The time anſwereth thoſe of the garden. 
| * The names. BY 
Their ſeuerall titles doth ſet foorth their names in Latine and Engliſh, 
| | | | * The temper ature. hs; 

Ofthe temperature of wilde Apples, hath beene ſufficiently ſpoken of inthe former chaprer, 
| * The vertwes. FR 

The iuice of wilde Apples or Crabs,taketh away the heate of burnings,ſcaldings andalinflam- A 
mations: and being laid on in ſhortrime after iris ſcalded,irkeepeth it from bliſtcing, = Ro 
The juice of Crabapt Veriuice;js aſtringentor binding, and hatywithallanabſterſive or _ B 
| | | | Ng 


: 


12338 ' THE THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 

ſing qualitie being mixed with hard yeeſt of Ale of Beere,and applied in maner of acold ointment, 
that is,ſpred ypon acloth firſt wet in the Veriuice and wroongout, and then laideto, raketh away 
the heate of Saint Anthonies fire ; all inflammarions whatſocuer, hcaleth ſcabbedlegs, burnings 
and {caldings wherefocuer it be, | | ls «(1 | 


1 4 


g 4 *#YÞ2 C7 


-Of the Citron, Limon, Orange, and «A ſyrian 
+ Appletrees.\ Chap.g7. 
He Citron tree is of kindted with the Limori tree ;the Orange is of the ſame houſe or ſtocke; 


and the Aſſyrian Apple tree claimeth aplace as neerelt in kinred and neighbourhood: whereof 


we intend to make one entire chapter, | 


The Pome Citron tree, WV | "| The Limon tree. 
Ny CI x - F- KY. 4 jt | Yr - CAR 


" PA 
o o 
W's 
= 
& * 
4 Lo 
= 
« 
= 
A 
»* 
, 
a? : 
\ : 
- \\ U 
= 
; | 
, © 
h 4 1 
£ 
A a 
: 3 
-— = 


[1 7 
Fl, 


» 
i z 
i { mo 
| 
'n a — 
$! 4 
8 $ 
% 4 ; EF , 
4 1 "I 
; «: 
I : > 
: " 
. . = F 
i : «ff 
8&3 i *- 
q [ 
© . 
. 
”} ; 
1 1 
FH 
"$4 8 —_ 
: : o 
: - 
4 , , 
4 
' i 
*1 
/ : 
"4 ; 
1 
+} 
v+ 
bi ; 
x : 
; 1 
I i 
* 4 
3.4 | 
an 
: 1 
Lt S 
4 3 | 
© ; 
3 : 
, + Rf 
£4 : - tf 
; 1 
i | 4 
k 5 : 
I ; 


Sf 


_ + The defer tom. 


He Citron tree is not very great,hauing many boughes or branches, tough & pliable, co- 
vered with a greene barke : whereon do grow greene leaves, long, fomewhat broade, veric 
-{moorh,and {weete of ſmell, likethoſe of the Baie rree : among which , come foorth heere 
and there certaine prickles,ſet farre in ſunder : from He boſome wherof come toorth ſmall flowers, 
confiiting of five little leaues,of a white colour tendingro purple, with certaine threeds like haires 
growing in the middle : the fruite is longygreater many times then the Cucumber,often eller , _ 


n 


- 
\ 


: t — 


lg 4 


. 2 /'HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 1279 
not much greater then the Limon: the barke or rinde is of a light golden colour, ſerwith diuers 
knobs o& bumps, and'of a very pleaſant ſmell: rhe pulpe or ſu enext vatoitis thicke, white, 
hardehawingakinde ofatomaticall or ſpicie ſmell, almoſt without any raſte ar all: the ſofter pulpe 
within thdtisnorſofirme or ſolide, but more fpungie, and full of afower ivice, inwhich the ſeede 
| beth hidzereater and thicker cthena graine of Barly. | | | - 


. 


2 Thekimontree is like'vnto the Pome Citron tree in growth, thorney branches, and leaues, of 
a pleaſant fiveere {mell, like thoſe of the Baie tree : the flowers heereof are whiter then thoſe of the 
Citron tree,and of amoſt fweerte ſmell: the fruitcis long and thicke, lefſer then the Pome Citron; 
_ therinde is yellow, fomewhat bitter intaſte,and ſweetcof ſmell : the pulpe is white, in quantirie lit- 

tlein reſpet ofthe Citron; in the middle part whereof is conteined more'foft [pungie pulpe , and 
fuller of molt ſower iuice :the ſecdes are like thoſe of the Pome Citron; 


3 Malutarantiia. ad 4 Maus Afpria. | 
The Orange nice. \.. The Aflyrian Appletree, | 


A , C \ 
" , 
- OS 
ay? ” 
/ AT 4 
F a F 
»* 
: 


WV. 


p REN DVY 
a. 


-— 
. 
= 
/ 4 
"Ti 
- ; + "+ 
- - 
4 - — CL» 
FiO Ul : 
< L - - ; kh o. 
/ » BW 4 :- —— 
$ d C Zi 4 X 
[ . W £5 , DOSS 4 VN — 
L | WY ol $5.00" 8 Wh : 
T ” JD \ Fl 
, —<—_ 1 " »4 . 
/ BD F a " 
—_— TIF ql 
T7 = ; (4 ' 
V * > a 
<. þ n my f 4 : 19% 
—— : h 8 1TH 
by > " 3 (us \ # & 
_ : - 4 
- ae A vv 4 VyY 
ivy TT. l 
p $5 — 
"ye 


Gy 
3 
.” 
L:,8 | 
+& 13:3 14 } 4A J 
WITT N 4 $ % The dzferipti » 


3 TheOrangetrec groweth vp tothe height of aſmall Pearetree, having many thorny boughes 
orbrangbes, like thote of the Citron tree: the leaues are alſo like thoſe of the Baie tree, ofa ſweere 
{mell: the lowers are white,of amoſt pleaſant ſiweer ſmell alſo: the fruit is rounde like a ball,cuerie 
circumſtance belonging to the forme 1s very well knowne toall; the taſte is ſower,lomrimes ſweer, 
and often of a taſte betweene both: the ſeedes arelike thoſe of the Limon. | 

4. The Afſyrian:Apple tree is like vnto the Orange tree: the branchesare lke: the leauesare 
greater >the flowers arc like thoſe of the Citron tree: the fruite is rounde , three times as biggeas 
the Orange : the barkeor peeling 1s thicke,rough,and of a pale yellow'colour, wherein appe creof. 
tenas4twereſmallcliftes orcragkes: the pulpe or inner ſubſtance is full of juice; in raſte ſharpe, 
asthat ofthe Limon,but not fopleaſant : the ſeedes are likerhoſe ofthe Citron, > 

SUP | %T, 


- 


ds |. THE THIRD BOOKE! oF THE 
| 4 7haplaye | 


| | as notoneb | diate wiiterh. run 2-5 _ 
rey afficmath inthe ſecond booke of his i Geogelconing _ Cirontree COTHiy maner: 


Media fere triftes faces, tar / 4 
__ Felutumali, quo non preſentius vilum, 


Pocula fiquande ( #u4 infecere nonerce, 
Miſcueruntque urs; & non inuoxia verba, 
Auxiltum went ac membris a git atra Venena. 
Ipſa ingens ar bos faciemque ſomillima Lauro. 
Et [i non al;um late taftaret odorem, [| 
T—_ erit folia hand wilis kebentia vents, 

| prime tenax anmas olentia Meds 

Graft tio, ns fenila mndicgmtar —_ 


The epi Mod beareth iuices ſad, 


EE "uM [y 
tree it ſelfe in growth is huge and bi W 
And woulaberhe Sans, gets 
w ought a Laurell.leafe and 
Bur irbas niſgee: wh 
The flowre in holde as fa rg bee: | | 
| Therewith che Medes aremedicd9 fi : © 
For ſtinking brearhes and mokths acuremoſt kitde, 
And ey oldmen mhih hardly ferch re 
2s = * The time. $ 
ak nc be aaa anddo as Plinje faith, beare' ſuite rallies ofthe year; ns 
falling off,others waxing tipe andothersnew]y if commingfgorth. Ns 


; ' + The. Wares, 
The firſt iscalled in Grecke dunk wth: in Latine AMalus Medica, and lm Cari : in Engliſh 
Citron tree,or Pome Citrontree, | | 

The fruite is named in Greeke «ior uedhos : ir Lkiine Malum Mates, or Malum Citrium,and Ci- 
fromalum. AEmylianus in \ Athenew ſheweth, that Iube king of Mautitantiia hath made mention of 
the Citron, who faith, that this avple is dame among them Ad«/wn Heſpericum : Galen denicth it 
to be calledany longer Malum medicum but Citriam,and faith, tharthey whocall ic Medicum doit 
to thatend thatno man ſhould vnderitand wharthey ſay : - Apothecaries callrheſe Apples C+- 
frones : in high Dutch Citrim opffell, Cltrinaten: in lowe Dutch Citroenent in Icalian Cizrons, 
and Cedrz: in Spaniſh Cidras :in French Citrops:in Engliſh Citron Apple,and Citron, * © 

The ſecond kinde of Citron'is calledin Latine Lrmonyum melum: in hope: Lymones : in French 
Limons :inlow Dutch Limonen: in Engliſh Limon,and Lemon. | 

Therhird is named Afalum arty antium,or CAnerentium, andof ſome Aur antins of others 4s 
rengium of the yellow colour of gold ; ſome woulge haue themcalled Arentis of CArantium, 4 
townein Achaia,or Arania,of aconntrey bearing char name inPerſia :itis termed in Italian Aran- 
c: in high Dutch Pomeranken: in low; g ms ry pe pony pſt hs 
in Spani Maya : inEnglith —_— bello} 3 Th 
bo 


1 


nfs oRft 'OF Ti KR | Yer 


pieganos of divers ohm Afirivm, of Cition of Alyria, thd way Be Eaglihed 

Adiinis apple,after the [ralantame;anf arwohg the villgar fort of lin Lomie, of whom); 1s .al-. 

ſtalled Potram Atlami or Adams apple, and that came / lic opinion of the « common rude peQ- 4 
pleywho thinke® to be'the ſame Apple,of which Azam dide: Eate in Paradiſe when he tranſgrefſed 

Gods commandement; whereupon allo the printsof the biting appeefe therein as chey [aig ; bur -, 
erhiers ſay thiatthis tsnotrhe Apple, burthat which the Atabians do Call Muſe, or Meſa, whereof * 
Hiern in his 395: chapret maketh mention : for diuers of the lewys! take this for as, Rough ; 
SPY ENG; Ahn Poor Andreds 0, henetus here, - | 


we rac . 


| coy * Thetemp 1 IBPe Rr mtþA wooden. 4 
" Allcheſe fruits conſiſt of vnlike; parts,and much differing in  faculcie, 4 a —— 


A 
Therindes are ſweete of ſmel!,bitrer ,hot,and dry. B 
The white pay” iscolde,and connect] in it a groſſciuice,ef] pecially ofthe Cirrons, C 
The inner ſubſtance or papis Howerias of CS RT Ren colde and dry, with thinnes D 
of parts. 


The ſeede bicauſe it is bitter,is hot and dry, S: E 

The rinde of the Pome Citron i is good againſt al poiſons, for which cauſe itisput into 'Treacles, E 
and ſuch hike confe@ions, | - 

-:kr:is:good ro beeaten agatnita ſtinking brezch, for it makeththe breath fweere; z and being ſora- G 
kenit comforteth the c9kd ſtvinicke exceedingly. 

[:Thewhice, found, & hard pulpei is now and then eaten butvery nardlyc SScotted, & ingengreth H 
2grofle .colde,and ficgmarike inice;bur being condite with ſugar,it is horhpleaſantinraſte,cafic ro 
bedigeſted;more nourſhing,and: leffe x; rro obſtruction and inding,or ſtopping. 

Galen reporteth,cthat theminerinice of the Pome Citron,was not wgontto be caten,butitis now I 
vied for faucezand being often vſed,ir repreſſeth choler whichi isin cheſomacke,andpr procureth ap- 
petite: itis excellent good alſo robe giuen'ih'veheren rand burning fevers,and againſt all petlitens 
and venemous; ofinfeious diſeaſes : it comforterh the hart; it coolerh the inward parts, cutteth, 
dinideth,and makerh thinne;erofle ough,and imy hunts 

21Of this + forefaid ſharpe inicethereisa firupe prepared, whichis calledi in ſhops $17apus ae A.e- K 
toſtaxe C1tri, very good againſt the foreſaid imfirmiries. 

- Such afirrupeis alſo prepared of the ſharpEmuice of Limons,of the fame qualitic and operative ,L 
ſothariniſteed of the one, the other will ſerve yery well, |_| ; 

"Atoferof Orenpes cur in fliees,and put into'a gallon of water adding therero an ohince of Mer- M 
ery ublimar,and iled rothe conſum pou of che halfe, cureth " irch and marigineilc ol the 


Men in o!d time(as Thee brftis writeth in. his fourth booke) did nor cate Citrons, but were N 
contented with og ſnielt, arid to laic them among garmentes Tho preſcrue them fi rom 
Mothes,. © 

"As oftetras tele reqhited they vied doh againſt deadly poiſons, for which thing hey were O 
eſpecially commienged enen by 7y2/{e verſes which we haue before alleaged. 

' There is extantin Hrheneus, in his third booke, a ſtoryof ſome thar for certaine notorious of- P 
fences hauc beene condemnedto bedeuouredof ſerp ents, who haue beene prelerued and kept in 
heal th and ſafery,by cating of the Citron, 

'' The diſtilled water of the whole Limons rinde and all drawne out by a glaſle Still; taketh awaic Q_ 
terrets and blemiſhes of the skin,and maketh rhe face faire and ſmooth. | 

 "Thefame being drunke prouocketh viine,diflohuerh the ſtone, breakerth and expellethi ' - R 

Therindeof Orenges is much like in faculty tothat of the SY and Limons, yetitis ſo much S 
the more hot asit is more bicing and bitter. 

The inner ſubſtance or ſower pappe which is full oi juice, is of like facultie, or notmich T 
inferior'to the facultic of the pap of Citrons or Limons; but the ſweete pap doth nor muchcoole 
or drie, but doth*teryperately heare and moyften, being pleaſant ro therate ; ir alſo nouriſherh 
morethati doth the fower papve, butthe ſame nouriſhment js thinn «+ and little; and that which 
is of a middle taſte hauing the ſmacke of wine, is after amiddle fort more colde than fweete, and 


| Miſkeolderhanſfower: the ſweerg and odoriterous flowers of Drege viedof the perfumers in 
their fivecte ſmelling ointments, | | 


Iwo 


1282 THE- THIRD BOOKE OF 'THE 
'V  Twoounces of thajuice of Limons mixed with the neiti 
Aqua vit (but the ſpirit of wine moms] much | 
ut 


gue, taketh away the ſhak | 
king thereof perfealy to cure the fame, Icr 
be couered warme in a bed, and cauledro ſwears, || Loradietthult ora Big les 
X Thereis alſo diſtilled out of them in a glaſle Still, a water of a maruellous Fyeere ſmell, which 
being inwardly taken in the weightof anounce anda halfe, mooueth{weare, and healerh the agye. 
Y -Theſcedeof all theſe doth kill wormes i belly, and driveth them foorth; it doch alſomigh. 
tily reſiſt poiſon, andis good forthe ſtinging ofſco pions ,if it be inwardly taken, © Me 
Z Thoſewhich be called Adams apples, are "3. kb be like in faculties to the ſower iuice eſpe. 
'  , Ciallyof the Limons but yer they bc notlo cf all Thx RN 052 ads 1M 


franc 


preſently: 
PID, 


Cornu mas. | bY i WELET 6 ITO 
The male Cornell tree, | . & The deſeription. nb 
by | | FT Hetame Cornell tree groweth ſometime to 
' | | theheightandbignes of a ſmall tree, with a 
- | ©) greatnumber of ſprings; itis couered with 
| a rugged barkezthe wood or timber is very harde 
; -anddrie, without any greatquamitic of ſapther- 
| In:theleaues arelike vnto the Dog berric L 
| erumpled, rugged, and of an ouerwormme colour ; 
| the flowers growe in ſmall bunches before any! 
| ES colour yellow, of no great 
| value (they are fo ſmall) inſhewlike the flowers 
. of the Olwe weez which being vaded, there 
| come ſialllong bends which at the firſt bee 
| | greene, andred wh be ripez of anauſtere 
- andharſhtaſtewith me with- 
| Jn this berrie is a ſmall ſtone, exceeding hard, 
= 2 whitewithin, like chat of the Oliue, whereuntoir 
= 3 is likebothin thefaſhion, and oftentimes inthe 
M4 || u* Theplace, 
F< 4 | This groweth in moſt places of Germanie 
| BR 2 | withourmanuringzit growethnotwilde in Eng- 
> A | land.Butyer there be ſundric trees of them grow- 
K: A  inginthegardens of ſuch as louerare and dainty 
$A  plants,whereofI hauca tree or two in my garden, 
> 34: BRL  »* Thetime. 
VE £7 | | Therame Cornell tree flowreth ſometimein 
Sf =) Februaric, and commonly in March, and after- 


o 


| wardes the leaues come foorth as an vntimely 
| | _ | |- birth ;theberries or fruitareripein Auguſt, 
| % The mames, | | 
The Grecians call it xe-vi«: the Latines Cormm/z-in high Dutch Comelbaum 2 inlowe Durch 
Comocle boom: the Tralians Cormyole : in French Corniher: im Spaniſh Cornizolos: in 

Corel! tree,and the Cornelia tree, of fome long Cherrie, and long Cherie tree 
The fruit is named in Latine Corman : in high; Dutch Comell ; inlowe Dutch Copnodle ; in 
Italian Cormole : in Englith Cornell bergie, | : | Fr? | 


This is Corn mas Theophrait:, or Theophrs 


: F 


two ſortes of Cornell recs, the male : hemaketh the woodof the male Ow 
| | FE rn oape: n 


HISTORIEOF PLANTS. Jos 1:93 
found avinnhis Corndl treez which we both for this-cauſe and for others allo, have made tobe'the 
male : the female is that which is eommonly called#;rg# [atrguinth , or Dogst berric rree',aftd Cor- 
j_ ſhieftris, or the wild Comell tree,of which alſo we will intreate ofin the next chap. following, 
+ The temperature and vertnts. | 

The fruite of the Cornell tree Ifath a vety harth of reablang ralte: it coole th,dric t, and binderh : 

t mayir alſo beeaten.as it is oftentimes, ; 
| Itis aremedy againſt the laske and bloudie flixe ir is hurrfullto a hide ftomacke,and hicretferh 
' - therawnes thereof : the leaues and tender erops« of che'tree are likewiſe of an harſh and choking ; 

taſte, and do mightily dry, + 

They heale greenewotnds that are greatand deepe;eſpecially in hard bodies but theyar arc Rot 6 

good! ye finall wounds ang cender bodies 85 Cateh wrirerh, 


Of the female Cornell ,or wy berrie t tree e C bep.99 99. 


Cornus famina. 
The Dogge bertien thee. * rhe erittion. 
| Hat which theltaliahs call Fix aſeneninea, 
Or blondy Rod, is liketo rhe Cornelltree ; 
Wet itgroweth. notinto atrce,butremaineth 
a ſhrub *the yoong branches thereofare iomted, 
and be ofanobſrure red purple; they hane with- 
in a white ſpungie pith,hke chat of Elder, but the 
old ſtalkes pagonny ſtiffe,the ſubſtance of the 
whichis alfo white, and anfiverable to thoſe of 
the Cornell Eleauesare alſo like the mid- 
dleribbe whereof as alſo the brictle footeſtalkes 
arc ſomewhat reds at the rop whereof ſtand 
white flowers in ſpokie rundles eohichfurne inco 
berries.greeneatthe firſt, and of a blacke 
colout whenthey be ripe,in taſte ynpleaſant, and 


not cared for of the birds. 
%* The place. 

This ſhimb growerh in hedges andbuſhes in 
euery cotmtrey of England, 

+ Thetime. - 

The flowers come foorth in the ſpring, inthe 
moneth of Apiill the berries are > in Au- 
tune. | 

VF. o-q he manies,/ 

The Italians do commonly call'i it Sakgs "Mo, 
and Sengarmcllo : Petrus Creſeentius termeth ir 
Sanguinus, and Mathiolws Vir ga ſanguinea , Þ ti- 
nie bath wricten a lixtle of Yirga ſanguinee, in his 
24 booke 15:thaprer: neither is Yirga ſanguenee, 
ſaith he, counted more happic: the inner barke 
thereof doth breake open FW ſcars, which they before haue healed: Ir is a harde thing or perad- 
venture araſh part go affirme by thele fewew that P/pie wr ſanguines is the - that 
Sanguinus is. This is calfedin high i Ducch Hartrieget: in lowe Du aide C omotftif , thar 
is to faie Corwtad peioe w or wilde Cornell rree : and in Frerich Cornetrer auhagt - in Engliſh 
Houndes rree, Hounds berrie , Dogges berrie tree, Pricke Timber tree; in the North coun- . 
trey. eall ir Gate ttee, or > Gare rrees wheteof feeme to.be thole which Chaucre 
callerh Garer berries : Plterive Cords nameth Mtdoenn,” that i is. to fay, Fulſa fa R "or Com £07- 
#us, falſe '6rbaſtard Corel! tree: this ſeemerh alforo be Theophra Aus his Fab kopvlet, or Corum fz- 


mins, female Cornell tree. This hath lictle branches ,hauing pich within , neither be they! pers 
ounde 


1:84 THE THIRD: BOOKE! (OF; THE 
ſounde like thoſe of the male,the fruite is afrw+, that is,nor fit tobe eaten,and a late fruite, which is 
not ripe till after the Aurumne xquinoGiall ; andfſuch is the yyilde Cornell trec,or Gatertree: the 
and tender branches whereof be red, and hauc, as we have written, a pith within: the fruic 

or;berries be vnpleaſant,and require along timebefore they canbe ripe. | 

| ; 11. ** Thetenperatore. | 
The berries heereof be of valike parts , for they haue ſome hot, birter; andclenſing, and verie 
many colde,dry.harih, and binding,yet Payhorers vie in medicine, | 

A Mathiolwwriteth,thatour of the berries firſt boiled and afterwards preſſed,therc iſſueth an oile, 
which Azenien ſes ruſtics do vicin lampes : burie is notcertaine,nor very like that the barke of this 
 wilde Cornell tree hath that operation which Plinie reporteth of Rings panes for he faith, as 
we haue already ſer downe,that the inner barke thereof doth breake and laie open the ſears which 


: . 


Enonymulatife 
Broad leafed Spindle tree, 
Q: | a - W = 


| ranate tree; it ſpreaderk farre with 
newhat white; the newe and thoſe thar 


HISTORIE « .OF PLN T : G90 2285 


Fo 


Pods a, 4 =... 


This other fortof Euonymos oweth: to the FTI of an hedge'tree, of a meane bienefſe: 
the trunke or bodie whereof is of the thickneſſe of a mans coef arough of ſeab- 
bed barke, of an onerworne ruffer cg The branchevare any, fleodgr,:and veric euen, co- 
vered with a greene barke whileſt they be yet yoong-and tender; they are alſovery brictle, with 
ſome pith inthe middle like that © tag Elder. The leaves are-feweirr number , fall of- nerues 
or finewes , diſperſed like thoſe of Plantaine; in ſhape like thoſe'of the Pore" Cirrdn/tree ; - 
' alothfome ſmell and bitter rafte :-atong which come foorth flender footeſtalkes, verylon __ | 
naked; whereon do growe ſmall flowers conſiſting of fowerfinal! leaues likethoſcof the Cher- 
rierrec;butleſſer, of a white colour tending toa bluſh, with ſome yell inthe middle ; af 
tercommeth the fruite , which as yet we haue'no cerraine know geof. "ou roote is torgh, 
and woodic, diſperſing it ſelfe far abroad vnder the vpper cruſt of the carth, 


g Emnonymos Pannonice. YET! : 
Hungarie Spindle tree, | vhs 4 *DIGN 


The ns Jr ſetceth "E225 oa fore 

which he foundin themountaines of Morauia and 
Hungaric, hauing a or ſtocke of the hi 

of three or fower cup Ackles with a barke 


:droward 


les es fi 
kbolk a SS _—— th =_ 
Myrtle, ofan aſtrin at begin: 
2; Gen hot a [iT 6 
foorth ſmall flowers 
footeſtalkes., | 
a bright ſhining pur 
middle fome thou 


porred bagtihy, as mo amy bur blpcke,ver 

like to thoſe of Fraxinell of a blacks 
colour, like vnto burniſhed home, w are de- 
voured of birds when) (Smqey the rather 
bicauſe they fallof t $.Out of their husks, 
otherwiſe the bitternes of the hukes woulde take 
awaic the "__ | 


_- 
wr The place. 


The firſt commen) vp in vntoiled places and 


3 %E [ 


| raftia among ſhrubs, vpon rou bundles andother 
fer: rv alahrines or hogan Rh ronig ny bande 


The other forts Carole hank ac munkaeſhmgl beyoodthe river Drauus z yr 
000 x | %7 fe 


_ . Fane 
x toe 04 to GS > eo, PS) Oe IT OR ren ey: rr a 2 
” 


A This ſhrubis burefull oall things, as Theophy 


1386 THE|T THIRD BOOKE.OF THE 


hetime. 
The lowers appeercin Api: 0D (INN oriuthe monerh of Sep. 
tember. | 


: Thee atclleth third ines, yo” prurns ir.in |hischirde bouke of the VAN of 
Plancsz diuers do falſely reade. it | Ereſeentins calleth it Fuſanwn, bicauſe 
Spindles be made of the woods hereof, and cauſe iris calledin high Durch'Spindel- 
baum , yer molt of them þanhoplin 3 in WC L2H) Papenhout : in Iralian Fuſexo: in French 
Fuſin,and Bonnet depreſtre: inEngliih Spindle tree, Prickwonde, and Prochrinbex, fy 

,  #'The remperatureand vertnes.. 


heereofas he ſairhykilleth ; ſodothe leaues and fruice deſtroy: G y ſcou 
as well ypwards as downwards zif =_ adi OR given to aman,they purge both 
by vomire and {toolc, | RS ; 


of the dic Alert Gr 


CAlnus ni an; ule. | = | 
ener: 3 | ll © | | 4 The defeription 
[- He blacke Allertrebringerh foorth from 
1 | etetagetarer diuided into di- 
ver? btanchex:the outward barkewhereof 


] is blacke,andthatnextto the woodeyellow, and 
| giueth a colour as ycllowe as ſaffron: the ſub- 
| (once Folhroolriakhoead babe, with a 
| reddiſh pith in the midſt: the leaues be like thoſe 
| of the Aldertree,or of the Cherriertree, yet blac- 
; \Ttee ttle rounder : le Hovhn 
| white: th fruire arc rounde berries , in which 
| appeereth a cerrainriftorchinke, as though two 
were ioined togither , atthe firſt greene, after- 
bl wards red, andlaſt of all blacke; in this there be 
; wo little ſtones: EET EIN A IE 


J 5416} Ke * Theplace. | 

'. +7 The Aller tree groweth in moiſt woodsand 
| coples;] fount eatplEric of itin a woeda mile 
| | nal vilagecatd Ham ing vpon ther 
-S!\ ſmall vil Harnſey | 
tand iwhyy bein Gr Fonds et 

' neere London, and Ar panda rs c 
| about London. 


| w* Thetime, 
-|The leaues and flowers appeere in the begin- 
| | ning of che ſpring,and the berries in Autumne. 


ww Thenames. 
| | | This ſheub'i is called Alzn; ngra, or blacke Al. 
ag! $4 247529 | | | der, and others Francnla rather : Petros pat 
|| $4ws namerh it Azorns ;inlow Dutch Dpary | 
hout, wdofenines Pibontbemeboiem for themſelves arrowes heerof inhig 
Faulbaum : iris called Enghth divers Burchers Pricke tree. 
II WR” [Ya 
Theinnerbarke ke All cenely q 1 il; < 


ay The 


Y ſtoole but many rinies alſo by vomite, IX wichourgr {ttrouble and paine to the ſtomacke: it is 


HISTORIE OF. PLAN! 1287 
* The vertues. 
The inner barke heerof is 1 ſed of diuets'countrimer, who drinke the fuſion thereoſwhen they A 


| woulde be purged: i it pur eth thicke fleematike humours,and alſo cholecicke,and. not onely by the 


thetefore a medicine more fit for clownes , then 4 ciuill people, and rather for thoſe that feede 


groſlely,then for daintie people. _ 
There be others who affirme that the dried backe is more gentle,and cauſerh leſſer paine: for the B 


greene bark (fayrhey)» whichis riot yet dried,containeth in it a cettaine ſuperfluous moiſtire,which 
cauſerh jpings and romignes $,and troubleth the ſtomacke, | 
The fame barke being boiledin wine or 'vineger,maketh a a lotiqg for the tooth achziti is Salſo com: C 


cad againit ſcabs and filttities of the $kin. &#] 
The leaues are reported to be good fodder for Ny. — for kine, fait to'cauſe them! tro'D 


yO gry ner wes. 4 =Y mod 24 41451 9 
: ar L [| 
þ SIG 34 4 13s. i $34 


Of 0) cla = 'Glpnon,| 


ing {1 06: Wawhway 2. 
Þ erbus,* ; 243 * 2 nc ret: $3D 1117 


Cake Seruic& khfE+1 a 


= . . ; \ E. I 4 &@ * 
S x a4 £4 N ——_ » \ 6 ; 
* % + K o FN | 
wh = $14... % 
oy : <> v WS . , 


"1 : 5 


. *#>q\ Loo 
"s - > lb T5 —_ 
a £>"— 4 
a , = TE ws, 
: : o | þOp - 

A » # is ws "EL 4 p £ Ti T 
dr : k on pu % 

F k.; dis 2 ' «SS 2+ X 

<a < | 
= 4 8 
o : 


, MT 


SO, 


th The denges fl | | 


He Seruicerree growerhto the heightand bignes ofa great reeychar ed with manygreat 
wh (4 axmes or ens por are ſet $4 ſundriefmall branches, with "ny great 


 leaues,{omewhatlong like thoſe. of the Aſh: the flowers arewhi pwr "ear c 
which turne into ſmall browne berries, ſomewhat long zwhich arc not noo robecarenyntill chey 


*—_ __ a while and vntill they be ſoft like the Medlar ; whereunto itis like irt taſteand operation. 
Oooo 3 | 2. The - 


;288 THE{THIRD{BIOOKE| OF.THE 
| | 8 The dfription, 


2 The common Seruice tree groweth likewiſe to the height of a great tree, witha iraighrbod; 
of a brownith colour, full ofranches, eva 5. great tree, ghtbodie, 
are w 


| ng diſplaced leaues like the former , ſauing 
| they arebroader and not ſo long : the flowers ive Gn grow intufts;which being ra Fs 
EE come in place thereof ſmall round berries, browne vpon one ide,and reddiſh towards the ſunne of 
; an vapleaſant taſte in reſpeR of the former ; in whichare contained lirtle blackiſh kernels, 


in moſt places of ET There be many ſmal trees 
A from London: in Kentit growerh in great aboun. 


.dance,eſpecially abour Southflecte,and Gown end; __.. |. 
| They flower inMarch,and their frujte is ripe in September. Fae 


"2.0 Thefirſt is called in Greeke 2, and TM 
Dutch Sozbenbooin 2 in FrenchCa 


t > £ Sorbe tree, x | 


\ The berriesovrfruiteof the Service tree is called 3ir, or 


- 
wu . 
& 


$ 
= 
»- 


»s 


B Theſedo ſtay allmanerof fluxes of rhe belly, 
theſe we may vie divers waics according tothe maner of 


: 4 
$- 7 


4, 
7 6 
MO R's PO oe gg 


nr 


ad 


> - 
5 


o , : 3 £ 

. b. 1 = > x - 
by EMO - ja $ : . * xi bi - [! 
$S e 4 4 d Xt ? : : I : ; 

E717. { ” it 3 my ; 5 ; q 
-* P> l 4 o Ki : x 4 
: 2 k, b » : iy 1 # 3 $ ” 4 E + 
: of "41 ; h —Y. bt d \ 
4 p . {8 | PA, ' R A % \ 
7 p% £\ ' . * E . 
; 1 } 27 : x 6 v , "& 
Fs , | I 3 
4 : : 
? J eE j © o ; 

BY  þ 'F * Py . : '# O F : 
[ * a $2's »1 4 ; ' ! ig 

: 5 % q:0 | © 1 = 

: 4 15 ' ; 
: Y id P38 : 4 . 

: weld : X z 4 - l F % 
| ? IJ} 1 
© ; $1 ; : :; 
&| i 


| 


[3-044 þt + * Thedeſeription. | q  (s 


} 

0 | 
* i S : w 4 o 

F-z:"] £ ".; 


| I He Aſh alſfois an high and tal tree;itriſeth yp with a traight body;mnow :now and then of no ſmal 
; thickneſle, combat of a middle iſe, Indes couered with a ſmooth barke : the woode is 
; | white,ſmooth, hard,and ſomewhat rough grained: the tender branches hcerof, and ſuchas 
EZ | be new growen vp are ſet with certaihe joints,and haue within a white and ſpungie pith;but the old 
| boughes are woodie throughout , and be withopr either joints or pith : the leaues arelong,, and 
winged, conſiſting of many ſtanding by couples, one right againſt another vpon one ſtalke or rib, 
or as Theophraſtus ſaith <p" iris wiv, the vppermoſtofall excepred,which ſtandeth alone;of which 
ceuery particular one is long,broade,like to a ning rok ur ſofter,& of a lighter greene,without any 
ſweets ſmell,and nicked round about bg dm. nh zur of the yoongerſort of the boughes hard to the 

ſetting on ofthe leaues, growe foorth hangi ogither matiplong | narrow and flat cods, as it 

n the ſeed is perfired, which is of a bitrer taſte: the | 


were like almoſt to diuers birds toongys, where 
rootes be many,and grow deepe inthe grotind,”! 


5 | g 
[47] Dale F2þe: o 


4 


Fra x in 


E3 = 3 _ ' =_— ——_—_ 1 | 234X 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 299 


Fraxinus. | 
%*T he Place. 

The Aih doth batter proſper inmoiſt places, 
as about rhe borders of Meadowes, atd riucr 
lides,then in dry grotmds, 

%T he t1mme. | 
. _ The leaues and kefes come foofth ih Aprill 
and Maie,yet is not the ſeederipebetore the fall 
of the leate. | | 
% The names. 4" 

This tree is called in Greeke «#4: and of di- 
--uers wie; in Latine} Frexinus : in high Durch 
\/ E> * Cichernbaum, Eſchernholtz, and Steyne( 

WQd {= Chcrn:in low Dutch Efthrn,and Efſchenbon: 
Fa ST in Italian Fraſ6n0 : in French Frejne:; in Spanith 
Freſno, Fraximoand Frerxo:in Engliſh Aſh tree, 

The fruite like vnto/cods is called of the Apo- 
thecaries Lmmgna Ann, and Lingua paſſerina : a 
man may name it in Greeke 5r:95aw7or : yet ſome 
woulde have it Called Orneog/ofſion : others make 


Orxus or the wilde Aſh ro be Orneogloſion . 

It is termed in'Englith Aſhkeies, andof fome 

Kitekeies, bh | EY KEY 
* The temperature and vertues.. 


The leaues and barke of the Aſhtreeare drie, A 
and moderately hor; the ſcedis hot and dric in 
the ſecond degree. | 

The ivice of the Jeaues ; or the leaues them- B 
ſclues being applied or taken with wine, do cure 

| | the bitings of vipers,as Dreſcorides faith, 
The leaues of this tree are of ſo great a vertue againſt ſerpens , as that the ſerpenrs darenot be C 
ſobolde as totonch the morning and cuening ſhadowes of the tree, but ſhunnerh them a farre off, 
as Plinyreporteth in his 1 6.book 1 3.chap. He alfo aftirmeth thar the ſerpent being penned in with 
boughes laide rounde about , will ſooner runne intothe fire, if any be there , then come neere ro 
the boughes of the Aſhzandrthat the Aſh'doth flower before the ſerpents appeere , and doth not 
| Ccaſthisleaucs before they be gone againe. [| | 
| We write ({aith he) vpon experience, that if a fireand a ſerpent beer within the circle of the D 
" boighes,the ſerpent will ſogner runne into the fire then into the boughes, -It is a woongert ull cur- 
| tefieinnature that the Aſh ſhould flower before thele ſerpents appeere,and not calt his lcaues be- 
| foretheybegone againe. | | | | [| þ 5 

Both of them, that is to ſay,the leaues and the barke, are re@vrred ro! {top the belly z and being F 
boiled with vineger and water,do {tay vomiting, it they be laide vpon the ſtomacke. | 

The leaues and barke of the Aſh rree, boiled in wine and drunke, dg open the ftoppings of the F 
liver and ſpleene,and do greatly comfort them. | || | 

Three or fower leaues of the Aſh tree taken in wine ech morning fram time to time, doth make G 
thoſe leane thar are fat,and keepeth them from feeding,which do begin ro waxe fat. | 

The ſeede or Kitckeies of the Aſh tree pronoke vrine,increaſe naturall ſcede, and ſtirreth vp bo- H 
dily luſt, eſpecially being powdred with nutnegs and drunke. | | | 

The woode is profitable for many things being exalted by Homeys commendation $and Aehit-1 
les\peare, as P/inie writeth ; The ſhivers or ſmall pecces thereof, called In Greeke Tproejvers , being 
drunke, are {aide ro be pernicious and deadly ,as Dioſcoridesathrmerh. | | | 


The Lie which is made with the aſhes of the barke cureth the whiteſcurffe, and ſuch other like K 
roughnes of the skin,as F/4ayteltifieth, = "74 [| *j | 


Oo00J J Of 


= ry — o Q S | 
m— 


I £ 


| 


THE THIRD BOOKE!OF THE 
| | | l | *$ 4 


Of. the wilde Aſh othermiſe called Quickbeame, 
| or Quicken tree. Chap.104. 


Sorbus {ylueſtxis, aut faxiles Bubuls. | ; 1... «ag 
The Quickentree, wilde Aſhe,or wilde Service tree. | *Thedefeription. 


| |[T" Hewilde/Aſhe, or Quicken tree , Pens $e- 


& |Þþ 
t 1Þ 


tcth foorth for the wilde Seruice tree, which 

| | 7" Irhinke heneuerſawe, and therefore deſer- 

; \ueth the lefle blame: this tree groweth ſeldome 
| (or neuer rotheſtature & height of the Aſh tree; 
: notwithſtanding it groweth to the bigneſle of a 
| (greatmans legpe : the leaues be grear and long, 
| |and ſcarſely tobe diſcerned from the leaues of 
| [the Seruice rrce:the flowers be white,and ſweete 
| 'of ſmell;andgrowe intufts, which do tume into 
| [round berries, [greene atthe firſt, but when they 
| |be ripe ofadeepe redcolour, andofan vnplea- 
| fanrraſte; the branches areasfullof juice asthe g 

[| !Ofiar, which is the cauſe that boies do make 
| pipes of the barke thereof as they do of Wil- 


way [=] 


z 


LE  '%*The place. 
|| |Thewilde Aſhor Quicken tree, groweth vp- 
| on high mountaines,andin thicke high woods 1n 
| moſt places of Englande, eſpecially about the 
|\Namptwich in Cheſhire, in the wilde of Kent; 
| in; Suſſex anddiuers other places. 
$4.44 | lj | , * Thetame, 
%\ | = ''/-. | The wilde Aſh flowreth in Maic, and theber- 


b=- | *%* Thenames, 
|. | The Larines call this tree Ormnw, andoften. - 
| times Sylneſtris fraximms,or wilde Aſhand itis al- 
af = | ſo Praxint fpecies,or akinde of Aſh: forthe Grz- 
etans (as not onely Pliniewriterh, but alſo Theophraſtus) havie madetwo kindes of Aſh, the one 
high andrall, the other lower ; the high and tall pneis Frexinw walgards, or the common Aſh, 
andthe lower Ornas, which alſo is named uri whiz; of Montana Fraxinmmountaine Aſh ; as the 
other mJuri, or fielde Aſh, which is@lſo named Brrwaie, or as Gaza tranilateth it, Bubula Fraxi- 
us, but more truely Magne Frexeaw, or great Aſh, for the ſyllable «7 is a ſigne of bignelle, 
This Orme or great Aſh 1snamed'ih high Dutch Malbaum : inlowe Durch Hauereſichen, or 
©urreſchen, of divers Quallter ; in French Freſac ſauvage : in Engliſh wilde Aſh , Quicken rec, 
Quickbeame tree , and Whicken trce: Afathiolau maketh this to be Sorbus ſylueſtris, or wilde 


Seruice tree. 


== E--2 $7 
11 | | uh Theremp'ratureandvertats, wk 

A Touching the faculties of the leayes, barke or herries, as there is nothing found.among the 
olde , ſois there nothing notedby the later writers , but Plane ſeemerh. to make this wilde Aſh 
like in faculties tothe common Aſh: for in his r4,booke 13.chaprer, where he writeth of both the 
Aſhes he ſaith, that the common AſhiisCy;/ſþe,and the Mountaine Aih Spife. Forthwith he addeth 
this, The Grecians write, that the leauesof them do kil cartel, and yet hurt notthole that chow their 
cud,which the olde writers haue noted of the Yew tree,and norofthe Ath tree. P/inie was decciued 

by the necrnes of the words wine and ate: wh is the Yew tree, and woiz the Aſh tree: ſothat he 

hath tallly attriburedthatdeadly facultie to the Aſhtree,which doth belong to the Yew tree. 


N | 
Ss 


The 


HTSTORTE' /OF' PLANTS. 1291 
 _ Thelcanes of the wilde Aſh tree boiledin wine,aregood againſt the paine in the ſides, and the B 
ſtopping of the liuer;and aflwagerhithe bellies. of thoſe:that haue the tympanic and dropſic. 

Brnedjit us Curtis Symproſianu,'s deceued inthe hiſtoric of Oraus,when hethinketh out of Y;x- C 
gils Gebrgickes that 0-24 hath the flower of the Peare tree: forout of Yergils verſes no fuch 
chingaraltcan be gathered, forhe intreateth nor of the formesof trees, but of the graſhng of 
divers imre-others , viilikeiand differing in nacure, as of the graffing ot the nut nee 1nro the 
Strawberietrec; the Apple mto the Planetree; the Beech into the: Cheſtnurxrec; the Pearce into 
the wilde Ath;or Quickbeame tree 5 che MkeintorttieElmerrec:andin this reſpett hewriceth.thar 
the Plane tree bringeth foorth a® Apple ; the Beech tree a Cheſtnurz the wilde Ah rreebringerh. 
forth hevbire flowerofthe Peare cree as it is mo{tmanifeſt ourot Hirgeds avwne wordes ,. which 
tarde inthis manerinzhe ſecond booke ofhis Georgickes, +), || 
OO Inferitur vito 2x ſatu nuts Arburns hoyrids, 
* "Ex fterilesplatinimabos g7ferevacentes, 

"Caflanee Fagos : Ornus imeaviuit atbo 

Flere pyri, glandemgue ſuts frrgcye [a> vim. 

| The rugged Wilding ſtocke is grafted with . 

', A Nuttcceſertor:impe which tender be, 


And Plane tree ſtockes,barren for want of pith, 
Have borne excceding fruitful apple yee; 

- And Cheſtnut ſtockes haue borne ot Beech the maſts, 
The Ath ree ſtocke growes hoaric in his ſeate | 
With Pcare tree flowers or blofloms which it caſts, _.. | | / 


And vnder Elms haue livinc crallic malls for mcatre, | 
| ; \ ' T 
Of (oriars Sumach. Chap.105, 


» Rhus Coriaria. | 2 Rhws Myrtifalins... 
Coriars Sumach. i Wilde,or viyrull Sumach. 


| 


THE THIRD BOOKE / oF THE 


| |- The = 
Oriars Sumdch drobeckp vnto the ighe dd ildee crops, ther the maner 
Elder tree; bigger then Dioſcorides reporteth.ittobeyor other, who affirme that er of ay 
weth two cubits F-4-l n errors arethe-greatertbur this Xbwsis fo like vnto the Seruice 
tree in —_— and maner of growing, thatitis hardtoknow one from theother 3 bur that the leaues. 
arc ſoirand hairic,hauing a red finewe or tib thorow the midſt of the leafe : the flowers growe with, 
the leaues vpon long ſtems cluſtering rogither hke Cats raile,or the carkins of the nur wee, bur 
_- _— ofa whitiſh greene colour: afret which _ cluſters ofroundeberties | growin gin bun 
ches apes. 
2 pong, Sumach,or the Sumach of Maze ſeri tion grower likea finall hedge tree having 
many flender twiggic branches ,Barniſhed with little caues like 24yreas; or rather like the leaues of 
the 1#ube tree; among which comme foorth {lender moſfie lowers , of no great account or value, 
which bring forth ſmal ſeeds,incloſed within acorneredcaſe or huke,faſhioned like aſpoone the 
trunke or bgdy of both theſe kinds of Sumach being wounded with ſome 1 iron inſtrument,yeclderh 
agum or liquor. 1 % Theplace, | 
Sumach groweth as Dieſcorides ſaith, in ſtony places: itis foundin abiervi moumraines and wood; 
in Spaine,and in many places on the mount Apenginein Italy ,and alſo necte vnto Ponrus, 4rchi- 
 genesin Galex inthe 8. booke of medicines according tothe Packs RE ſheweththar it grow. 
cth in Syria, making choice of thar of Syria. | 
| | + The that. 
The flowers of Sumach come foorthi in luly,theſeed with the berries are ripe i in Aurneone. 
| %* The names. 
This is calledin Grecke «is : Ahus faith Plinie hath no Latine ies zyert Gaza after the fignifica- 
tion of the Greeke worde,faineth a namexcalling it:F//da: the Aribiaris natreit Swnzth:: the Itali- 
ans Somache: the Spaniards Sumagre: in low Dutch) by [opan of ace they calit Dmack, 
or Sumach: in Engliſh Sumach;Coriars Su nach ah d leather Sumach: the leaues ofthe ſhrub be 
called jets 4yow/t-lx4 : in Latine Rhus corraria,or Rho. | ; 
The ſeede is named irvs; and fovs bn?! wt 3a: in Laine Rhoe celmeric and Rhot obſenieran : in 
Engliſh Meare Sumach,and Sauce Sumach, j 
| w%The chmplreeart. 
The fruit Jeaves,and ſecde hereofdo very much binde, they fb coole and drie: dric they a are in 
the third degree,and cold in the fecond,as Ga/entcacherh. 
| ** Thewertves. 
A Theleavesof Sumach led inwine and drunkeh, do ſtop the laske, the inordinate courſe of 
womens lickneſles,and afl other inordihate iſſues of blood, 
The ſecede of Sumach eaten in ſauces with meat, ſtoppeth all manner of fluxes ofthe belly, the 
bloodie flixe,andall orherifſucs,eſpecially the white lies of women. 
The decoRionof the leaues maketh haires blacke, andis put into ſtoolesro fume vpwardi into 
the bodies of thoſethat h aue the dyſenteric, and is to be giuen them alſo in drinke. 
D Theleauesfiadeintoan n_— or Plaiſter whth honie and vineger , ſtaierh the ſpreading na- 
rure of Gangrehe and Perygium 
E Thedrielcaucs ſodden in water wngill the decdiion be as thicke as honie, yeelderh foorth a 
certaine oylineſle which performerh all the effets of Licium. 
FE Theſcedeisnoleſle ctteQtuallro be ſtrowed inþpowder vpon ther! meates which are Cz{;ac; or 
enteric. 
G wv ſeeds pouned, mixed with honie andthe powder of Oken toles healerh the Hemorrhoides. 
H Therciſſucthout of theſhrub a gum, which wh pur into ta hollowneſle of the teeth, caketh 
away the paine,as TT writeth.| 


Of red Sumach, | Chap. 106. 


[ The deſeriptin. 

Heſe two figures are one and the ſelfeſame plant, the Grlt ſhewerh the ſhrub beingin 
flower : the other when iris full lowred with the fruit growento ripeneſlc, notwil | 
ding ſomehaue deemed them to be of two o kindes __ they were decciued, 


Thus 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 292 

This excellent and moſt beautifull plant Coggyeria(being repured of the Italians and the Vene- 
tians fora kinde of Rhas or Surnach, bicaulc ir 1s viedfor the fame purpoſes whereto Rh ſernerl 
and therein doth far excell it) is an hedge plant growing not aboue the height of foweror hte cuts 
bits,hauing tough and pliant ſtalks and twiggic branches like vnto Oziers,of a browne cotour. The 
leaucs beround, thicke and ſtiffe like the leaues of Capperis, in colour and ſauour of Prtacre \eaurs, 
of Tere binthus; among which: arifeth a ſmall vprighrt ſprig, bearing ar the roppe a moſt fine 
woollie or flockie tuft, criſped and curled like a curious wrought ſilken fleece, which culerh and 
foldeth'ir ſelfe abroadlike alarge buſh of haires, copaGt of red or crimſon coloured hairezamongſt 
which commeth foorth the ſeede,much like vato Leas,but ſmaller,and of a darke red colour. 


1 Corgyeria T. heophr aits et Cotinus Cortarins Pliny. 
Venice Sumach.  RedSumach. 


% The place. | 

Coggygriagroweth in Orleans neere Auinion, and in divers places of Italie, vpon the Alpes of 
Hiſtria, and many other places. Ir groweth on moſt of the hils of France, in the high woods of the 
vpper Pannonia or Aultria,and allo of Hungaria and Bohemia, 

| * Thetime. 

They flower and flouriſh for the moſt partin Tuly, 

* Thenames - | 

The firſt is called Coggyeria and Coceygria: in Engliſh Venice Sumach, or Silken Sumath; of 
Plinie Cetinua in his fixteenth booke cighteenth chapter, There is {ſaith he ) on mount Apen# 
nine a ſhrub, which is called Cotinas ad lineamenta mode Conthyly coloye inſignis, and yet vin is Ole- 
after,or Olea ſy{neftris,the wilde Oliue tree, fromwhichthis ſhrub doth much differ; and therefore it 
may rightly be called Cotinws Coriaria : diners would haue it named Scotinas, which name is nor 
found un any of the olde writers. The Pannonians do call it — Iris alſothoughr that this 
ſhrubis Coggygria Pling,of which in his 13.booke 22.chapter he writeth in theſe words,Coggyeris 
isalſo like to /nedoin leafe, not ſogreat; ithath apropertieto loſe the fruit by the downe , which 
thing happenerh co no other tree. | + 

* The 


"z 
7 


£- 


1294 THE THIRD BOOKE/ or THE 


The leaues and endanger wi hi Ge wrrymacbining coldand eric 
as the other kindes of Sumachare. | | [2] 

The leaues of Cogeyeria,or filken AW pe -bry inthe aatlew FP; Spaine aid Iralie for great 
ſures of money, vato thoſe that dreſle Spit ings for which prapoſy they are very excel. 
lene. © | 

Theroote of Cotinns, as hbieuilerangreth; Gnich wdiewdd. wing ro wooll and cloth, ared- 
diſh colour,which Plinicknew,thewing & =_ chis ſhrub ( tharisw þ )is aibdineementa 


web OT INTIY: | i | I F | | 45 EN, TY AEIJP WJ 1 


= C > - 
Lv ; ; x : '2 PF 
| [1 is EF! 
: q ” & } 
: ' : : E 1 
= [. <t 3 
1 | Rl : F+ 
J | : = * 1 
: q BY ®& 3 
: , 4 £3 
, 5 g . f E ? 
>} Ft : | ee. 
t? : } J $ j > ' 
[; V4 « a Y 
: ' { 7 ; Q 
> : 4 Hl e i 
: « 
: 7 


& 4 
* | 
% 7} 
8! 


Alnw. © 
The Alderr rree, 


hauingmany brittle branches, the barke is 

' of a brownecolour, the wood ortimberis 
nor hard,and yer itwill laſt and enfure very long 
ynder the water, yealonger than any other tim- 
ber whartſocuer : days mu the fennic and oft 
.marriſh groundes, t dovie to make piles and 
poſts thereof, for the rengthening, of the wals 
and uch like, This timber doth alſo ſerve very 
well ro make tfoughes to conuey water in ſteade 
;of pipes of Lend. The leaues of this tree arc in 
ſhape ſomwhar like the Haſell,bur they are blac. 
ker and more wrinkied; very claminie to handle, 
'2sthough chey were ſorinkled with hore, 7] he 
bloſſomes or flowers are like the aglers of the 
Birch tree, which being vaded,there followerh a 
"5m fruic cloſcly growing rogither , 2s big as a 

igeons egge, which rowarde Aurtimne doth 
non . ſeede falleth out and is loſt, 

| | w% Theplace. 

| | The Aller or Alder tree ,delighteth to growe 
inlowe and moyſt wateriſh places. 
| , %* Thetime. 


'T He AlaG rice or Aller ,is a greathigh tree | 


|| |The Aller Meng forth new atonds Aprill, 
the fruit whereof is avs in Seprember. 
| |Thistreeis called i Greeke xaiJox: in Latine 
CAimus, Perrus Creſeentins nameth it Ameaanss : 
it is cted in high Dutch Erinttioun We 2 ternidum: ! in lowe Dutch Elfen and Elfen oO 
in Italian Mzo: in French Au/ze :inEagliſh A'derand Aller, | 
| Þþ The tem nature. jo 
The leaues and barke ofthe Alder tteeare cold,gdrie and aftringent, 
|! *% Thevertues, 
The leaves of Alder are much vſed againſt hot ſwellings, vicers, andall inward inflammations, 
eſpecially of the Almonds and kernels of the throte, 
The barke.is much vſed of poore countrie diers,for the Hinger courle cloth, Laps ent oY ſech 
like in into a blacke colour wherewito it ferueth yeryſ | 


: HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
. \Of the Birch tree. (hap.108. 


1295 


* The defeription. 

He common. Birch tree waxeth likewiſe a 

great tree , hauing many boughes beſet - 
with nanyfſmallrods or twigs, very limber 
andpliant: the barke of the yoong twigs and 
braunches is plaine, Gnooth, and full offap, in 
colour like the Cheſtnut but the rinde of the 
bodie or trunke is harde without, white, rough, 
 apdvneeuen, full of chinkes or creuices : vader 
which is founde janorher fine barke, plaine , 
ſmooth, and as thinne as paper, which heerero- 
fore was vſed in fteede oa to write vpon, 
before the making of paper was knowne : in 
Ruſſia & thoſe col e regions,it ſcructh in ſteede 
of Tiles and {late to couer their houſes withall+ 
this tree beareth for his lowers certaine aglers 
like the Haſell treezbur ſmaller,wherein the ſeed 

* The place. * 


Thiscommon Birchcree groweth jn woods, 
and mountaines,in moſt places of England. 
___ *k Thetime. 
 Thecatkinsoraglers do firſt appeere , and 
then theleaues ,ina Aprill or alittle later, 
nd *+ The names. ET. 
Theophraſtuscalleth this tree in Greek owits ; 
divers owes, others mus: it is named in Latin Be. 
fula:diuers alſo write it with a double / Zerwlls,as 
ſome of Plinzes copies haue it : it is called int 
| | high Dutch. Birckenbawn : in lowe Durch 
Lerckenbooin : in Italian 3etw/s, by them of Trent Bedollo: in French Bowes: in Engliſh Birch © 


| | w% Thetemperatureandoertues. 

Concerning the medicinable vic of the Birch tree,or hisparts; there is nothing exranteitherin A 
the old or new writers, | | WE, | 

This tree ſaith P/z#e in his 16.booke 18.chapter , Mirebili tandore & tenuitate terribilimagi- B 
fratuewn wvirgs: forin times paſt the magiſtrates rods were made heerof: andin our time alſothe 
ſcholmaſters and parents do terrific their children with rods made of Birch, | 

Ieſeruerh wellro the decking vp of houſes,and bflnquerring roomes, for places of pleaſure, and C 
beautifying the ſtreeres inthe croſfe or gang weeke;and ſuchlike, | | . | 


Of the Hornebeame,or Hard beame tree. | Chap.109. 


| w The deſeription. =. 
LY £txdxs,or the Hornebeame tree groweth great, 8 very like vnto the Elme,or wich Hazell tree, 
hauing a great body: the wood or timber wherof is berrer for arrowes and ſhafts, pulleies for 
mils, and ſuch like deviſeFthen Elme or Wich Hazell ; for in time it waxeth ſo hard, thatthe 
toughnes and hardnes of it,may be rather compared vnto horne then vnro wood, andtherefore it 
was called Hornebeame,or Hardbeame: the leaues heereof are like the Elme , ſaving that they be 
tenderer: among thoſe hang certaine triangled things ,vpon which be.rounde knaps, or little heads 
ot the bignes of Ciches;in which is contained the fruite or ſecede : the roore is ſtrong and _ 
| | Bet 


| f MW | [ = | 
| þ 8 | Ye bs 
1296 THE THIRD 'BOOKE' OF THE 
Betuus, fie Carpinus. [| 4-1 S 9 
The Horncbeametree, 7 | | fo LOI 4 4 Theplace. * 
| | | | ' __ + Betulws orthe Hornbeametree groweth plen. 
tifully in Notthawpronſhire, alfo-in Kent by 
Graveſend, where itis commonly taken for a kind 


a0 


il | | *% Thetime. 

| This ereedoth ſpring in Aprill, and the ſecede i: 
ripe in September. 

\BE- ' *% Thenames. 

' The Hornbeame tree is called in Greeke 7's, 
which is as if you ſhould ſay Conzuga/is, or belon. 
ging tothe yoke , bicauſeir ſerueth well to make 
© of, in Latine /vgs, yokes,wherewith oxen are 

 yoked togither, which are alſo cuen art this time 
gitnefleth, Benediftus Curtius 
dour ſelues haue ſufficientknow. 
ledge thercofinour owne countriez and therefore 
rhay be engliſhed Yoke Elwe. Iris called of ſome 
Carpinus and Zugia; is allo called Zerulus, as if 
it, were a kinde of Birch, butmy felfe berterlike 
that it ſhould be one of the Elmes : in high Dutch 
Ahone : in French Carne: in Italian Carprno; in 
pan Hornbeame, Hardbeame, Yoke Elme, 
and in ſome plates Witch haſell, 
| * *% Thertemperature and vertnes. 
| This rree is not vicd in medicine, the vertues 
are notexpreſled of the ancients,neither haue we 
any cerraine experiments of our owne knowledge 


[3 
a> | 


mare than hath beene faide for the vic of hut- 


- 


made thereof, Þ 
Symproſianus,and 0 


: 


+ 

I © | | | . 
4} : 4 _ Z 
Ss: » : + 
v9 ' 
»1 : 
Cy | 


Of the Elme tree. Chap 110, 


e115 Fete defer iprion. 


a firſt kinde of Elmeis a great high tree, hauing many branches {preading themſelues 
largely abroad : the timber of it is hard, [and notcaſfie tobeclonen or cut inſunder, The 
leaues ate ſomewhat wrinkled and ſnipt tbour the edges,whereupon are ſornerimes found 
certaine bliſters orbladders, which containc acertaine ſlimje ot clammie liquor, wherein is often 
found ſmall wormes ; hut when the ſaid 00: hath contipticd vatill the end of ſoramer, you ſhall 
find it hardened with the hearte of the ſure, and congealed like ynro gum, The ſeede is broad and 
flat, notmuch vnlike the feede of the garden Atach. "This tree is very common in our countrie: 
of England: the leaues of thisElme are pleaſant f9dder for divers fowerfooted beaſts, and eſpect 
ally tor kine and oxen. | | FY EPR PS © 3 26 . 
2 Theſecondkinde of Elie growerh likewiſe vito a great ſtarureyirh very hard and tough tim- 
| ber,hereof are made arrowes,wheeles, mi = es, and ſuchtherengins for the carriage of great 
waights and burthens. The leaues belikewiſe wrinkled, and ſomewyhar ſnipr about the _— lon- 
er and narrower thay the leaues of the common Elme, of a faint graene colour vpon the backe 
Die Condbien ſhining,and of a good ſmell when they ve drie; wherupon there nener grow any bli- 


ſters or bladders, neither willrhe hungie cattellſy willingly feede thereon on the common 
Elme,whych they will browze ve eedily. The ſeede hereof is very like vnto rhe former, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1297 


2 Yimaulatifalis, 
The Elme with broad leaues. 


4 
K : % : % | 

| : ' ' | 

N \ 7 | -+ : 4 —_— i 1 '* : RI 
| ; | - +> HY <A ; W PE 

SY F ; A ar 

* The place. 5 FRE & 

« 4 , 


The firſt kinde of Eſme groweth plentifully in all places of E The  Sroweth in 
was ro and parks in great plenty, asin a parke belonging to my.Lord Treaſurer, a mile be- 
yond his Honars place at Waltham ,<alled Thibalds, It growerhalfo in Kene neere Southfleete, 
Theſcedeof the Elmeſhewethitſelfcfirſt; and before theleaues $ it falleth in the end of Aprill, 
 atwhat timethe leaues begin to ſpring.” © | 

*% The nones. ; 

The frſt is called jn Grecke #04s: in Latine Pim: in high Duxch Ruff holtz, Ruſtbaym,Clime- 
baum: in lowe DurchDimen: in French Ozmeand Omcan: in Iralian Ohms : in Spaniſh Yhno: in 
EngliſhElmerree. ' | fb oof ; ; TY | 

The ſeede is named by Plinie and Columells Samers. Thelittle wormes which are formd with the 
liquor within the ſmall bladders,benamed in Greekeuinis. in Lirine Cultces arid Muliones.. | 

The other Elme is called by Theophraftarip+0ie,which Gaza tranſlatech Montiulmus,ormoun- 
taine Elme. Colamells nameth it Fernacula,or N oftras Vim, that is to fay, Itz{caor italian Elme: 
itis calledin lowe Dutch Þerfelecrzand in ſome places beerenteer, | 
. wy * The temperature and vertues, © | 

The leaues and barke of the Elme be moderately hot, with i euiflent cleanfing facultiez they A 
haueinrhe chewing acertzineclammic and glewingqualitie, | | 


Theleaues of E glew and healevp greenewounds, ſo doth the barke wrapped and fivadled B 
aboutthe wound like a band. (63 7 "Bfots 


The leaues being ſtamped with vineger dotake away ſcurffe, LINES Comes phtigng, > 
Ny ——_ the thicker barke drunke with wine or water pur- D 


1298”. THE THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 
E Thedecoftion of Elme leaues,as alſo of the barke or roote, healerh broken bones very ſpeedily, 


hn fomentedor bathed therewith. ; | 
F liquor that is found inthe bliſters doth beaurifie the face, and ſcowreth away all ſpors,frec- 


kles,pimples,ſpreadingterters, and ſuch lke,being ap 


lied thereto, 
/ G Ithe cene wounds,and cureth ruptures ah made,being laidon with Spleenwoort 


is 


Of the Line or Linden tree. | Chap.mn. 


The temale Line tree. | 


*  #- The deferaption.”o _ 


s *T* Hefemale Line or Linden tree waxeth "ery. Geear and thicke, ſpreading foorth his bran- 


z 
: 


ches wide and far abroad, beinga tree which yeeldeth\a moſt pleafant ſhadow, vnder and 

within whoſe boughes may be made braue fomumer ooes and bankertting arbors, bicauſc 
the more that it is ſurcharged with waight of timberand ſuch like, the betterie doth flouriſh, The 
barke is browniſh, very ſinooth and-plaine| on the outſide, bur that whichis next tothe timber 
is white, moyſt and tough, ſeruing very well for ropes, traſes, and halzgggs. The timber is whitiſh,” 
Plaine and without knots, yea yery ſoft and gentleinthe cuttingor handlihg. Better gunpowder is 
made ofthe coles of this wood than of Willow cles. The leaues are greene, ſmooth, ſhining and 
large,ſomewhar ſaiptor toothed abour the edges, The flowers are verylittle, whitiſh, of a good 
fauour, and very many in number,growiag cluſtering togither from ourof the middle of the leafe 3 
outof which alſo proceedeth a ſmall whitiſh longharrow leafe: there commeth very ſeldome times 
any-good or fruitof theſe lowers, they are as it were a barren kindeof flowers or chaffelijke vnto 
NO w Thliaſpi wa py mrs 216 prop peemble chafte. This tree ſeemeth + be EA kind 
, andthe people in Eſſex abqutHeningliam (whereas great plenty groweth by the way 
fades) do call ic broad ſeafed Elme, KSALE ey FIC. | mY 
| | | | 2 


HIST.ORIE OF PLANTS. | 
| . * The deſeription. x ! SITES. 
2 Themale Ti{e,or Line tree,growerh allo very greac and thicke, ſpreading irſelfe farreabroade 
ike che other Linden tree; hisbarke is veryrough and plianc, and ſeryerh to make cordes and hal- 
cers of. The rimber of this tree is much harder more knortie,& moreyellow then the timber of the 
ocher ,not much differing from the timber of the Elme tree : the leaves heereof acenormuch vn- 
like Iaic leaues, not very greene, ſomewharſaipr abourthe edges: from the middle whereof come 
foorth cluſters of little white lowers like the former, which being vaded,there ſucce<e ſmalli6und 
pellers,growing cluſtering 4s. gy ec Luic berrics, within which is contained a hittle round blac- 
kiſh ſeede, which fallerh out when the berrie is ripe. | REES op 4 
- - wTheplace. { | 
The female Linden tree growerth in ſome woods in Northamptonſhire ;alſo neere Colcheſter , 
and in many places alongſt the high way leading from Londonto Heningham , in the Countie of 
The male Linden tree growerh in my Lord Treaſurers garden arthe Scrandzand in ſundry other 
places,asat Barnelmes, andin a gardenat gy ay; ncere London. | 
| Sgt .- + T be tame. | 
Theſe trees flower in Maic,andtheir fruite is ripe in Auguſt, ; I 
| | | *& Thenames.. 1 ye 
TheLindentree is called in Greeke ox fog: in Latine Tilta : in highDate h Linden, and L inven» 
baum: inlow Dutch Linde, and Lindenboom + che lralians Ti : cl 
Tlet ,and Taliewl : in Engliſh Linden tree and Line tree, | 


Spaniards Tee +inFrench | 


| | #7 he temperature. 1 ec 
Thebarke and leaues of the Linden or Linetzec,are of a temperate heate, ſomewhat drying and 
aſtringenr. | »+ The vertues. 1 = 


The leauces of Ti4a boiled inſmithes water with a peece of Alom and alittle hony , cureth the A 
ſores in childrens mouthes. # | 

The leaues boiled vntill they be tender, and pouned verie ſmall with hogs greaſe, and thepouder B 
of Fenugrecke and Lineſeed, rakerh away hot ſwellings and'bringerh i ro maturation, 
being applied thereto verie hot. 1 | | 

The flowers are commended by diuers againſt paine of the head procecding of a coldcauſe, C 
againſt uh” <6 Apoplexicandalfo the felling helney and not onely the lowers bur the diſtil- 
led water thereof. _ | : [ Sorii6y 

The leaues of the Linden tree(faith 7 heophraſtw) are very ſiveete,and be a fodder for moſt kinde D 
of cattle: the fruitcan be eaten ofnone. | 


Of the «IM aple tree. 'Chap.tth, 


THe great Maple is a beautifull and high tree, wich a barke of ameaneſmoorhnes : the ſub. 
ſtanceof the woode is tender andeafie to worke on zitſenierh foorth on cuery fide very ma- 
ny goo apngiee) and branches, which make an excelent ſhadow againſt the heate of the 

ſunnc zypon whictt are great, broad, and cornered leaues, much like to thoſe of the Vine, hanging 
by long reddiſh ſtalks: the lowers hang by cluſters, of a whitifh/greene colourzatrer them comme 

. wp long fruite faſtned rogitherþyconples, one right agairiſt:anothex, wich kernels bumping our | 
neere to the place in which they are combined:mall che other parrs flaratd thinne like vnto parch- 
_ or reſembling the innermoſt wingsof Ephemer;,or of graſhoppers :the kernels be white and 


lanes of 2 tree, but moſt commonly 
tkewile ſmooth; the ſubſtance of 
the woode is white,an Teiues are corneredlike thoſe of the former, 
bars dorh,bur tharthe cues'are v1 

growing in cluſters,but v ' rhe 
afebettale de fs j 


ASSES! 1 WANG 3 


_ 


21 100d 24 £1310! 1 | 


1300 
Aer mator. 


A 


Accenſun tinges 
Hint bibis : aut CHeeris radice 


= 
- 
[6 
= F 
Wa themen das * T bs C = 
4 ; % 
” 
» & 


XJ 


i 
fo 


. 
My 2 
"-—\ 
—— 
< 16649; 


A 


” \ 
'S \ 4 ), ad 
s of 
PT f — 6 J / 
? £ ; wy ft ” —_ » /; 
I - 
% 
= 
A © "4 »” : » 
, , - 
"8 > 2 £5 th 5 —. 11 Z ; 
% . Y 


,_ - 
#. 4 - 
= 


THE THIRD BOOKE oF THE 


The greatMaple,nort rightly calle the $ycomor tree, p12.59 


1" Theplace, © 
The ſmall 'or hedge Maple groweth almoſt 
where inhedges and lowe woods, 
The grearMaple is a ſtranger in England;only 
i roweth in the walkes and places of pleaſure of 
noble men, where jreſpecially is vlanted for the 


4 3% 
I © thadowe lake, and vnderthe name of Sycomore 
Win 


4 | * The tame. | IT Si 
| Theſe trees flower about the-ende of March, 
rs their fruit is ripe in September, 
111 "o Thenames. © | 
Il | This treeis/calledin Greeks ovituri@:: in La. 


hee: in Engliſh Maple,or Mapletrec, 


ln pore and UNaldeſcherne : 


*xhoughr to beproper 


| Thegrear Maple is called in high Durch 2. 
the French men 
Erable and 'Plajne abuſiuely , and'rhis is 
ly called ew4:w3#; butthey 
arefardeceiedthare rake this for P/ztanms,orthe 

ane tree, being drawen into this error by the 
jnlwany of the French word; for the Plane tree 
'\doth much differ from this, 


* | Theotherivtcalled in Laririe Ceer mines: in 


| high Dutch UMaſſholdert in low Dutch Boogs 


2 in French Eyab4: inEngliſh ſimall Maple, 
common Maple. | 
% Theten 


18 ature andvertaes.” 
What vie the V 


ple hath in medicine ina 


zothi of as Grecians, but dl nth 14.booke $, chapter affirmerh, thatthe roore 
and looked, isa ſingular remedie for the paine of che liver, Serpmus Sammenicw writeth, 
thatitis drunke with wine qoperegpioenof edge, (+74 
IH?) 


Ss latiu imeneritint morks tentaruy aento, | 


Lopidemirientiburondh, 


tundis & 1114 


Cam Vino caple; : hes of mae _ 


If with a diſeaſe that h 


aheroo! nei 


- 1 the deſcriptions, 
Plinie which ische Aſpe,n 


oÞAmerita,or of the Indies,whi visr tobe 


$ 7 
"F 

Ee 

- 
8} 
S- 
S 
F þ 


HISTORTE OF PLA 'TS. 1301 


t Populss /ba. | | 2 Pope's nigra. 
1hewhite Poplar tree, ' The blacke Poplar tree, 


l Hewhite % v5 commeth ſoone to perteftion, and +a high in ſhort time, full of 
_ þ boughesatthe top: che barke of the body is ſmonth,/and that | 

| whire withall : the yood is white,cafie to be cleft: the leaues axe broad,deepely gaſhed,and 
cornered like alm.Ilt to choſe of the. Vine,but much lefler,fingoth on the ypperfide,glib, and fome- 
whar greene 3 and on the'neather fide white and woolly: the carhins ate long,downy atthefirlitof a 
purplith colour : the gore ſpread many wit: ping On and not growing deepe, and 
therefore it hapneth that theſe trees be oftentimes blowne downe with the winde, *_* | 
2 TheblackePo»lartrec is as high as the white, and now and then Higher , oftentimes fuller of 
bougheszand with a thicker body :the barke thereofis likewiſe ſmooth , bur rhe ſubſtance of rhe 
wood is harder yellower ,& notſo white,fuller of veines.& nor ſo eaſely cleft: the leaues be fomwhar 
long,and broad below towards the ſtem,ſharpe acthe poinr,aad a lirfle ſnipt about the edges,nei- 
ther white tor woo!ly;fike the Teaues oF the former, birt of aplcaſant greene colour : among which 
come foorth long agers or catkins, which doturneinto cluſters : theb 


4 | «: vioun ſhew.chemſelues 
before the leaves ſpring out, arc of a teaſonable godd ſatiour';'of the cis made thatprofitable 
oinementealled Farientans Populeny 7 9D BOG mo 


; Tho hind ofPplat ic lb 4 Sieat tree: the bankcnnd bale of he Wode is Tau 
like that of the former: this tree is garniſhed with many brittle and render branches , ſet 


leaues,in a maner round tiuch blacket and hardet thetrthe blacke Poplar, hanging vpon long and 


: 
[ : 

: 
+ # 4 


llenderſtems , which arefor the moſt part ſhll-wuering, and wake a great noiſe by being beaten 
one t6hdther; yeathough the weather be calrmie;and ſcarce any winde blowing z and knowne by 
CITI ANA TO fongerz and grow dee to the ground thi 

ole of the white Poplar. CRIT EN EI od ei as. 
4* This firanpe Poplargvhich fomedocal-Pupalel in Engliſh the tormd leafed Poplac 


Os 


of India,waxerh a greattree , bedeR with many goodly twiggic branes, tonghand limmer = 


Pppp x 


of the boughes is likewiſe 


MY a> OY — O_— -m_s. 4-1» <a > _ Gs on, m_— 


i. WIS 
-* 


3:44 Gnu AND Sal A; arte et > 


% 
. * 
OE ER  U  ERI TIRING — OO WFP INTE A ak 
- 


1302 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


the Willow,full of joints where the leaues do grow,of a perfect roundnes,fauing where it cleaueth 


or groweth tothe ſtalke:from the boſomes or cor 


| | | YWners of theſe Jeaues com 
vnto our Poplar,bur ſmaller : the leafe is thicke,and very like the leaues of 


c foorth ſmall aglers.like 
Arbor Twde,bur broader, 


of an aſtringent raſte Jomewhar heating the mo 


h,and falriſh. | 


 Thereis allo another ſort of Poplar,which gro\ 
ofare knottie and bunched foorrh,as though it we 
in tutts, moſt commonly at the endes of the boyg| 
of that _MNriplex,called Pes anſerinus z | 


\incolour like the former 


eth likewiſe ynto a great tree,the branches wher. 


re full of ſcabsorfores: the leaues come foorth 
es,not cut oriagged, burreſembling the leaues 
, butthe aglers arenot fo Clolcly 


: 
«= 
£ 
3 
k + 


_ packtrogither otherwileitis like, 


3 Pojalu Libyea. if 


The Aſpentrec, 


Theſetrees d 
ms - i. CRLIETS.- -1Þ 
The firſt kinde of white Poplargrowethnot 
and thereatree : T found many both ſmall and 


>» 
[ 


b- 


0 grow in low moiſt places,asin 


, 
[ 
= 


f; 


i? 


lar gro 


The white Po 
{a 1n his Comedic 


A: 
- -# 


4 Populus CLRericana. 
The Indian Popler tree. 


_ 


ſome places heere 
medow turning vp alane at 
called Ouenden, 


 HISTORIE OF P 
* Viſcwn legion: deds | 
Fundaſque : rk vt folia Farfars. 


* A net Igaue vnto my band, ' *orBirdlime. 
 Andflings with ſtones to hurle by hand, | 
F And alla ong I feldmy foes, 
Like Poplar leaues beate downe with blowes, 


lc is called in high Dutch Poppelbaum,UMeilz Alberbaumz in low Dutch Abeel, ofhis horie or 
aged colour,and alſo Abeelboome : which the Grammarians do falſely interprete Abies, the Firre 
cre :in Italian Popolo bianca: in Spaniſh Alamo blanco : in French Peuplier blanc, Aubel,Obel, or Au- 
bees: in Engliſh white Poplar tree,and Abcell,after the Durchname. | 
 Theſecondiscalledin Grecke aizoz95: in Larine Populus nizra : by Retrms Creſcent ion CAlbarm : 
in high Dutch Aſpen tinlow Dutch Populter : in Icalian Popoſo wero:/in French Penplity noir : in 
Spaniſh Alamo nrgrilho :1m Engliſh Poplar tree,blacke Poplar,and Pepler. The firſt or new ſprung 
buds wherof,ate calledofthe Apothecaries Ocalt Popals,Popler buds 2 orhers chooſe rather ro call 
it Gemma Populi : ſome ofthe Grecians name itomyua, — grounded their crrour,who 
raſhly ſuppoſed that thoſe Rofinie or clammie buds arenot tobepur of viedin the compoſition of 
the ointment bearing the name of thePoplar,and commonly called in Engliſh Popilion,and Pom- 
pillionz butthe berries that grow in cluſters,in which there is no clamjmines ar all, 

They are alfoas far decciued who giuing credite to Poets fables, do belecue that Ambercom- 
methof the clammic Roſin,fallingintotheriuer Poo, | 

The third is called of diuers Populus rremuls, which wordg is borrowed of the French men , who 
nameit Tremble: it alſoreceiued a name amongſt the low countrey men,fromthe noiſe and ratling 
of the leaues, who call it Rateeler, this is that whichis named of Plepie Libjea, and by T/ cophra- 
flu wr, which Gezacalleth Þ montans : in Engliſh Afpe, and Aſpentree , and may alſo be 
called Tremble,after the French name, conſidering itis the matrer whereof womens toongs were 
made,as the Poets and ſome others report, which ſcldome ceaſe wagging. 


| | wu Thetomperature and vertues. | EC | 
Thewhite Poplar hath a clenſing faculty ſaich Ga/ez,and a mixt temperature, conſiſting of a wa- A 
tery warme efſence,andalſoathinneecarthic ſubſtance. | b 


| .  Thebarkegas Dioſcorides writerh,to the weight of an ounce(or as others ſay,and thatmore truly, B 
- little more then a dram)is a good remedy for the ſciatica,or ache in the hucle bones, and for the 
That this barke is good for the Sciatica, Serewn Sammenicw,doth alſo write, | 


S epiteocculths vitta coxtndice morbus 
Perfurt& g7eſacauro languore mor atur : 
Populie alba, dabit medgcos de cortice potwe., 


. -» An hiddendiſcaſe doth oftrage and raine, . | 
. Thehip ouercoine and vexe with the vaine, +} 
It makes with vile aking one tread ſloweand ſhrinkez; | : 
The barke of white Poplar is helpe had in drfake. <1] | 


Thefame batke is alſoreponted to make awortanbarren., if it be-drunke with thekidney of a D 
Mule,which thing the leaves likewiſe are thought to performe , being taken after the flowers or 


reds be ended. 


T 


The warme ittice of the: lcaues:being droppedinto theeares , doth take away the paine thereof. E 


The rofin orclatnmie ſubRatce of the blacke-Poplar buds is hot and dry,and of thin parts, and [; 
doth attenuate and mollife : itis alſo firly mixed acopis & malagmats : the leaues haucin a mancr 
the like operation for all theſe things,yer weaker and not ſoefteQtuallas Ga/en teacher), 

The leaues and yoong buds of Mack Poplar. do aſlwage the painc of the gour in the handes or G 
feere, A EI Ea "7 Yet 2503 2 o 

| PSs [{\TPPP ® | ANG 


- ah 100. | wr——— 


wes Gow 


"TI P Meer 2 
Pe A ee oceans ler ae Fs —_— "= 
gr : 


1304 THE THIRD" ROOKE| OF THE * 


'H Theointment that is made of the buds, i is good againſt al -fnlememetions bruſes, ſquars, fals, 


and ſuch like: this ointment is very wellknowneto the 
blacke Poplar. 


I Panlus CAEgineta reacheth to make an oile allo hecrof, which is is called Agri, or oyle of 


TY 
24 3 


| |; 
v 1 | , | 
- 


of the Plas tree Op 4. 


b\ 
F 


=Q 


| 
! 0 


 Platanu. 


&1 } 
©; 1 


The Plane tree. | | (+ The deriten: 


He Planeis agrear tree, having verie long 
18 and farſpreading boughes,\caſtmg/a' won- 
|-** derfullbroad ſhadow, by reaſon whereof jr 
| was highly commended and cficemed of among 
' the old Romanes: the leaues are cornered like 
. _ of Palma Chriſti, greater then Vine dajnds; 
lj 1 vpon icele red footeſtalks : the flo- 
| rb are ſmall and moſhe,and of a pale yellowiſh 
: colour: the fruite is round like a ball, rugged, and 
/ ſornwhat aitiezbur in Aſia more hairieand grea- 
| |ter,almoſt asbig asa Wallnur: : the aiognc 
| flipe r{1ng ithelte far wr 
||| Plai moo ow 8 
| and rivers : Pliny haticlace rogrowbyfping 
to becheriſhed with wine; they grewafterwards 
' faith he, robeof ſo great he (meaning the 
; Plane rrees)asrhat rhey wi nan and wa- 
' rered with wine: itis foundeby experience thar 
| the ſame is very comfortable to the rootes/, and 
| we havealready: raught thatrrees defire-to drink 
' wine, Thiszreeis ſtrangeinraly, ir-is nowhere 
| ſeene in Germanie , nor in the low countries: in 
| Aſrair growerki plenrifullyz ir i is founde alſo- in 
| Candiegroving invalleies, and neere vnto the 
| Hill Athonas Ferrw Belloniwein: his Singularities 


bl doth declarezit growath inmanyplaces of Greece, 


| andis foundplanted in ſohne gardens of [raly,forpleaſure ratherthen for profite, My ſeruant {li 


«m Marſrall, hom Iient into the Mediterranean ſſea,as chiru ion vntothe Hercules of London, 
found diuers trees heerofgrowing in Lepantz,hardby the ſeatide,arthecntrance mtothe Ro, 
aport of Morca,being a part of bs vey. f muyhones boagge one of 19s 70924 #54 Win 
ing the fruitethercof. 

The Plane trees caſt heir Jeduesi in winneP Jas: hathwiie reſtaioeb? and chhvekionieis no maruell 
that they keepe away the funne in ſommer, and not arall inthe winter:there is ſaith plinie no grea- 
ter commendation of thexree then Gat je mat rg: 41 TRI pe 3 drove gn | * 
in winter, | | Ts $i oy KEEL 

ſit = Then Ames. I 

This tree is calledi in Grecke jdravec: and likewt m Lacie pltamas (reehiccame of he 
breadth : the French mens piojhedath fhere op | | 
named in Engliſh Plane tree. | ++} + |! Nt 

| | There 


' A ThePlanetreeis ofa coldeandmdiſts 


% 


laid vpon hot ſwelling's argd Ins ns inthe be 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 13095 
Being boyled in wine they are aremedie for the running and watering of the cies, ifcheybe ap-B 
plied. . | | 
L The barke and bals do drie; the barke boyled invineger helpeth the roothache, _ C 
Thefruit of the Plane trce drunke with wineghelpeth the birings of mad dogs and ſerpents, and D 
mixed with hogs greaſe,it maketh a _ ointment ”_ burning and ſca!ding, 
The ati” oh. 2 doth mightily drie, and ſcowrerl: withull; it remgoueth the white ſcurfe, and F. 
cureth moylt vicers, | $6 
The duſt or downe,faith Galen, thar lieth on the leaues of the tree, is to be taken heede of: for if F 
itbedrawen in with the breth, iis offenſive rothe windpipe by his extreme drinefle, and by ma- 
king the ſame rough, and hurting the voice, as it doth allo the light and hearing, ifit fall mrothe 
eics or cares. Dijoſcorz4es doth not attribute this tothe duſt or downe ofthe leaues onely,but alſo to | 


that of the bals, 
Of the Wayfaring tree. ([bap.s. 
Lantent, ſe Viburnum. f; X70 
The W aytaring tree. | % Thedeſeription, 


the height of at hedge tree,of a meane big. 

neſſe: thetrunke or bodie thereof is conuc- 

red with a ruſlet barke : the branches are long, 
rough,and cafie to bebowed and hard to be bro- 
ken, as are thoſe of the Willow, couered with a 
whitiſh barke ;, whereon are fer broade leaves, 
thicke and rough , {lightly indented abour the 
edges, of a white colour, and ſomewhat hairie 
whileſt they be freſh and greene ; bur when they 
begin to wither and fall away, thev growe ſome- . 
what reddiſh ,and are {et rogither by cou les one 
oppoſite to another ; the flowers are white, and 
growein cluſters, after which come cluſters of 
truit,of the bigneſle y a Peaſc,ſomewhar flat on 
both ſides; at the firſt greene,after red,and black 
when they be ripe: the roote difperſerh it ſelfe 
far abroade vnder the vppermoſt cruſt of the 
carth, | 

| * The place. 

This tree groweth in moſt hedges in rough 
and ſtonie places, vpon hils and lowe woods, c&- 
pecially in the chalkie groundes of Kent abour 
Cobham,Southfleete and Graueſend;zand al the = 
traſt ro Canterburie. ; 

* T he time. 2.1 

The flowers appeere in ſommer; the berries 
be ripe in the end of Autumne, and new kaues 
come foorth in the ſpring, 
| * Thenames. [ 

This hedge tree is called Yiurnaof Ruelime: in French Yiorne and Yijorna: in Italian Lanterns : it 
is reputed for the tree Yiburnun, which Yergilmakerh mention of in the firſt Eclog, where he com- 
mendeth the citie Rome for the loftineſle and tarelineſle thereof,aboue other cities . {aying,thar as 
the tall Cypreſle trees do ſhew themſelues aboue the loweand ſhrubbie Viorne, ſo doth Rome = 

| Wboucothercities lift vp hit head very high,in theſe verſes: | | | 


T 6c Wayfaring mans tree groweth vp to 


= 


Pppp 3 | Varun 


| 
' 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
Verumbectantun alias inter caput extulit writes, 
Quantww lents ſolent inter viturna Cupre ſe. 
Bur:* this, among other cities and townes, .  *Romevpon' 
Hath ſo much more ants {rem vp hir head ; ſeuen hils. 
By how much the Cypreſſcgcarrie their crownes, 
| Aboucthe lowe visrns bznding (like lead,) 
'__w-Thetemiperature. | 


- Thelcauesand Mertief of Lantapa axe colde and drie ,and of zbinding qualirie, 


" A Thedecottionof theleaues of Lantana is very/good tobe gargledin the mouth againſt all yet. 

lings andinflammationsthereof, againſt the ſcuquic and other diſcaſes of the gums, and faſtenerh, 
ooſe teeth. - =y F-þ [| 

B Theſameboyledin lie doth makethe haires blacke, if theybe bathed or waſhed therewith, and 

ſuffered to dric of it ſelfe, | E108 i | 

C The berries are of the like facultic : the powder whereofwhen they be dried, doth ſtay the laske, 
all iflues of blood, and alſo the whites. | | | 

D Irtisreporteg,that the barke of the raote'of the tree buried acertaine timein the earth,and after. 

wards boyled and ſtamped according to the art thereof, maketh good birdlimefor towlers tocatch 


birdes with. = | | 
| Of the Beade tree. Chap.n6. 


1 Zizipha candida, . © {|| i Ziziphus Cappadocia. 
The Beade tree. ee® 4:40- _ |[The Beadetree of Cappadocia, 


# 
[4 
, 
, 


A 
ay 


=, 


I Hisrree was called Z;=iphs candrda by the Herbariſts of Montpellier, and by the Venerians 
« | andIralians Sycomoras, but vatruly; the Portingales haue termed it Arbor paradszo; all 


| $7 


which and each whereof haucerred togither, both in reſpe&of the fivitand of the whole 


tree : 'orme haue called it Z:zzopha, thovgh in faculric it is nothing like ;for the taſte of this fruit is 
Iz 474 | 4 | | very 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. _ 
very vnpleaſant,virulent and birter.But deciding al contronerfies,thisjs the tree which Avicencal- 
leth Azederach, which js yery great, charged with manylargearmes, thatare garniſhed with twig- 
gie branches, ſerfull of grear leanes, confilting of ſundry ſmall leaves, one growing righroppoſite 
t9 another like the leaves of the Aſh tree, r VW hicken tree, but more: ely cutabout the edges 
lke the teeth of a faw : among which come the lowers confiſting of five [mall leaves laid abroad in 
manner of a (tar, fromthe midſt whereof groweth foorth a ſmall hollow cup reſembling achalice; 
after which ſucceedeth the frujt covered with a browniſh yellow ſhell, very like vntorhe fruit of 
Iujubes(whereof Dodoner'in his laftedition maketh it a kinde)of a ranke,bitter,8 vopleaſant raſte, 
with aſtone within, which being drawen on a ſtting, ſerueth tomake Beades of, for wantofother 

things. | | j | 
2 S :21phu Ca;paderia groweth not ſo greatas the former, but is of a meaneſtarure, and ful! of 
boughes:the barke 1s ſinooth and euen,and thatwhich groweth vpon the Funk and great boughes, 
is ofa ſhining ſcarlet colour : our of thele great armes or boughes groweflender twigs, white and 
ſoft, which are ſer fuil of whitiſh leaues, bur more white on the contrarie or backe parr,and are like 
to the leaues of Willow, bur narrower and whiter : among theſe leaues come foorth ſmall hollow 
' © yellowiſh flowers, growing ar the joints of the branches moſt commonly three togither, and of a 
pleaſant ſauour, with ſome tew threds or chives in che middle thereof : after which ſuceeederh the 
fruit, of the bigneſle and faſhion of the ſma!leſt Oltue,whire both within & withour,whercin is con- 
taincd aſmall Ronewhich yeeldeth a kernell ofa pleaſant raſte and very ſweete, | 
| % The place. it 

Mathiokge writeth, that Z;2ipha candida is found in cloyſters of certaine monaſteries in Italic ; 

L Obelizs faith, thatit growerh m many places in Venice and Natbonz and it js woont now of late 


to be planted and cheriſhed m the govdlicit orchards of all the lowe countpes. 


: 
: 


Z124phus Cappadocia groweth likewile in many places of Italic, andſpecially in Spaine; it is alſo 

cheriſhed in gardens bothin Germanic and in the lowe countries, | j 
; : = *% Thetme. — M1 ; 

Theſe trees flower in Tune in Italic and Spaine; their fruit is ripe in September zbut in Germanie 

and the lowe countries there doth io fruit follow the flowers. 1] I 
SE > 2 The names. oor” | | 

Zizip "a candida <Avuicen calleth _Azerderach, or as diuers readit ys rar and theyname ir, 
faith hen Rechi Arbor cMrroba/any wn, the Mirobalane tree burnor properly,andin Tabiaſten, 
and Kien,and Thahich/ 1helarer writers are far decciued in taking it ito be the Sycomore treezand 
they as much that would haue ir to be the Lore or Nettle tree: irmay be named in-Engliſh Beade 
tce,focthe cauſc before alleaged;. HT. j | | 

Lheorheris &ter« ſperres Z1210hi,or a ſecond kinde of Tuiube rreegwhich Columellt in his g.booke 
4.chapter doth call Z;ziphw ba, or white Iuiube rree, for difference from the cher thatis ſurna- 
med Rutria,or glittering red. Pliniecalleththis Z;ziphus Catpadocia, his 21r:booke 9.chap. where 
he intreateth of the hon\r of garlands,of which he faith there berwokindes, whereof ſome be made 
of towers andothers of leaues: I wouldcall the flowers ſaith he,bropmes (for of thoſe is gathered 
a yellow flower)and Rhadodendron alto Zizipha, which is called Cappadocia. The flowers of thele are 
ſweere of finell, and likejro Oltue lowers: neither doth Colwnells or Flare vnaduiledly take this for 
Ziziphw, for both the leanes and flowers grow out of the tenderang new ſproongewgs, asthey 
likewiſe do que of the former :the flowers are very {iveete of ſmel},andcaſt their ſauour far abroad: 
the fruit alſo is like to that of rhe former, n [ | FEY 

6 {ti % The temperature. | | 

Anicen writing and intreating of ! Azrradaeth faith,that the lowers thereof be hot in the thirde 

degree,and dry in the end of the firſt. Ziz/phwCappz docia is cold anddrie of complexion. 
| *% The vertues. A! | 

The flowers of Z:z/phaor Azaradaethopencth the obſtruRions of the braine. a A 

The diſtilled warer thereof killerh nits and lice, preſerueth the haire of the head from falling, B 
eſpecially being mixed with white wine,and the head bathed with ir, AS bag 

The fruic is very hurefull ro the cheſt, and atroubleſome cnimie tg the ſtomacke, it is dangerous, C 
and peraduenture deadly. | [EY 


Moreouer, itis reported that the decoion of the barks and of Fumitoric, with Mirobalans ad- D 
ded,is good for agues proceeding of flegme. if | | 


- 
F4 
$! 
b 
+ 
''s 
x 
4 
I 


Pppp 4 "Fl 


23268 - THE THIRD 'BOOKE OF THE 
E Theiuiceofthe vppermoſtleaues with honie is a remedie os poylon. 
F Thelikealſo bath #4466. 'The Beadetree,ſaith/he,is hot a { drie: it1s good for ſtoppings of the 

head,itmaketh the haire Jongzyer is the fruit thereof very offenſiue to the ſtomacke,gand oftentimes 
found to be pernicious and deadly, | | | | 
G AMathiolmwritech,that the leaucs and wood bringerh death cuen vnto beaſts, and that the poy- 


i 2 
s 5 
- 
$ 
e 
3 > 


io 


ſon thereof is reſiſted by the ſame remedies that Olcandey is, || 
H 2:ziphw Cappedocia prevaileth againſt the di{caſes aforeſaid, bur the decoCion thereof is ver 
20d for thoſe whoſe warcr ſcaldeth them with the continuall iffuing thereof, as allo for ſuch as 
BE therunning of the raines, and theexulcerations of the bladder andpriuie parts, 
1 Aloochorlicking medicine made thereof vr the ficupe, is excellent good againſt ſperting of 
blood procecding ot the diſtiliations ofſharpe orlalt humors,' 


Of the Loteon Nettle tree. |Chap.n7. 


Lots arbor. þ 4 [| [1 
The Nettle tree, | is 2h | *% Thedeſeription. 

| |  . : He Lote whereof we write, is a tree as 

bigas a Peare tree, or bigger and high- 

er:the body and armes ate very thicke; 
the batke whereof is ſmoothe, of a gallant 
p_ (colour tending to blewneſſe : the 

ughes arc long, and ſpread themſelues all 
abour :\the leaues be like thoſe of the Nettle, 
ſharpe pointed,and nicked in the edges like a 
ſawe, &daſhthereand there with ſtripes ot a 
yellowiſh whire colour : the berries be round, 
and ang vpon long ſtalks like Cherries, ofa 
yellowiſhwhire colour at the firſt , and after- 
wards red,but whe they be ripe,they be ſom- 
what blacke. * Theplace. 
This is arare and ſtrangetree in ache 

Germanjes:itwas brought out of Italy wh 
there is found ſtore thereof, as Mathrolurte- 
ſtificth; I hauca ſmall tree thereof inmy gar. 
den.Thete is likewiſe a tree thereof in the gar- 
den vnder London wall, ſometime belonging 
to M.Gray,an Apothecary of London mY 


other great tree in'a garden neere Colinan 

ſtreere mn London, being the garden of the 

Queenes| Apothecary at the impreſſion here- 

of Called M. Hagh Mor g1n,acurieus caeruer 

of rare firples. i he Loce tree doth alſo grow 

| in Aﬀrike,butit ſomewhat differeth from the 

| | Iralian Loreinfivir, as F/iein plaine words 

; | dothſhewinhis 13,booke 17.chaprer. That 

E. [| + | partof Afrike, faith he, that lieth towards vs, 

bringeth foorth the famous Late tree, which they call Cectis,and the ſame well knowen in Iralie,but 

altered bythe ſoile : itis as big as the Peare tree, although Negos Cornelius reporterh it ro be ſhot- 

ter: the leaues are fult of finecurs, ocherwiſe they be thoughtito be like thoſe of the Ho!me tree. 

There be many differences, but the ſame are made eſpecially by the fruit : rhe fruit is as big asa 

Beane,and of the colour of Saifron, but before it is thorow ripe it changeth his colour as doth the 

Grape. It growerhthicke in bouh2cs after the manner of the Myrrle,nor asin Iralie,after the maner 

of the Cherrie tree; the frnit of iris there fo fieere, as it hath alſo giuen a name to that countric 
and land, zimis ho/hita4i atuenatum ohl:urone patrre * | | 


Ir is reported that they are croubled withno diltafes of the belly that eate it, The berrer 15 or" 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1309 
which hath no kernell, that is thought to haue a ſtone inthe other kinde : thereis alſo vrefſed our 
of ira wine, like toa ſweete wine; which the ſame Nepos deemeth toindure aboue ten daies,and the 
berries ſtamped with 4/:cx,to be relerued in veſlelsasa foode. Moreouer, we haue heard faie, that 
armies haue beene fed therewithgas they haue paſſed toy and fro thorow Aﬀerike. The colourot the 
wood is blacke : they vie to make flutes and pipes of ir: the roote ſerueth for knives hafts,and other 
ſhort works: this is there the nature of the tree: thus far P/-nre. In the fame place he faith,thar this 
renowmed tree doth grow about Syrtes and Naſamone:andin his 5.booke 5.chap.he ſheweth thar 
there is notfar fromthe leſſer Syrris, the Iland Menynx, ſurnamed Larophagiris, of the plentie of 
Lote trees. | | 

Straboin his 17.booke affitmeth thatnot ofnely Memnx, bur alſo thar leſſer Syrrw, is faide tobe 
Lotophagitis:firſt ſaith he, lieth Syr74 a cerraine long land by the name Cercinna, & another leſſer, 
called Cercinnitis znext t9 this is the leſſer Syrris hich they cal Lotophagiris Syrris: the compas 
of this gult is almoſt 1600. turlongszthe bredth of the mouth 600,By borh the capes there be lands 
joined to the maine land, that is Cucinna & Menynx,Gf like bignes : they chink thar Menynx is the 
countrey of the Lotophagps, or thoſe that tecde of the Lore trees, of which countrey Homer ma- 
keth mention,and there are certaine monuments tobe ſeene;zand Phſſts altar,and the frune it ſelte ; 
for there be in it great plenty of Lote trees, whole fruit is wonderfull fweete: Thus far Str abe. 

This Lote is alſo deſcrihed by TheÞhra/{re in his 4 bookhe faith,thar there be very many kinds, 
which be ſcuered by the frunt:the frunc 1s of the bignes of a beane,which when it waxeth ripe goth al- 
ter his colour as grapes dotthe fruit which the Lotophagos do cate is ſweete,pleaſanr,harmwlcfle,ge 
holfome ſor the belly,but that 1s pleſanter which is without kernels, &of this they make their wine, 

This Lote tree as the ſame author afftirmeth, is by naturecuerlaſting, as for example,the Lote 
trees wherof P/rny hath written in his : 6.booke 44 chap, Ar Rome GithPe the Lote tree in Lucrnas 
court how much eider it was then the churchof the citie built in the yeere which was withour ma- 
giſtrares 459. it is vncetaine: there is no doubr but that it was cider. Riennk Lucina bare the name 
of that Lucxs or groue : He nun circ:ter annum 450 habet. That is elder which is ſurnamed c2044/ats, 
or hairie 3 bicauſe the haire of the veſtali virgins was brought vnto1t:bur the other Lote rree in Yu- 
£495 church,which Ko-mnlas built by the viRtory of renthes; is taken to be as old as the cirie,as Maſe 
uri witnefleth. | * The t11e. [ 

They loſe their leaues at the firſt approch of winter z and recouerthem againe in April: the fruit 
is ripe in September | & The names. = 

This tree is called in Greeke »»7%: in Latine by P.axy Celtis: in Italian Perlaro : by thoſe of Trent 
Bag-laro: andin Engliſh Lote tree and Nettle tree, | 

*% Thetempcy ature and wertues. Y | 

The Lore trec is not greatly binding as Gz/ez taith,bur of thinne parts,and of a drying nature. A 

The deco@tion of rhe wood beaten imall, being exther drunke or vicd gliſterwiſe 3is a remedie B 
for the bloudie flixe ;and for the whites and reds. = 

It ſtopperh the lask,and maketh the haire yellow,8& as Ga/ezaddeth keepeth haires from falling. C 

The thiuers or ſmall peeces thereofas the fame auchoralleageth,are boiled ſometimes in water, D 
ſoratimes in wine,as ncede ſhall require. | | 


Of Italian wood of Life, or Pocke woode, unlgarly called - 


 Lignumvite. Chap.ns. 


| * Thedcſcription. | | | 
Talian Lignwn vite, of woode of Life, | HO 46 ro a faire and beautifull tree , hauing aſtraighe 
and vprigiut body,couered ouer with a ſmooth and darke greene barke , yeelding toorth manie 
ewiggie branches, ſer full of goodly leaues,like thoſe of the Pearetree, but of greater beauiry & 
ſomewhat broader : among which commeth foorth the fruite , growing cloſe to the branches, al. 
moſt withour ſtalks :this fruite is round And at the firſt greene, but blacke when ir is ripe, as bigge 
as Cherries, of an excellent ſweet taſte when it is dried: but this is not the Indian Lrgnum ſanttum, 
Or Guaracurn whereof our bowles and phiſicall drinkes are made, but it is a baſtard kmdetherof firſt 
planted in the common garden at Padua, by thar learncd Faibpims, who ſuppolcd itto berheright 


%7te 


Tr 44-7 | 
1310. THE) THIRD BOOKE "OF THE 
| pSSIS$774 | | Guaiacurn Patauinmum,groweth plentifully about 
os > ER 2 : Lugdunum, or Louanein France: I planted in 
AJDD | Ee, \ FRE-GA | den at Barne Elm i; 
N = 3 FRA | the garden a es necre London two 
! rrees; beſides there groweth another in the gar- 


-, Pp 
P44 
* T_ %. 
> IBN . 
- = % k 
- 5 : 


- 


| | denof Maſter Grate,an Aporhecarie of London: 
"1." | andinmy garden likewiſe, | 

| | Ir flowrethinMaic, and the fruite is ripe in 
| September, | FOCEY 
| | | *Thenames. wht 
| | Guazacum Patauinum hath been reputed for the 
| Lotw of T heophraftus: in Engliſh ir is called the 


| baſtard Meuynwood. 
2} *% The temperatureandwertues. 
| | Tofer footth the vertues of Geazacwm it were 
| to ſmall purpgſe,confidering that every vagarant 
; phifition Sl kdcluing Surgion,will boaſt and 
| brag that theyknow more,or atthe leaſt asnwch 
| asthebeſt and moſt learned phiſition,of the ope- 
| rationtherof ;wherfore I determining tococeale 
| ny fimplecenfure thereof, being ouerweake to 
| reach and jnſtruct the learned, amnor willing 
| to ſer foorth; vnto thoſe boaſters what I have 
| learned of the right Gueizcum, and do refer the 
TIS dm | conſiderationtherof vmto thoſero whom it doth 
hb RR. | | eſpecially appertaine. : | | 
Of the Strawberrie tree. Chap.ng. — © 


_ Arbutus. The Strawberic tree, } C41 | Thedeſeription. 


wid 4 4] FH _ TT He Strawbertie tree prone for the moſt 
X12 1 | #5 {AT x | 


part Jowe, very hke jn bignes to the Quince 
| | rree(whereunto D/eſeorzdes compareth it)the 
body is couered with a reddiſh barke; both rough 
; Kſcaly: thebobghes ſtand thicke onthe top,ſom- 

what reddiſh : the leaucs be broad, long, ſmooth, 
Ike thoſe of Bajes, ſomewhat nicked in the edges, 
and of a pale greene colour: the flowers growein 
cluſters, being hollow & white, and now and then 
on the one ee ſomewhar of a-purple colour: in 
their places come foorth cerraine berries hanging 
down vpon little Jong ſtems like vnto ſtray berries, 
but greater, without a ſtore within, but only with 
lite ſeedes gar the firlt greene, and when they be 
ripe they arc ofa gallant ted colour ;in taſte ſome- 
w hatharſh,andin a manner,withour any reliſh; of 
wich Thruſhes and Black birds do feedin winter> 
| | I 


| 

: i 
ff | 
L743 
. 


| | '% The place. 


: 


<- 
ITO 


I 


k 
- 
X 


1 The Strawberrietree groweth in moſt countries 
of Greect,in Candy, lraly and Spaine: alſo in the 
yalleies of the mountaine Athon, where being in 
| etherplaces bur little, theybecome great & huge 
— ti ets, as Petra Relkp;im writerth : Juba alto repor- 

q Yo in Arabia therc be of thE 50. cubirs ve. 


1 ; { % 2 he 


i 


ONECDCCEDCEREINCCI RECAP IETF 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, 1311 
| $$ Therame, 
The Strawberry tree flowreth in Tuly and Auguſt ; and the fruite is ripe in September, after ic 
hath gemained vpon the tree by the ſpace of an whole yecte. | 
| | * T be names. is 
This tree is called in Greeke wag: in Latine Ar bazms : in Engliſh Strawberrie tree,and of forn 
Arbure tree. | SH 
The fruite is named in Greeke wyaiwar, oras others reade it wudiacr:in Latine Memac rium, 
and cArbutwn and Plinie calleth it Y eds: Ground Strawberries ſaith hejhaue one body,and Y neds 
much hike vrito themanorher body, which onely apple is like tothe fruite ofthe earth : rhe Iralians 
call chis Strawberrie A/batro: the Spaniards Atadrono, Aedronheyroand Medronhe: in French Ar- _ 
boutes, CArbows: it may be named in Engliſh tree Strawberry. | | | 
th Thetemperature and Vertues. 


The _ of the Strawberrie trec,is of a colde temperature, hurtinghe ſtomacke , and cauſing 
headach, | ; 


Of the Plum tree, Chap.120. 


% The kindes. [4 


O write ot Plums particularly would require a peculiar volume andyet theendnot tobe atrai- 

ned vnto,northe ſtocke or kinred perfedtly knowne,neither to be diſtinguiſhed apart: the num- 
ber of the ſorts or kindes are not know any one countrey: cuery clymate hath his owne fruite , 
far different from that of other countrieNmy ſelfe hauc three ſcore Kelib my garden,& all itrange 
and rare: there be in other places many more common , and yet yeerely commeth ro our handes 
others not before knowne, therefore a fewe figures ſhall ſerue for the tek. | 


I Pruni Domeſtics. 2 Prumgsy Mirobalanm. 
The Damlſon tree, The Myrabolane Plum tree. 


J 
Ed 


| 'v 
7 1H p-\ 
£ = Gt 
le oe l / [Fu 
N/ 
FAST 5 


R——_— | - 
4 LRIIOS ls <> => 


&' . 
"i 
1 at? 


_—_ 


THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


{HY | 1 Thea cyipteon, 

HePlum or Damſon tree is of a meane| ignes zitis couered with a ſmooth barke:the bran. 

ches are long, whereon do prow broadJeaues,more lopg then round,nickedin the edges; 

the flowers are white: the Plums do dufer in colour, faſhion and bignes;chey all conſiſt of 
pulpe, and skin , andalſo of kernell', which: is ſhur vp in a ſhell or ſtone, Some Plums are of 2 
blackiſh blewe,of which ſome be longer ; othersxrounder z others of the colour of yellow waxe; di. 
uers of a crimſonred, greater for the moſt part then the reſt, [here be alſo greene Plums , and 
withall very long; of a ſweete and pleaſant raſte: moreouer the pulpe or meate of ſome is drier 
andeaſi.icr ſeparated from the ſtone; af other ſgme 1t is moiſtet, and cleaveth faſter: our common 


z 


Damſon is knowne toall,and therefare&nor to beſtqode vpon, 


2 The Mirobalan Plum tree, groweth tothe hejght of a great tree,charged with manygrear armes 
or boughes, which diuide themſelues into infinite ſmall rwiggiebranches, by meanes whereof it 
yeeldeth a goodly and pleatant ſhadowe: the trunke or bodies conered with a finer and thinner 
barke then any of the other Plum trees; the leaugs do ſomewhat reſemble thoſe of the Cherrie tree; 
they are very tender, indented about the edges :tht lowers be white : the fruite is rounde hanging 
vpon long fooreſtalks, pleaſantto behold; greene jn the beginning, red when itis almoſt ripe; and 
being ful! ripeir gliſtererh like purple mixed with blacke: the fleſh or meate is full of iuice , plea- 
ſant inraſte: the ſrone is {mall,or ot a meaac bignes: che rreebringeth toorth plentic of fruit every 
other yeere. | 10 of 3% 


3 Prunu Amyedd/ins.— | | | | 4 Prunus Damaſecens. 
| PR] | The Damſon Plum tree, 


* 


3 TheAlmond Plum groweth vpte zhciof atree of/a meanebigneſle : the branches 
are long, ſmoorth,andeven : the Jeaues are broad,ſomthirig long, and ribbed in divers places , with 
{mall nerues running through the ſame: the flowers are white, ſprinkled with a lirtle daſh of purple, 
ſcarcely to be perceiued; the fruit is long, hauing a cleft or {lit downethe middle, of a browne red 
colour,and of a pleaſantraſte, |  ' | | | 4 * 


| HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS. | 1313 

The Damaſcene Pluiti tree groweth likewiſe toa meane height 3 the branches very brittle ; che 
1eaues of a deepe greenecolour. The fruitis round,of a blewiſh blacke colour. The ſtone is like ynto 
thar of the Cherrie,wherein it differeth fromall other Plums, þ | 


5 -rumus flueftrii, Prumns frlueftris flrens. 


The Sloe tree, | TheSloe rec in flowet, © 


- 


' : % 
"— EEE TOES 


% The acſeription. | 


La 
$-* Los 


5 TheBullefſeand the Sloe tree are 'wilde kindes of Plums, which do varie in' their kinde, ener as - 


the greater and mariured\Plums'do: 'Of the Brlleffe, ſome are greater andof betrer taſte rharr 
others, Yloes are ſ>me of one taſte, and ſome of others, more ſharpe; ſome greateragnd others)et- 


{cr ; rhewhichro diftiingulity;.with long deſctiprions were to ſmall purpoſe, cor dering thiey be 
all ndeneryof them knowen cuen nth ſimpleſt: thereforerhis Mall futice for their ſeugr 
$1 Ts #5. T4 * I 31 | ! #1 


deſcriptions. 'N gh 22M 
- The Plunverees growein all knowen countries of the world: they require 4 looſe ground) they 
alſo receive a differetice fromthe regions where they growe, nor ay of the forme or faſhion, bur 
eſpecially of the facultics,as we will foorthwith declare. 


The Plum trees ace alſo quany cimes graffed jaro erecFof otherkinds, and being ſoingrafted they, 


faciem parentis,ſutcun adoptions, vt Plimu dicit, exhibent. I | 

The greateſt varicrie of theſe rare Plums are to be found in the grounds of Maſter Vincent Porn- 
ter of Twicknam (before remembred in the Chapretof Apples) alth my felfe am not with 
out ſorne,and tholerare arid delicate. Thewilde Pltns growe in moſt he ges through England, 
þ 1101 Dk P19 bc 64 *% Thetime. x was # j +. X oh ; py - £4 

Thecommon and pate Phiri trees do bloome in Aprill,che leaues come foorth preſeatly wich 
them; the frairis ripe fotninier, ſome ſooner, ſometarer, OY ir | = p | dg 
=, re {how yo9'y” NT 4" 7 $497) =o 


"FF 2243 4 þ o 


4 # * 
+» »% 
c 
p: - 
3 _ 


214i hong & 15545 0 30 1900 Tg bak " 
-  ThePlumtrecis called in Greekewimmwnie! in Latine Priwm : in high Dutch Pflaumenbauni: 
in loweDurch Pzupmen?'iri Spatifh Cirul ; i French Prowjer :in Engliſh Pluny tree, | 


1314 THE, THIRD. BOOKE OF THE 

The fruit is called in Grecke wxxuuinr: in Latine Prumum: in high Dutch Pflaumen: in lowe 
Dutch Pzupmen:z in Iralian and French Prune; in Spaniſh Prwnas : in Engliſh Prune and Plum ; 
chicſe haue alſo names from the regions and count ries where they growe, _ ft : 

The olde writers haue called thoſe that growe in.Syrianeere ynto Damaſcus, Damaſeens Prung 
in Engliſh Damſons, or Damaske Primes; and thoſe that growe in Spaine, Hiſpanic, Spaniſh 
Prunes or Plums: Son gurage we vie tocall thoſe that grow in Hungaric, Hungarica or Pann. 
nica,Plums of Hungarie z ſome Galea Pruma,or French Prunes, of the countrie of Fraunce. Clear. 
chu Peripatet ions {aith, that they of Rhodes and Sicilia docallthe Damaske Prunes Brabuls. 

| | t% The temperature and vertues. 

A Plumsthatberipeandnew gathered fron) the tice, whatfſoreſoeuer ba Cs of,do moyſten and 

. coole, and yceld vntothe| body very little nouriſhment, andthefſame nothing good at all : for as 
Plums do very quickly rot, ſo is alſo the juice of them apr to purtifie in the body,8& likewiſe to cauſe 
the meat to purrifie which is taken with them, AM? they arc good for thoſe that would keepe their 
bodies ſoluble and coole; for by their moyſture and {lipperineſle they do Yoon the belly, 

B Dried Phums, commonly called Prunes, atc holfomer and no ant tothe ſtomacke, they 
ccld more nouriſhment and better, and ſuch as cannoteaſily purrifie, Irisreported, ſaith Galey in 
his bookes of the faculties of nouriſhments,*that the beſt do gone in Damaſcus acitie of Syria; 
andnexttothoſe, they thargrowe in Spaine ; bur theſe do-nothing ar all binde, yer diuers of the 
Damaske Damſon Prunes very much: /for Damaske Damfon Prunes are more aſtringent,bur they 
of Spaine be ſweeter. Dioſcorides ſaith,that Damaske Plumgdried do ſtay the belly ; but Galen affir- 
meth in his bookes of the faculties of ſimple medicines, that they do manifeſtly Jooſethe belly, yer 
leſſer than they thatbe brought our of Spain;being boyled in Meade or honied water,whichharh a 
goodquantitie of honic in it, they looſe the belly very much(as the fame author ſaich ) alchough a 
man take them alone by themſelucs, and much more if the Meade be {upped after them. Ve moſt 
commend thoſe of pRmgns being long and ſweet:yer mote thpſe of Morauia the chiefe and prin- 
cipall citie in timespaſt of the prouince of the Marcomans :/for theſe after they be dried, thac 
the wa—_— may be conſumed away, be moſt pleaſancto the raſte, arfd do eaſily without 
any troublefo mollifie the belly, as that in that reſpect they go beyond Caſſia and Manna, as The- 
mas Tordanu affirmeth. = | Bj 25 EE | | 
The leaues of thePlum tree are goad T—_—_— ſwellingof the Vuula, the throte, gums, and 
kernels vnder the throze andiawes; they {top the theume and falling downe of humors, if the de- 
coCtion thereof be made in wine, and gargled in the mouth and throte, | 
The gumme which commeth ourof the Plum| tree, doth glew and faſten togither, 'as Dioſco- 
rides ſt al . ; | | F f | | 

E Being drunkeinwine it waſteth away the ſtone, |and healeth Lichens in infants and yoong chil- 
dren;if it be laide on with vineger, it worketh the ſame effeAts that the gum of the Peach and Cher- 

EF _Thewilde Plums do ſtay and binde the belly, andſodothe vnripe Plums of what forc ſoeuer, 
whiles they are ſharpe and ſower,for then are they aſtringear, 

G The ivice of Sloes do ſtop the belly,the laske nh bloodie flixe, the inordinate courſe of womens 
rermes,and all other iſſues of blood in man or waman,and may very well be vicd inſtead of Acatia, 
which is athornic tree growing in Egypt,very hard to be gotten, and of adeere price and therefore 

* the berterfor wantons; albcicourPlums of this countrie are equall vnto itin vertues, | 


j 


Of Sebeften,or the eAff (ian Plum. | Chap.nni. 
| | > Thedsſeription. | | [-+%: 
$: therres whereof is nat vnlike tothe Plum tree, ſauingit 


LI 


Ebeſtines are alſo akinde of Plum | 

groweth lower thanthe moſt of the manured|Plum trees ; the leaves be harder and rounder; 

the flowers growe at the tops of the branches conſiſting of fiue ſmall white leaues, with pale 

lowiſh threds in the middle, like thoſe of the Plum tree + after followerh the fruic like tolirtle 

lums, faſtened in little cups like vnte Acornes, hich when they be ripe are of a greeniſh blacke 
colour, wherein is contained athree ſquare ſtone ſomewhat hard. The fruit is ſweete in taſte, 


pulpe or meate is very tough and clammie,a matrex fi to makebirdlime of. py i 


_»HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
Sebeften,Myxa,/ine MyXaria.' = f 
Aſlyrian Plums,” - | 


15195 


” C 
p 


: 29441 + Theplae. | 
The Sebeſten trees growe plentifully in Syria 
and Egypt; they were 1n times patlt forraine and 
ſtrange in Italic,now they growe almoſt in eucry 
garden, being firſt brought thither in p/z7e his 
time, Now do the Sebelten trees, faith he in his 
I5. booke 18. chapter; begin co growe in Rome 
among the Seruicetrees. | 
| * The time. , 
Thetime anſwereth the common Plums, 
{ "7 be names. — 
Plinie calleth the tree Ayxait may be ſuſpected 
that this is the treewhich Afatron Paroilis in his 
Artrick banket in A/henem doth call Akwwtic,but 
we cinot certainly afficme it &eſpecially bicauſe 
divers copies have Uinerſly deemed thereof. The 
berric or/ fruit iSnamed wc and widwer, neither 
haue the Latines artyorher name. The Arabians 
and the Apothecaties do call it Sebeffen, which 
is alſo made an Englith name: we may call it the 
Aſſyrian Plum, ! | | 

©, t* The temperature and vertues. 

Sebeſtens be very temperadly cold and moyſt, A 
and haue a thicke and clammie ſubſtance; there- 
fore they nouriſh more than moſt fruits do, bur 
withall they cafily ſtopthe intrailes,andtuffe vp 
the narrow paſſages, and breede inflammations. 

They take away the-ruggednes of the throte B. 

TALES and lungs,and alſo guench.rhirſt, being taken in 
alooch orlicking medicine,orprepared any other kinde of way.,orclſe taken by ir ſelfe. /; 
The waight of cen drams, or of an ounce and a halfe of the pap ot pulpe hereof beinginwardly C 


> 


taken, doth looſe the belly, 


o_ 


Thereis alſo made of this fruit a purging EleCuaric, bat ſuch an ohe as quickly mouldeth, and D 
therefore it isnottobe vied, but when it is new made, | BE 6 


: Ofthe Indian Plum,or eMirobalan tree. Chap*inne 


: 


S 


SF 
:— "6 
; , 1 | 

© -» oP | | *% The kindes. ou oh od T2244 REAL 

| T Here be diuers kindes of Mirobalans, and therefore not eaſily comprehended vader one de- 
| ſcriprion:they be alſo of divers colours, ſome are yeljow , fame of Orange tawnyglome blacke, 
ſome called Chebule,fome Retrricefome Emblice; they likewiſe growe ypon divers trees, any in di. 
' vers and ſupdrie countries fac diſtant one from another;yer Meſeefarh,that the yellow ah 
| # andtheChebale arcthoughtto growe vpon one tree; for befare they be ripe theybe y 


# 


oft arcot t opinion, that ſuch 3 


facly in order,and ſet full of lcaucs 


* | w 


« 4 
__ \ , a9 


; Himes | i wit 
1316 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
1 AMirobalani Chtbuls. ; [1 2 Mirobalani Citrine. 
| Mirobalans with Seruice leaues. 


4 Mirobalani Indic. 
Indian Mirobalane tree. 


fiSTORIE OF PLANTS. 1317 


' %* The aeſcrivtion. | 
The third kinde of Mirobalans called Emblice, the Indians do call | anigh which andre vpon 
2 tree of meane ſtature, like the formerzbur theleaues are very much iagged,in ſhape like the leaues 
of Ferne,bur that they be {omewhat thicker, The Indians do not pur the truit hereof vntg philicall 
vies, buroccupicit forthe thickning and tanning of theirleather in fipede of Rhws or Coriars Sus 
mach,as allo romakeinke and bletch for other purpoſes. 
Mirobalani Belltrice called of the Savages Gotni and Gutz, growerh vp to a meanc ſtature, gar- 
niſhed with leaues like vato Laneell or the Bay tree, but fomewharl (cry chinger, and of a pale 
greene colour. » 
> Thefourth kind of Mad alonps iscalled akiawhith the Indians cal Rezanwelogroweth vp6 
a fie of meane {tarure, orrather vpon a ſhrub or hedge plant, bearin leaues like the VV round | 
afruir eight ſquare. Thanks a ft kinde,the god whereof is not mentigned inauthors,” 4 
* The place. | 
The firſt fower kindes of Mirobalans do growe * the kingdome of (Canibaia ; theyo —_ like. 
wiſe in Goa,Batecala;Malanor,and Dabul; the x chaſe in Biſnager, Docan, Guzaratc,and va a, 
and many other places of the Eaſt Indies. | 


. — ” 


* The time. 

The time agreeth with other fruits in thoſe countries, 

*% The names, CY 

Thoſe which we haue ſaid co be yellow the inhabitants of thoſe countries FATSD they vrowe do 
call them <Arare ; thoſethat be blacke, they call Rezennale z the I Getine: : _ Chetule, 
CAretea ; the Emblicearc called CAretiqui.” 

#i The temperature. 

Allthe kindes of Mirobalans are in taſte aſtringent and ſharpe like vnto the vnripe CL or 
Seruice berries ,and therefore theyare of complexion cold and drie, 

*% Thevertyes. | | 

Thelndians vie them athet tobindethanpurge ; bur if they do vie themfor a purge, a vic A 
thedecodion of them, and viethem much conſeruedi in ſugar, and ef; pecially the Chebuls; zthey el- | 
low andblacke be good that way likewiſe. 
 Theyellow and belerceraken belore meate,are good againſt a lack jor weake ſtomacke As Ger- B 

64 writerh. 
 Theyellowand blackede Indice, and the Chebule, purge Wghtly, if £ qo orthree drams be taken, C 
and drawe ſuperfluous humors from the head. 

The yellow,as ſome write purge choler,Chebu/z fiegine.1n4ice melancholie,and ſtren trhen the D 
inward partes; but roſted in che imbers or otherwiſe, waſted,they drie more than they pe 

There are two ſortes eſpecially brought into theſe partes of the wotlde conſerued, the Chebulc E 
and of them the beſt are ſomewhat long like a {mall Limon, with a haxde rinde and blacke pith, ct 
the taſte of a conſerued Wall nut; and the — which are round and lefler, and tenderer i it 
eatin 

If tho be mingled with ſhare medicines, As Scammonie, ir corredterh their nature, and eſpeci- 7 
ally the yellow. 

L'Obel1us writeth, that of them the Emblicedo meanly coole ſome do driein the firſt 6c preegt th; 
purge the ſtomacke of rotten fliegme, they comfort the braine,che ſinewes,the hart, and huer 
cure appetite, ſtay vomit, andcoole the hcate of choler, helpe-rhe vnderſtanding , quench thi: 
andthe heate of the intrailes ; the greateſt and heauieſt be the beſt. | 

Theypurge beſt,and with leſſer paine, if they be laide in water in the ſunne vnrill they fvell, at 
ſod on a ſoft fre, & after they haue ſod and be cold, preſcrued i in ſo much white hony as the founch 
part of it,pur to chem. 

Nur Aporhecaries might very much further the happy veocerdinls of our Phiſitions, if they, I 
would procure to haue the aforclaid fruits greene,to diftUll them, andyeleruc the water thereof for 
agreatiewell, 

Garcia tound the diſtilled water aforeſaid to be right profitable agginl the French diſeaſe and K 
ſuch like infeCtions. | 

The Zelericeare alſo of a milde operation, and do comfort, and are cold in the firſt degree,and L 
dricinthe ſecond :the others come necre to the Embl;ce in operation. 


I.204 L [> = Of 


: | 
| 


THE THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 


Of theFuiube 


Ininle Arabwn,/ae Ziziphus Dodonej | 


tree. Chap.123. 


” 


The Iuiube rec, 


—W 8 


414+ 2 vt Thedefeription. 

T* Helwuberreeis normuch lefierthan z;. 
| ap caxdida,hauing 2 wieathed rrunke or 
1 body, and a rough barke full of rifts or cra- 
| ye LES | nies, andſtificbranches,beſerwithmanyſtrong 
Y4— Mat ISS. | | and hard prickles: from whence growour many 


nn _—< - \ BS | ud "; : K 
EE JJ $9 ' longrwigs,orlicrle ſtalks, halfea foote or more 
| "$1 Ns 


a4t4: 


4 
1 
$43 } 
N43 F 
J . 
: 
q 
y 
z 
[4 
8 


* 
m 


4 => | inlengthin ſhew likeRuſhes,limmer,and eaſily 
Ts '| | bowing themſelues , and very lender like the 
| | rwigs of Spartum : abort which come foorth 
/&  leaues one againſt another, which are fomwhar 
" long, not yery great, bur hard and tough liketo 
|| | theleauesof Perw/ncaor Peruinklez8& amongſt 

\| | theſcleaues come foorth pale and moſſie little 

oa  flowers;afterwhich ſucceed long berties asbig 
2} | as Oliues(ofa meane quantiric)or little Prunes, 
[| | orſmalPlams, wheron there is an hard orwoo- 
| | dyſhell,jn which the kemel or nutis contained. 
| ; % The place. . ; 
| Therehenow at this day Iviube trees grow. - 
| | ingin very many places of Iralie,which in times 
paſt were newly brought thither out of Syria, 
'| | andthatabout Phnje his time, as he himſelfe 
||| hathwrittenin his 17. booke 10.chapter, 
" [4  *% Thetime. | 
||  Irflowrethin Aprill,at which time the ſeedes 
||| orſtonesare tobe ſet or ſowen for increaſe. 
| 1} ** Thenames. 
zone :4- -@:| This tree is called in Grecke ?i7vpes and i736 
with i= in the ſecond ſyllable: in Latine likewiſe Z ;zyphas, and of Perrus Creſcentins Zezulm: in 
Engliſh Tuiuberree, {© | | colon. ted 

The fruit or Plums are named in Greeke (i{upm,7ilue: Galen calleth themmens» as Hurcen ou 
ſhewerhin his 369. chapter intreating of the Tuiube, in which be fer downe thoſe things, thatare 
mentioned concerning Serica'in Galeps booke of the faculties of nouriſhments : in Latine likewiſe 
Zizypha and Serics :inſhops Teiube tin Englifh Iuiubes. © 

x | | | 1+ Thetemperature. | 

Iuiubes are ternperate in heate and moyſture. 

The fruit of the Iuiube tree caten,is of hard digeſtion, and nouriſherh very little, but being taken 
in ſirupes,cleuarics, and ſuch like confeRtions, it appeaſeth and mollifieth the roughneſle of the 
chrote.the breſt and lungs,andis gogd againſt the cough, bur exceeding good forthe reines ofthe 
backe,the kidncies andbladder. =: l ff | | 


4 = 


P w 


© 
by 
" 
i 
- 
! x 
y 


z 


f 
» 
B 


 Ofthe(herrietree. Chap.124- 


T He ancient Herbariſts haue ſer downe fower kindes of Cherrie trees; the firſt is great and wild, 
| TL theſecondtame orof thegarden ; the third, whoſe fruiris ſower z the fourth is rhar __ ar 


{ 


" ; 


A | 
HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1919 


called in Latin Chamecer aſus,0r the dwatffe Cherric tree, The later wrizershaue found divers forts 
' more, ſome bringing foorth greater fruit, others lefſerz ſome with white fruir, ſoine with blacke3 
= others of the colour of black blood varying infinitely according to the glimate and countrie where 
they growe. | «$8 | | 

1 Ceraſms oulgart. | _ |2 Ceraſwprecog /me Belgict, 

The common Engliſh Cherrie tree, ' IheFlancers Cherie tree, 


ha _ 
WO, - - * - 
f 8 x of 
| — W % JA k AS} 
O. , ' IV A 
wo —” us 


| | 'd *% Thedeſeriition. +. | 
I He Engliſh Cherrie tree groweth ro an high ang great tree, the bodie wherof is of a meane 
| bignes,whichis parted abouc into very many boughes,withabacke ſomewhat ſmooth,and 
of a browne crimſon colour, tough and phable. The ſubſtance or timber is alſo browne in 
the middle, and the omward part is ſomerhing white. The leaues begreat, broad, long, ſerwith 
veines ornerues, & {lightly nicked about the edges, The lowersare white ,of a meane bignes,con-— 
ſiting of fiue leaues, and hauing certaine thredsin the middle of the like colour. ' The Cherries be 
round,hanging ypon long ſtems or footeſtalks, with a ſtone inthe mifdeſt which is covered with a 
pulpe'or ſoft meaxe zthe ketnell rhereof is not vnpleaſant tathe taſtethough X624DT. "07h 
2 The Flanders Chettie tree differeth not from our EngliſkCherjie tree in ſtature, or forme of 
leaves or flowers; thediffercace confilteth in this , rhat this rree bringerh foorth his fruit fooncr,, 
and greaterthan the other. 4 TS. eD.. | | 
3 | The Spaniſh Cherrie tree groweth vpto the height of our common Cherric tree; the wood or 
timber ſoft and loofe,couered with awhitiſh {calic barkezthe bhranchesareknortic, greater & tnller 
_ of ſubſtance than any other Cherric tree; the leaues ate likewiſe greater an#longer than any of the 
reſt,in ſhapelike thoſe of the Cheſtnut tree: rhe flowersare like thelother in forme, butwhaerof 
colour: the fruir'is greater andlongerthan any, whitefor the moſt part all oucr, except thoſe that 
ſtand in the hotteſt place where the ſunne hath ſome reflexian againſta wall ; they are Alſo white - 
within,and of a pleaſanc caſte. / , | __ | SO IT 2 
4 The Gaſcoine Chertie tree growerh very like vntothe Sx aniſh-Cherfie trecin ſtakure, flowers 
and leaues: ir differerh intharit bringeth foorth very ereapChetticd, long, ſharpe pointed, with 2 
certaine hollownefle vpon one (ide, and (potted here and with certaine prickes of purple co- 
lour as ſinallas landzthe taſte ismolt plealanc,and excclgtWinbeautie, ' | 


= 


1442 | 3 Ctrdſu 


% | : 4 : 
z _ 
4 


1320 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
3 Ceraſie Hiſpanics, [|| | 4 Ceraſar Gaſeonica. 


The Spanith Cherrie tree, Ex i | | - The Gaſcome Cherrie tree, 


Sy "I » g—— 
5 Ceraſus Serotins. 
_ Lateripe Cherric tree, 


b 


1 
8 

c PE 

Z 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 
a. {EE WE: w The deſcription. | | 
The late ripe Cherrie tree groweth vp like vnto our wilde Engliſh Cherrie tree, with the like 
leaues,branches and flowers,ſauing that they are ſometimes once doubled:the fruit is all, round, 
& of adaike bloodic colour when they be xipe, which the French men gather with their (talks ard 
hang them vpintheir houſes in bunches orhandfule againſt winter, which the Phificioffs do give 
vnto cheir patients in hot and burning feuers, being firlt ſteeped in alittle warme water, that cau- 
ſern them to {well and plumpe vp as tull and freſh,as when they did growe vpon the trec. Fo 
-6 The Cluſter Cherrie tree differeth not fromrhelaſt deſcribed eitherin leaues,branches,or ta- 
ture: the flowers arc alſo like,bur neuer commeth any one of them to be double. The fruit is round, 
red when they be ripe,and many growing vpon one ſtem or footitalke in clufters,like as the Gra pes 
do. The raſte is not vnpleafant,although fomewhar ſower, 1 FEA 


321 


La 


7 Ceraſus multiflora fouttus edens, '$ Ceraſm multifora panciores fruct ua cde ns. 
The double flowerd Cherrie tree bearing fruit. The double flowerd barren Chertie tree, 


| % T he defeription. | 
7 This Cherrie tree with double flowers groweth vp vnto a ſmalltree, not vnlike vnto the com- 


= 


mon Cherrie tree in each reſpc&, ſaving thar the flowers are ſomewhat doubled, that is ro ſay, 


three or fower times double: atter which commeth fruit (though in ſmall quantitie ) like rhe other 
common Cherrie, | Bs | 

$8 Thedouble flowred Cherrie tree growerh vp like vnto an hedge buſh, but not ſogrear nor gh 
as any of the others; the leaues and branches differ nor fromthe reſt of the Cherne trees. The 
flowers hereof are exceeding double, as are the flowers of Marigoldes, bur of a white colour, and 
ſmelling ſomewhar like the Hawrhorne flowers after which comeſeldome or neuer any fruit, al- 
though ſome authors haue ſaid that ir beareth ſomerimes fruit, which my ſelic haue nor at any rime 
ſeenez notwithſtancing the tree hath growen in my garden many yeeres, and that in an excclicnt 
good place by a bricke wall, where it hath the reflection of the ſouth ſunne, fic fora tice thatis nor 


willingto be are fruicin our colde cluvate, 


Q4qqq 3 9 Ceraſm 


© C j L 
'f -; 
{ j + . bs ? 
: & 2 ” 
z® | ] nf | 
» : Y © Þ a 
: & F £ 
, *2 » 


1322 | THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


"9 Ceraſus tninmnigra & racemoſa. if} © Io Ceraſmracemoſarnbra. 
Birds Cherrie,and blacke Grape Cherrie tree. | | RedGrapeCherrie tree. 


1 — #44, 
o 


J 
> 
- / 


\ 
M8 


: 
US 
, : 


>, 
vs 
i\ 


: [ ; 


1) | 1 e&Thedefeription. | | 
9 TheBirds Cherrietree, or the black Cherrie tree, that bringerh forth very much fruic vpon one 
branch(which berrer may be vnderſtopd by fight pf the figure,then by words) ſpringerh vp like an 
hedge tree of ſmall ſtature ,ir| groweth in the wilde woods of Kent , andare there vied for {tocks 
to gratffe other Cherries vpongof bertex taſte,and more profite, as eſpecially thoſe called the Flan- 
ders Cherries : this wilde tree groweth very plenrifullyin the north of England , eſpecially ata - 
placecalled Heggdale,neere ynto Roſpill in Weſtmerland,and in Giuers other places about Crol- 
 bieRauvenſraith , and there called Hegberric tree : ir groweth likewiſe in Martome Parke, fywer 
males from Blackburne, andia Harward neere thereunto; in Lancaſhire almoſt in eucric hedge: 
the leaues and branches differ not from thoſe of the wilde Cherrie tree: the towers growe zlougit 
the ſmall branches conſiſting of fine {mall white leaues; with fome greeniſh & yellow thrums in the 
middle after which commeth'the fruit, greene at the firſt blacke when they be ripe,aud of the big- 
neſſe of Sloes; of an harſh and wpleafant taſte; | || 
19  Theorher Birds Cherrie tree differeth not from the other in any reſpec, bur in the colour of 
- theberries ;for as they are blackezcontrary,theſe are red whenthey be ripe,whercin they dificr. 
11 Thecommon blacke Cherrie tree groweth vpin ſome places toa great ſtature: there is no 
difference bertweene it and our common Cherrie om , fauing that, that the fruite heeceof is very 
 lictle in reſpe of other Cherries,and be of a blacke colour, | | 
12 Thedwarffe Cheriie tree groweth very feldome to the height of three cubirs: thetrunke or 
body ſmall,couered with a datke coloured barke,whereupon do growe very limber and pliant rwig- 
gie branches: the leaues are yery ſmall, notmuch vnlike ro thoſe of the Priuer buſh : the flowers 
are ſmall and white, after which come Cherries of a deepe red colour when they beripe , ot raſte 
ſomewhar ſharpe,butnor greatly vnpleaſant: the! branches laide downein the carth , quickly rake 
roote,whereby it is greatly ibireaoll | q | Fa:.o1 4 
Wy | | *T 


: 
* | 
1 


HISTOKIE OF EVANTS TT | 1323 


| | | *% The deſcription. [ | | 

My ſelfe with diners others haue ſundry other (orrs in Qur gardens, one called the Hart Cherrie, 
the greater and the leſſer; one of a great bigneſlc , and mottpleaſant in taſte , which we call zzke 
Wardes Cherrie, bicauſe he was the firſt that brought the ſame our of Iralv ; another we haue called 
the Naples Cherrie , bicauſeir was firſt brought into theſe parts from Naples : the fruite is verie_ 
great,tharpe pointed, ſorwharlike a mans hartin ſhape,of apleaſaneraſte,and of a deepe blackiſh 
colour when it is ripe,as it were of the colour of dried bloud. ” F 

Wehaue another char bringeth foorth Cherries allo very great bigger then any Flanders Cher- 
ric,of the colour of Ieat,or burnithed horne, and of a moſt pleaſant ralte,as witneſlſech Maſter 3, 
the Queenes Maieſties Clockmaker, who did taſte of the fruite (the tree bearing onely one Cher- 
ric, which he did cate ; (bur my elſe never taſted of it ) at the impreſſion heereof, We 'haue alſo 
another, called the Agriot Cherric, of a reaſonable good taſte, Another we haue with fruite of a 
dun colour,tending to a watcher, We haue one of the dwarffe Cherrie crees that bringeth foorth 
fruite as greatas moſt ofour Flanders Cherries,whereas the common ſort hath very {mal/Cherries, 
and thoſe of an harſh raſte. Theſe and many more forts we have in our London gardens wheceefto 
write particularly, would greatly inlarge our volume, and toſmall purpoſe: therefore what hath 
been faid thall (ufhce. | | 


11 Cerg/m« nigra. | 12 Chamaceraſ. | 


= . 


The common blacke Cherrie tree, _ The dwaific Cherrie tree, 


DPD | J, Pe 
WS > VS z 


ANA) os 
2 1117 


| 
"Kd 


VEE AY > 


, —Y F 


RY 
> 4 


x\ / A BY 


4 og 
* 
V..\d 
_ WW] 
_ % v 
> A | k 
/ "_ \ 


41 
ds 
\ * 
» 0” 
\ 


[ ! ED 


| *% The time, ; 2's 2 
The Cherrie trees bloome in Aprill; ſome bring foorth their fruite ſooner; ſomelarer: the red 
Chenties be alwaies betcer then the blacke of their owne kinde., | | Bfs 
3 ds 229c Fu 2 _ 4 The names. : 4%" 
The Cherrie tree is called in Greeke 312-5: and alfo in Latine Cerafe : in high Dutch i trſthen- 
bauy : in low Durch Kerfcnboome,and Crieckenboom: in French Cerfer : in Engliſh Cherrie 


UCcec. | 
Qqqq 4 The 


= THE THIRD BOOKE/OF THE 
| Thefruiteor Cherries be calledin Greeke wepsne, and zy-=: and in Latine likewiſe Ceraſ;: in 
Englith Cherries : the Latine and Engliſh names in their ſeucrall ritles ſhall ſuffice for the reſt 
chat might be ſaid, EY lf [1 h 
| ** Thetemperatare and vertues. 


The beſt andprincipall Cherries be thoſe that are ſomewhat ſower : thoſe lirtle fivecre ones 
which be wilde and ſooneſt ripe, be the woorſt : they conteine bad juice , they very ſoone purrifie, 
and do ingender ill bloud ,by geafon whereof they do nor onely breede woormes 1n the belly, Wis 
rroublefome agues,and often peſtilent fevers : and therefore jn well governed common wealthes 
it is carefully prouided, tharthey ſhauld not be fold in the markets in the plague time. 


Spaniſh Cherries are like to theſe in faculries,bur they do nor ſo ſoone purrifie : they be likewiſe 


& 


colde, and the iuicethey make-isnorgood. || | | 

The Flaunders or Kentiſh Cherries thar are through ripe,haue a better iuice, bur waterie, colde 
and moiſt: they quench thirſt,they are good for an hot ſtomacke, and profirable for thoſe that haue 
the agew: they eaſily deſcende and make the bodic ſoluble: they nouriſh nothing ar all, 

D The lateripe Cherries which the French mer keepe dried againſt winter, and are by them cal- 
led Aforelle, and we afterthe ſarmename call them Morel! Cherries, are dry,and do ſomwhart bind: 
theſe being dried are pleaſant to the taſte, and holeſome for the ſtomacke,like as Ptunes be, and do 
ſtop the belly. Us ; | | | | 

E "Generally all the kinds of Cherries are cold and moiſt of temperature,alchough ſome more cold 
and moiſt then others : the which bcing caren before meare do ſoften the belly very gemely\, rhey 
are vnholſoine cither vato moiſte and rheumarike bodies; or for vahealthie and colde ſto- 
mackes, TITS ES my INTE | 

F - Thecommon blacke »; p3vyv do ſtrengrthen.the ſtomack, and are holſomer then the red Cher- 
_ ries,the which being dried do ſtop the laske. * | |} | 

G Thediſtilled water of Cherries is good for thoſe that ate troubled with heate and inflammaci- 
ons in their tomackes,and preuaileth againſt the falling ſicknes giuen mixed with wine. 

H Manyexcellent Tartes,and other pleaſant meates are made with Cherrics,Sugar, and other de. 
licateſpices whereof to write wereto ſmall purpoſe, [1 Ke, 

1 The gumofthe Cherrie tree taken with wing and water,is reported to helpe the ſtonezit may do 
good by making the paſlages ſlippery, and by tempering and alaying the ſharpnes ofthe bumors, 
and in this maner it is a remedy alſofox an vid cough : Dzoſcerrdes addeth thatit maketh one well 


b 


coloured,clecrerh the fighr,and cauſeth a good appetite tomeate. = 


[ 


Of the eMſulberie Tree. Chap.nn5. 


Ll 


% 


3Y He common Mulberic tree is high and fullof boughes : the bodie thereof is many times 

þ : a the barke rugged ; and that ofthe roote yellow; rhe leaucs are broade and ſhafpe 

' pointed , ſomething harde, and nicked gn rhe edges z in ſteede of flowers,are blowings or 

catkins, which are downie: the fruite is long, made vp of a number of little graines ,like vnto 2 

blacke Berrie, bur thicker, longer, and much! greater , atthe firſt greene, and when it is ripe 

blacke , yet is the nice whereof itis full, red: rhe/roote is parted many waies, 

2 The whitc Mulberic tree growerhntill iche come vnto Aa great and goodly ſtature, almoſt as 

big as the former:the leaues are rounder,not vt poinred,nor ſo deepely ſnipt abour the edges: 
the fruite is like the former,but that it is white and omewhat more taſting like wine, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS, 1325 


- x AMorts. 2 Morusalþa. 


The Mulberie tree. 


ts Ly 
By 0 
5 [7 Fh 


| % The place. | ; 
The Mulberic grees growe plentifully in Italic and other hot regions, wherethey do maintaine 
reat woods and groues of them, that their Silke wormes may feede thereon, The Mulberie tree is 
bly ſet by theſlipz it mayalſo begrafted or inoculated into many trees, being grafted inawhite 
Poplar,it bringeth foorth white Mulbertes, as Beri#/u in his Geoponikes reporterh, Theſe growe 
in ſundrie eiblens in England, 0 | | 
. | v The time. 


Of all the treesin the orchard the Mulberic doth laſt bloome, and not betore the colde weather 
is gone in May (therefore the olde writers were woont tocallir the wiſeſt tree ) ar which time the 
Silke wormes do ſeeme to reuiue,as hauing then wherewith to feede and nouriſh themſelues which 
all the winter before, d6e lic like {mall graines or ſecdes, or rather like the dunging of a fleſhflic 
ypon a glafſe, or fome fuch on , as knowing their proper time both to performe rheir duties 
for whichthey were created, andalſowhen they may haue wherewith to mwaintaine andpreſerue 


their owne bodies,vnto'their buſines aforeſaid. 


The berrics are ripe in Auguſt. Hegeſander in ©AHthenew affirmeth,thatthe Mulberie trees in his 
time didnot bring foorth fruit in twenrie yeeres togither,andrhat ſ6 great aplague of the gourthen 
raigned and hos, ſo generally ,as nor onely men but boyes, wenches, cunuckes and women were 
troubled with thar diſeaſe. | | is 


By 3 *% The names. #24 POO og es 

This tree is named in Greeke M-eie and vrowrie: in Latine Morw: in ſhops Aorms Celſ: in high 
Dutch Pauilberbaum: in lowe Durch Boerbeſie boom: in French cAleariey : in Engliſh Mul- 
berie rree. ed ? Pali /b6 2; 

The fruit is called Miz» and 2zwrer: in Latine Aorwn: inſhops Morwn Celfi » in bigh Dutch 
Rocrbcfie 2 in Italian Aforo : in French Aewre: in Spaniſh Mores and Meres: in Eugliſh Mulberie. 

4 | * Thetemperature and vertnes, = | 
Mulhberies being gathered before they be ripe, are colde and dric almoſtin the third degxee, m A 


s 


- 


* 8 $ 
4 Wy 
_ b f 

4 


; BYBG b. "Y 'M - Q 
1326 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
do mightily binde beingdriedthey ate good forthe lake and bloodieflixe; the powder is vſed 
in meate,and isdrunke with wine and warer. | | | 
B They ſtayblecdings,and allo the reds; they aregpod againſt inflammations or hot ſwellings of 

the motith and iawes, and for other inflaimmarions newly beginning. 

| C Theripeandnew em hit Mulberies are likewiſe colde,and betull of iuice,which hath the raſte 
of wine,andis ſomerhingdrying,andnot rw ay np ener valitic z andtherefore itis alſo mixed 
with medicines for the mouth, and ſuch as helpe the hot Nallings of the mouth, and almonds of 
the throtez for which infirmities itis ſingular good. | "1 | | 


n 


D Ofthe vice of the ripe berries is made a confeRion with ſugar, called Diamorazs, that is after 
che manner of a firrupe, which js exceeding good for the vicers and hor fwellings of the toong, 
 throte,and almonds or Vuula of the throte,or any/other maladie ariſing in thoſe parts. 

E Theſe Mulberies taken in meare,and allo before meate, do very ſpeedily paſſe thorow thebelly, 

| byreafon of the moyſture and {lipperinefle of their ſubſtance, and make apaſſage for other meares, 
as Galen laith, |] | | [1 | | x 

F Theyaregoodto quench thirſt, they ſtir vp an appetite tomeare, they are not hurtfull to the 
ſtomacke,bur they nouriſh the body very little, being taken in the ſecond place, or after meate, for 
though they be lefſe hurtfull than other like fruits, yet are they corrupted and puttified, vnleſle they 

G Thebarke ofthe roote js birter, hotand drie, and hath a ſcowting facultie;z the decoftion hereof 
doth open the {toppings of the liuer and Jpleene,jt purgeth thebelly,and driveth foorth wormes, 

H Theſamebarkebeing ſteeped in vineger helpeththe roothach z of the ſame effeCis alſothe de- 
cottion of rhe leaues and barke,faith Dioſcorides, who ſheweththarabour harueſt rime there iſſueth 
out of the roote a iuice, which the next day after is found to be hard, and that the ſame is very good 
againſt the coorhach zthat ir waſterh away Pha and purgerh the belly, 

I © Galenlaith, thatrthere is in the leaues and firſt buds of this tree a certaine middle facultie, both 
to binde and ſcowre. | | t | 1 | 


- 


Of the Sycamore tree. Chap.126. 
' * The deſcription. | 
He Sycomore tree is of no ſmall height, be. 
ing very like tothe Mulberie tree in bignes 
| andlhew, tis alfolike vtoitin leafe: the 
Fruit rhercof 15 as great as a Fig, and of the ſame 
faſhion, very like in juice & raſte to the wild Fig, 
but ſweeter, and without any graines or ſeedes 
within, which growethnot foorth of the tender 
boughes, but.out of the bocy and greatold arms 
very fruitfully:rhis rreehath init _ of mulkie 
:iuice,whichja foone as any part is broken or cut, 
dothiflue foorth,. | _ - +, The place. 
| | Ir groweth,as Dzoſeorzdes writeth, very plenti- 
Fully in Caria,and s, andin ſundry places 
'of Egypt as atthe great Cayreor Alkaire,andin 
'places thatdg.not bring toorth much wheate, in 
'which it is an helpe, & ſufficeth in ſteed of bread 
and corne when there is ſcarfitic of victuals. Ga+ 
\/enwriteth, that he ſaw a plant of the Sycomore 
\rrce like tothe white Fig tree, fruit andall, 
[; | * Thetime. : 
| | Ic bringeth foorth fruitthice or fower times in 
{qne yecre,and oftner if it be ſcraped with an iron 
{knife,or orhet hike inſtrument, 2 
; 4 *% Themes. 
| | This rree js called in Greeke -x2#Yzv, of the 
'Fig iree and the Mulberie uee :in Latine Syeo- 
| | mor is ; 


Sycomormns. The Sycomore tree, þ | 


* 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. ee 
morus: Cornelizs Celſia nameth it backward Aforoſycon; the Egyptians of our time do call it Ficus 
Pharaonis,or Pharao his Fig tree, as witneſſerh Bellonjus: and itis likewiſe termed Frews CArgyptia, 
Acgypt Fig tree,and alſo Morwus Hee yta or Acgyptian Mulberietree, Vecall itin Enghth Sy- 
comore rree after the Greeke and Lanne,and alſo Mulberie Fig tree, which is che righe Sycomore 
rree,andnot the great Maple,as we have faid in the chapter of the Maple. | ; 

The fruit is named in Greeke -v»owe-er,and in Italian Sycomors and Fico 4 Egitto. 
vY- Thetemp rature anduertues. | v1 
The fruit of the Sycomore tree hath no ſharpneſle in irar all,as Gz/ex ſaith. It is fomewhat ſweer A 
in taſte,and is of temperature moiſte afrera fort,and colde as be Mulberies, | [et 
It is gogd,faith Dijoſcorrdes, forthe belly; bur it is «rev7%, thatis without nouriſhment, and trou- B 


o 
[ 


bleſome ro the ſtomacke. | | | 

There ifſuerth foorth of the barke of this tree inthe beginning ofirhe ſpring before the fruit ap- C 
peeteth,a liquor, which being taken vp with a ſpunge,ora little wgoll, is dried,made yp into fine 
cakes, andkept in gally pors : this mollifieth , cloterh woundes rvgither, and diffolucth grofſe 
humors. | | | 

It is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied againſt the bitings of ſerpents, hardnes of the D 
milr 2 ſpecne,and paine of the ſtomacke proceeding of a cold cauſe: this liquor doth very quickly _ 
putrine, | 


{+ 


Of the Fig tree. Chap127. 


Frcs. 


The Fig tree. 


% The deſerittion. © — 
| He Garden Fig tice becommeth a tree of a 
| meaneſtature, having many branches full 
of whine pith within, like Elderne pith, and 
large leaues of a darke greene colovr, dinided 
into ſundrie ſeions or diviſions, The fruit come . 
meth our of the branches withour aty lower at 
all that euer I could perceine, which truite isin 
ſhape like vnto Peares, of coloureither whitiſh, 
or ſomewhat red, or of a deepe blewe, full of 
ſmall graines within , of a ſweete and pleaiant 
taſte; which being broken before ic be ripe, doth 
yeeide moſt white milke, like vnrothe kindes of 
Spurge, and the leaues alſo being broken, doc 
- y:eld the like liquorz burwhen the figs beripe, 
the inice thereof:ts like honie. 7 , 
The dwarfte Fig tree is like vntothe former in 
leaves and fruite, Lin irneuer groweth abcnethe 
. height of a man; and hath many ſmall ſhoores 
comming from the rootes , whereby it greatly 
increaſeth. Bag 
There is alſo apother wilde kinde, whoſe fruit 
isncuer ripe; Theophraſius nameth ities, Plrmre 


Capr i fiews. | 
| *% The place. 
The Fig trees do growe plentifully in Spaine 
and Iralie, and many othercountries, as in Eng 
land; 'where theybeare fruire, bur it never com- 
| (Ry 2G oY 2M meth to kindly maturitie, except the tree bez 

planted vnder an hot wall,wheretoncither —_— northeaſt windes can come. 
% The time, ; | 

. The dwarffe Fig tree groweth in my garden, and bringerh foorth ripe and very great fruit inthe 


(979 {© 


1328 THE THIRD BOOKE | OF THE 
moneth of Auguſt ofwhich Figs ſundric perſons hauc caten atpleaſure, 

In England the Fig trees put nor foorththeir leaues vnrill te endof _ 50g oftentimes the 
fruit commeth foorch before the leaucs appeerc. | | 

| 4 KT he names. | 

The Fig trees called in Grdcke --43, and of diuers for difference ſake between it & the wilde Fi 
rree,94 fue: in Latine Ficts, and Fic fatina,; and FO inhigh Dutch Feigenbaum: in low 
Durch Gizgheboom: * in French Figaier : in Icahan Fico : oy Spagiſh /2, gh in Engliſh Fig 
[rce, 

The fruit 1s namedi in Greek: tuner tin \Latine Fiehland the enkipe fruit Z2avr9es :in Latin Groſſws:that 
which is dried is called in Grecke | 10:35 :1n Latine Carica* in high Dutch F eygcn; inlgw Dutch 
Citighen: in French Figues : in Iralian Ficht : in Spaniſh Higos : in Engliſh Fig: the little leedes 

| Whichare found:r, them,are named by Galen xexer fee, Cechramides, 

<-7 he temperature. * | 
, Thegreene Figs new pathered are ſomewhat warme and moiſt : the dry and ripe Figs are hot al- 
molt inthe third degree,and withall ſharpe and biting. | 
The leaucs haucalſo ſome ſharpnes,with an opening power, butt not fo ſtrong as the juice. 
' | * The wertues. | 

A ThedryFigs do oath better than the greene or new Figgnotwirhſtanding they ingender not 

very good blood, for ſuch people as dofeede much thereon, do become lowſte,and tull of vermine, 

B Figs be good for the throte and lungs , they mitigare the <ugh, and are good for them thatbe 
ſhort windedz they ripen flegme,cauſing the ſameto be calily pet out eſpecially when they be ſod- 
den with Hyſſope,and the decoQtion dtunke, | | 

: $ Figs ſtamped with falr, Rew, andthe kernels of nuts, withſtand all poiſon and corruption of 
the aire, The king of Pontus called Muthridares vied this preſeruatiue againſt all venome ard 
noon, 

D f Figs ſtamped and made ir into the forſne of a plaiſter with whear meale,the powder of Feriugreek, 
and Lineſced,and the rootes of marih Mallowes,applicd warme, doth ſoften & ripen nn, 
phlegmonsall hor and wi fivellings, and tumors behindethe eares;3 and if you adde thereto the 
rootes of Lillies,it ripeneth and breaketh Veneteqgus impoſtumes that come in the flanke, which 
 impoſtume is called Bubo, by reaſon of his lurking! inſuch i places, in plaine Engliſh rearmes, 
they arecalled borches. ||| 

E Figs boiled in Wormewood wine wth ſome Barly meale, 3 are very good to be applied as an im- 
plaiſter ypon the bellies of ſuch as hauethe dropſie. 

F Drie Figs haue power to foften, coplume andmake chinnd, and may be vſed both outwardly 
and inwardly , whether, it beroripen and loften umpoſtumes, or to ſcatter, diſſolue and conſume 
them. 

G Theleauesof the Fig tree do waſte ind con ſu me chekings euil,or ſwellingkernels inthe throte, 
and domollifie, waſte, and conſume all other tumours, being finely pouned and laid thereon ; but 
atter my praCtiſe,being boiled with the rootesoftnarſh Mallowes vntill they be ſoft, and ſoincor- 
porate rogither,and applied m forme of a plaiſter, 

H Themilkie iuice either ofthe Figs of leaues, is. good againſt all roughnes of the skinne, lepries, 
ſpreading ſores,tetters ,mall pockes,meaſels Puſhes,wheales , freckles, lentils, and all other ſpots, 
ſc uruines,and deformitic ofthe body and face, being mixed with Barly meale and applied : it doth 
alſo take awaic wartes] and luch like: excreſecares, if it be. mingled with ſome fattic or grealic 
tiung, 

I Themilkedoth alſo« cure the too chach jfa ll lint or cotton be wet therein, and pur into the 
hollownes of the tooth, | : 

K Ir openeththevaines ofthe hemotthoides, and looſeneth the bellie, being applied vnto the 
fundament, 

L Figs ſtamped with the powder of Fehogreekel| and vineger, and applied plaiſterwiſe , doth eaſe 
the intollerable paine of the hot goutgef| pecial'yrhe out of the fecte, 

M Themilke thereof pt into the weund proceeding of the biring of amad dogge, or any other 
venemous beaſt, preſeryerſy the parts adioinjn 6 taketh avyRie the paine preſently , and cureth 
the hurr, 

N The pom and ripe Figeare 4 for hol ta be troubled with the ſtone of the ms 

cy 


"1 "I 


AN l, 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. SAL 


chey ſlaken the paſſages,make the conduits {lipperie,and open them,and do alſo ſomewhat clenſe - 
whereupon after the cating of the ſame, it hapneth that much grauell and ſand is conueied foorth, 

Drie or barrell Figs,calledin Latine Carice,are a remedie for the belly,the cough,and for oldin. O 
firmitics of the cheſt and lungs ; they ſcoure the kidneies, and clenſe foorth the ſand; theymitigate 
the paine of the bladder,and cauſe women with childe to haue the eaferdeliuerance , ry teede 
thereof for certaine daiestogither before the time of deliverance, | | 

Dioſeorides ſaith,that the white liquor of the Fig tree, and ivice oftheleaues, doth curdle milke P 
as therennetdoth, and difſolueth the milkerhar is clutteredin the ſtomacke , as doth vineger. 

Ic bringeth-downe the menſes if it be applied with the yolke of an egge,or with yellow waxe. 


Of the prickly Fndian Fig tree. (hap.iz8. 


1 Fic Indice. © | Fruttw. 
The Indian Fig tree, 1hefruir, 


| =" 9. 


u%. The deſeription.. | 
[ His ſtrange and admirable plant called Fiew 1ndice, ſeemerh to be no other thing then a 

mulciplication of leaues, that is,a tree made of leaues, without body orboughes : for the 

leafe ſet in the grounde doth in ſhort ſpace take roote, and bringethout of 1t ſclfe other 
leaues,from which do grow others one after another, till ſuch time as theycometo the height of a 
tee; hauing alſo inthe meanc ſeaſon b es as it were comming from thoſe leaues, ſonetimes 
more, otherwhiles fewer,as nature liſttobeſtow, adding leafe vntq leafe, whereby it occupieth a 
great pecce of ground : theſ leaves arc long , and broad, as thicke as a mans thumbe, of adeepe 
greene colour, ſer full of long, , ſlender, ſharpe, and whitiſh prickles : on the tops of which leaves 
come forth long flowers,not valike tothoſe of e1e manured Ponfegranarte t:ec, orratherthe (Viar- 
vell of Peru, of a yellow colour : after which commeth the fruir,like vnto the common Fig,narrow 


b 


1330 THE THIRD 'BOOKE OF, THE 

bcelow,and bigger abouc,of a greene colour, ſtuffed ful! of a red pulpe and iuiceKtaining the h 

ot them - it,as Joche ilberies, with'a bloudy tne colour : the = of _ 
Figs are inuironed with certaine ſcalyleaues likea crowne,wherem are alſo conteined final! grains - 
that arcthe ſeeds,the which being ſowen,do bring foorth playts;round bodicdlike vatothe rrunke 
of other trees , with leaues placed thercon like the other ,which being ſer in the ground bring 
foorth trees of leaues, as we haue ſhewed. ||} | 


144-4: :|- Y, : Iheplaces. 1.1} oh 

This plant groweth in all the tra of the eaſt and weſt Indies, and alſo in $f countrey Norem. 
bega,now called Virginia,from whenceic hath; beene brought into ltaly , Spainc , England, and 
other coontries: in Italy ir ſometimes beareth fryire, but more often in Spaine, and.neuer as yer in 
England; alchough I haue beſtowed great paines and coſt inkeeping ir from the nniuric ofour cold . 

climate, * {998 FOES 8 Lit wal WW 
| Irgrowethalſoar Saint Crux and other places of Barbarie, &a!ſoih an Iland of the Mediterra- 
nean ſeacalled cg about a day & nights failing with a meanc winde from Petraſſe a port town 


in Morea, where my ſeruant !#/z{{;am Acrſhall betore remembred, did (ce not onely great ſtore of 
thoſe trees made ofleaues,bur alſo.diuers other founde bodied plants,of a woody ſubſtance; from 
whence he brought me ders plants thereot ineuþs of earth, yery freſh and greene for iny garden, 
where they flouriſhed at the impreſſion heerof./ | 


both\winter and ſommer, by the relation ofmy forcſaide 


hurt or griefe atall. 
It is reported of fomerhat 
NUANCE, 


gf 


0 gt 


HISTORIE OF' PLANTS. . | 2338 
throughthe thickeſt part, from which alſo they cur certaine loope' holes or windowes in fome q: 
places,to the end toreceiue thereby the freſh coole aire that entereththeratzas alſo for light, that 
they may ſec their cattle thar feedeth thereby, to auoid any danger gþat might happen vnco them, 
cirher by the enimie or wilde beaſts : from which vault or cloſe wake, ;doth rebound ſuch an admi- 
rable eccho,or an{wering voice(if one of them ſpeake vnco another with a lowde voice)thatitdorh 
relound or anſwer againe fower or fiue times,according to the heightof the voice,to whichit doth 
anſwere, andthat (o planly, that it cannot be knowne tron? the voice it felfe :the firſt ormorher of 
this wood ordefarr of trees, is hard to be knowne ftom the children, but by the grearnes of the bo- 
die,which three men can ſcarſely fathom about: vpon the hraunches whereof growe leaues, hard 
andwrincklcd, in ſhapelike thoſe of the Quince tree, greene aboue, and of a whitiſh horie colour 
vnderneath,whercupon the Elephants delight to feed: among whichleaues come toorth the fruic, 
ofthe bignes of a mans thombe, in ſhape like a ſmall Fig,bur of a fanguine or bloudie colourand of 
a ſee talte,but not (o pleaſant as the Figsof Spaine: notwithſtandimg theyare good tobe eaten, 
and withall very holeſoine, 2h W's 


| # 6's "1 
i Arbor Goa,ſine Indica. bis li 
The arched Indian Fig tree. * The place. 
| har! WE | 
SD ISLET This wonderous,tree groweth in divers places 
IAC. 4 of thecaſt Indies,elpecially neere vato Goa, and 
> SAN alſo in Malacazitisa ftranger in che moſt parts of - 

the world, ' x 


* The time. 


This tree keepeth his leaues greene winter 
and ſommer. | + 
* The names. 
" 


This tree is called of thoſe chat haue trauelled 
Ficus Indica,the Indian Fig,and Arbor Gog of the 
place where it groweth in greateſt plentie : wee 
may callitin Engliſh the arched Fig wee, 


*% The temperature and werrues. 


We haue nothing to write of the temperature 
or vertves of this : 4. of our owne knowledge : 
neither have we recciued from others,more then | 
that the fruit hereof is generally caten, andthat 1] 
without any hurt at all, but rather good and alſo 
nouriſhing, | 


> —— —_ 


Of eAaams Apple tree. Chap O_ 


| | % The deſcription. DE BR 
i Hether this plant may be reckoned for a tree properly,or for an herbie tree,jr is diſpu- . 
| 6.” die pididering the ſoft and herbie ſubſtance whereof it is made , (that is toſaic) 
when it hath attained to the height of fixe or ſeauen cubirs , andof the bigneſle of a 


|  mansthigh: notwithſtanding it may be cut downe at one ſtroke with a frrord; pr two or three cuts 
EE | | | with *- 
, | | 


. 
: - 
<a 


1332 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

with aknife, even with as much eaſe asthe rootef a Radith(or Carrot of thelike bignes : from 2 
thicke, far, threadie roote, riſe immediately diners great leatjes, ofthe length of three cubirs and 
a halfe ,fomerimes more, accorging tothe ſoile where it growerh, andof a ctibite and more broad 

of bignes ſuthcientto iyrap a childe in of ewo' yerres old , in ſhapelike thoſe of Mandrte of _ 
ouerworne greene colour, havinga broad riborfinewe running throughthe middle thereof ROT 
leaues,whether by reaſon of the extreme hor ſcotching ſunne , or of their ownenarvre, in Septem- 
berare fo dry and withered that there is nothing therof left or to be ſeene, but onely the i.iddle rjh 

Fromthe middle ottheſe leaues riſeth vp a thick trunke, whereon do grow the Ikeleaves,which 
the people do cut off,as alſo thoſe nextghe op which meanes it riſeth vv to the height of a 
tree, which otherwiſe would remaine a lowe and baſe plant :|this manner of cutting they vie from 
_ rtimerotime, vntill itcome toa certaine height / aboue thereach of the Elephant , which greedily 
ſeeketh after the fruit. In che midi(t of the rop am pehe leates commeth foorth a ſoft and fungus 
ſtumpe, whercon dogrow diuers apples in forme like a ſmall Cucumber, and of the ſame big- 
nes,couered with a thin rinde like tharof the Fig , ofa yellow .colour when ctheybe ripe : the pulpe 
or ſubſtance of the meare,is like that of rhe Pampion, without either ſeedes , ſtones, or kernels, in 
caſte not grearly perceiucd at the firſt þur preſently afterit pleaſerh, and intifeth a man toeatelibe. 
rally thereof,by 2 ſecretintiſing ſweetnes which xt yeeldeth : ih which fruitif itbe cut according to 
the length, ſaith mine author oblique, tranſuers, or any other way whatſoever, may be ſeene the 
ſhape and forme ofa ctolle, with a man faſtned thereto: myſelfec haue ſeene the fruit , and cur tin 
peeces which was brought me from Alepo in pickle; the crofle I mighr perceiue,as the forme of a 
Spread Egle in the roote of Ferne, but the man'T leaue to bt ſought forby thoſe that hauc better 
Cics and indgement then my felte, - | iu) [4 


z% 
if 


i? 


Y 


1 Muſa Ser apionis. | | | ; | | Muſe putts. 
Adams Appletree. # | || || Adams Apple. 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS 
*% The p/ace. | 
This admirable tree groweth in Acgypt, Cyprus and Syria, neere vnto a chiefe citie there called 
Alep,whichwe call Alepo; and alfsby Tripolis nor far from thence { ir groweth allvn' Canara, 
Decan,Guzarate,and Bengala,places of the Eaſt Indies, = 141 TRVEH v7 yy 
| * The trme, © L102; St Ty 


[4 


1333 


- , LE. 
: 
z 


From the roote of this tree ſhooteth foorth yoong ſprings or IE , whichthe peopletake 
vw and plant for micreaſe in the ſpring of the yeere : the' leaues with raway us September, as: is 
aboue ſaide, | | 1n:-*:7 og 

f = *% Thetimes. | =. + 

It is called 24/4 by fach as rravellto Alepo: by the Arabians Muſe Mawn :in Syria Mooſe; the 
Grecians and Chriſtians which inbabir Syria, andthe Tewes alſo ſuppoſe it robe thar wree,ot whoſe 
fruit Ada» did talte ; which others thinke to be a ridiculous fable : of Phmic Opunt 14. = re 

Itiscalledin the Eaſt Indies (asat Malauar where it allo groweth) Palar: in Malayo P7can and 
in thatpart of Africa which we call Ginay, Bane»: in Englith Adams/Appletree, > | 

| + Thetemperature.-' ' p'12 6! 10FER7 

Diofcorides and Serapioiucgethat itheaterh intheend of rhe firſt degree, and moyſtenerh in the 
end of the tame. | | #3 | | 
| *% The vertues, 7M | 

Thefruit hereof yeeldeth bb lirtle nouriſhment, it is goodfor the heate ofthe breaſt, lun gs and A 
bladder z it ſtoppeth che ljuer, and hurtech theſtomackejt roo much , it be eaten, and prociureth 
Þofeneſte in the belly : whereupon'it is requiſite forfuch asare ot a cold confticurion,inithe cating 
thereofour vatoit a lntle Ginger,ot other fpice, 3-4 4s (#294 

Itis alſo good for the 1eines, kidneies, and to prouoke vrine z itnoutiſheth thechilde inthe mo. B 
thers wombe,and ſlirreth ro generation, S | 


' Of theDate die, (hap .131. 


1 Paima. Palmerun fruttus & flores cum Elate. - 
The Datertree. leone The frur and flowers of the Date tree, 


FY. GA 0 


1334 , THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


x TT" HeDartetree groweth very great and hi 

red with a ſcalic rupged barke : the bot 

vpon a woodie middle rib like thoſe ofReedes or flags 3 the inner part of which rib or ſtalke 
is Toft, light, hol!ow andſpoongie; aniong the leaues come toorth the flowers included in alon 
$kinnic membrane, asit were a theathor hoſe, like that which couereth the Flowerdeluce before ir 
be blowen,which being opencd of it ſelfe, white|flowers ſtarrfoorth, ſtanding vpon ſhort andlen. 
der footitalks, which are faſtened with ccrtaine ſmall filaments or threadie ſtrings like vnto little 
branches;-after which-ſpring out fromthe ſame branches the fruit or Dates, which be in faſhion 

. long and round,in taſte ſweere,and many rime$ ſomewhat harſh, of a yellowiſh red colour;wherein 

is contained along hard ſtone, which is in ſteed of kernell and ſeede, the which I haue planted di- 
vers times in-my garden, and haue growen to the height of three footey bur the firſt froſt hath nip- 
ped them in ſuch ſort,that preſently they periſhed, notwichſtanding my induſtry by coucring them 
or what elſe 1 could dofor their ſuccour.  _ | | | . ; 


The Dare trees growe plentifully in Africke and Aegypr, bur thoſe which are in Paleſtina and 
Syria be the beſt: they growe likewiſe in moſt places of the Eaſtand Welt Indies, where therebe 
/ diaers fortes thereof,as weil wilde as tame,or tpanured; Ba EE. | 
The Daterree is alwaies greene, and flowreth;in.the ſpringtime: the fruit is ripe in September, 
and being then gathered they are dried in the ſunne, that they may be the better both tranſported 
- into other countries fax diſtant as alſgpreſerued from rotting athome. 
2; | | ou Thenones. | 
Thercee is called in Grecke g9ir:} :in Latine P&/me : in EngliſhDare tree. 


U 


The fruit is named in Greeke GeAargs $61inwr, that is to ſay;Glans P almarwn, orthe Acorneof the 
Dzr< rrces, and by one worde 9ornferc: in Latine Palmpls : inſhops Dactylus : in high Durch 
Dattelen; in lowe Dutch Dadelen ; in Italian| Darteſ; : in French Datres : in Spaniſh Tameras 
and Dartites: in Engliſh Dare. © | = F524 

Thecod or ſheath wherein the flowers and Dates are wrapped, are called ia, and of ſome 

|| ow ThetemPerature and verfiues. | 

A All mannerof Dates whatſoever he hard of digeſtion, and cauſe headach : the woorſer ſort be 

_ that be dric and binding, as A&7ypt Dates; bur the ſoft, moyſt, and ſweere ones arcleſle 
hurrfull, LH | | F--4 

B - Theblood which is ingendred of Dates in njans body, is _— groſſe and ſomewhat clam- 
mie :by thele the liuer is very quickly ſtopped,elpecially beinginflamed or troubled with ſome hard 
ſwelling; ſois the ſpleene hkewiſe, * ' bo | 

C The Dates which growe in colder regions, when they cannot come to perfe& ripeneſſe, if they 
be eaten too plenrifully, do/alſo fill the bodie full of rawe humors, ingender winde, and often- 
times the leprofie. . 7 ; | | SON 

D Thedrier ſortot Dates, as a faith, be good forthoſe that ſpet blood, for ſuctras hive 
bad ſtomacks,and for thoſe alſo that he troubled with the bloodie flixe. bh 

E Thebelt Dares, calledin Latine Cqrzote are: ggod for the roughneſle of the throte andlungs. 

E Thetg is mate heerof both by the eunning Confeftioners and Cookes divers excellent cordial, 
comfortable, and nouriſhing medicines,and tharprocureluſt of the bodie very mightily. 

G Theycoalſorefreſhand reſtore ſuch vnto ſtrength as are entring intoa conſumprion, for they 
ſtrengthen the ſeebleneſſeof the liver and ſpleene being made into conuenient brothes, and phili- 
call medicines mixed therewith bythe learned phiſi bog. 14-5; 

H DrieDatesdoeſtop the belly, in| ſay the vomiting and the wambling of womens ſtomacks 
that are with childe,jif they be either caren in meates or otherwiſe,or ſtamped and applicd vnto the 
ſtomacke,as a petorall plaiſter. l | Ed 

I Theaſhes of the Dare ſtones havea bindingqualitie, and anemplaiſticke or dawbing facultie; 
it healeth puſhes in theeies, Sraphylomare and þ ling away of the haire of the cie lids, cum nards, 
with wincitkeepeth proud fleſh from growing wounds, | 

| k L0"4 | = 


- 
24 4 EE 
= Þþ| 
- i i 


HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS} 1335 

| The hovghes andleaues do euidently binde, bur eſpecially the hoſe, thatis to ſay; the ſheath'or K 
caſe of the flowers and therefore itis good to vſe thele ſo'oft as there & neede of binding, 

' The leaucs and branches ofthe Date cree do heale greene wounds and vicers, refreſh andeoole L 
hot inflammarions. 45.2 | "y_ | 

Thereis a compoſition in Galen his bookes of medicines according to the kindes,called Diepa- M 

me,whichisto befſtirred with a bough of the Date tree, in ſtead of a ſpature ora thingro ſtirwith, 
for no other cauſe than thatit may receiue thereby ſome kinde of aſtrition or binding foice. | 


Of the wilde Date trees. Chap.1z2. Sl p 1 
1 Pabnites fue Chamerriphes. 2 Pabmapinus, fue Palmaconifera., | 


' The little wilde Date tree. The wilde Datetree bearing cones. 


8 etl 
| Le al" 
EE nay br = FR 
wo Sld SIRE IAU; 
SY UEDA S A 


OG A , 
8 OY IN 
"7 , a 'S , Y a 


00 


Y 


: | % The deſeription. 


4 

I Heoephraffus maketh this planttobe a kinde'of Darertree, Me lowe and of ſmall growth, 
 ſeldome atraining aboue the height of an hedge tree: on the rop whereof ſhoore fyorrh 
E; ” (forthe moſt part) lang leaues like thoſe of the Date ree, bur lefſer and torter; from rhe 
' fides whereof breaketh foorth a buſh of threadie ſtrings 3 among which rife vp ſmall bran- 

ches garniſhed with cluſters of white flowers , in which before hey be openedare tobe leciie” 
|  vnperfe@ſhapes of leaues,cloſely compaſſed abourwith an innumerable ſort of thin $kinnie hrits 
| whichrudeſhapes withthe flowers, areſerned vpand eaten at the ſeconde courſe anovg'orker 
| Iiunkers,withalirtle ſalt and pepper,being pleafant torhetaſte.  }. FOO 
! 2 Thewilde Date rice that bringeth foorth cones, ot key clogs, js of moſt travellers into tie 


: 


= 
- 


| Indies, thought to bebartenof Dates, excepr ſometimes ir yeeldethifoorth ſonce ſinall bercies like | : 
oy ED en | Rrrex 3; os vnto IH 


\ 


1336 THE-THIRD |BOOKE OF THE 
vato Dares, butdrieand nothing woorth.. Thistreegroweth tothe height and bioneſſe of + 
tree: the trunke or body whereof is ſoft, of brand. or pithic lubſtance, vnfic fork wryonk m_ 
the manured Dare tree ; the branch irſelfe was brought vnto vs from the Indics drie, an es de 
of leaues ; wherefore we muſt deſcribe the mak ue; of che bringer. The branches (ithin W 
author) are couered quer with long flaggie leaues, hanging downe of a great length, like thoſe of 
the Datetree : the branches are alſp couered with a ſcalie ot ſcabbed barke, very rough, one ſcale 
or plare lying ouer another, as tiles ypon a houſe: the fruite growerh at the endes of the branches 
not vnlike a great Pine Apple cone, couered puer with a skin like the Indian Nur ;wherein iscon- 
rained a ſhell, within which ſhell lieth hid an Cr or long kernell, of an inch long and ſome. 
wrnes louger, very hardto be broken, in taſtelike the Cheſtnurz which the ſauage people do grate 
and ſtampe to powder to make them bread, | | ES 
| FET-TE< 1-6 * T, be a | 1 

The firſt groweth, as TheophraFwteſtificth ; in Candie, but much more plentifully in Cilicia 
_-_ are nowe founde in certaine places of Iralic by the ſea fide, and alſoin diuers partes of 

The other hath beene found by trauellers intg the weſt Indies, from whence hauc been brought 
the naked branches with the fruit, ' | | 4 Ds 

1301: 41 | w* Thetme. 

The time anſwereth that of the manured Dare tree. 

HLWS  w*%Thenomes. | | . 

The little Date tree,or wilde Date tree is named of 7 hes by aft 2auapoic: in Naples Cephaglio- 
ze : in Latine commonly >e&mtes. That which is found in the middeſt of the yoong ſprings, andis 
vſed tobeeaten in bankers, is called in Grecke iynpextc ris priraue: in Latine Palme cerebrum, the 

 braineofthe Date tree, | | [ | Es | 
| | 1 jj Thos erature andvertues, = | 
A Galenſuppoſeth, that the braine of the Date tree conſiſterh of ſundry partes, that is to ſay, of a 
certaine wateric and warme ſubſtance, and of anearthie and colde z therefore it is moyſtand colde. 
with a certaine aſtrictjon or bindingqualitie, | FE | | : 
B Beingrtaken asa meate it ingendreth rawe humors and winde, and therefore itis goodto be ea: 
_ten with pepper and ſalt, || ; BEE. | 


b 
} 
[1 
« 


Of the drunken Date tree. |Chap.133. 


Þ 4 
\_ 


hs | 
4 | : : 


" Hedrunken Date tree which Caro/us Cluſiuy calleth Fawfel, is an Indian tree of a greatbig- 
nes, the timber wherof is very foſt & ſpoongious, exceeding ſmooth and plaine vntoa great 
height, nor poſſible ro be climed vp; and therefore the Indians for their eaſier aſcending w, 

at-ſome; diſtances doe tic round abour the tree! certaine withes or ropes made of the barkes of 
trees, as may be perceived by the figure, whereby very cafily they go vp and downe to gather the 
fruice at their pleaſure; The top of the tree is diuided into ſundrie branches, in ſubſtance like 
vnto the great Cane z whereupon dqe growe faite flaggie leaues like thoſe of the Palme or Date 
tree, whereof doubrleſle this is a wilde kinde :|from - & bottome of which branches commeth 
foorth fruit in long bunches like traces of Onions, couered with a ſoft pulpe like vnto the Wall 
nut,rough and very full of haire of a yellowiſh colour,and like the dried Date when it is ripe: with- 
in which huske is contained fruit like: vnto the; Nutmeg, but greater, very hard, and ſtriped oucr 
with red and white veines or finewes, [| bl 


: 


Areea, 


"TD 


EDS Y. a ar Ww 2 
Lunn peG—_——————_ 


'HISTORIE 'OF PLANTS! | ' 1337 
rect, ſme Beoftly 721i uor 1! hu ol u1 off 
| Thedrunken Datetree, giealo fc. *. The place;time and names. | 
YN NL HUE This Date tree which the Arab'/ans call Fau- 


fel, thatis by interpretation Canelians 1nd:ca, the 
Indian Nut or Filbetd : t_Auicen and Serapiocall 
it Filfeland Fafel. Itgroweth in the Eaſt Indies 
in divers and ſundrieÞlaces, as in Malauar, where 
vulgarly/it is called Pac, and of the nobles and 
gentlemen recs, which name is yied amongſt 
the Portingales whith dwell in thoſe Indies z in 
 Guzarateand Decar it is called Cupare, in Zeilan 
Poaz: in Malaca Pipan: in Cochin Checanr, In 
E:gliſh the drunken Date tree, which name we 
haue coyned from hjs qualitie, bicaufe the frutre 
doth make thote drugke thateate thereof, © \2* 
| mw Thetemperature.\* 7 | - 
Ir is cold and drichn theſecond degree. 4 
| v% 7 he wvertues, Pr 
The fruitof tre betore it be ripe, is recko- A 
nedamongſt the ſtifpefatineor aſtoniſhing me- 
dicines;| for whotogher eateth thereof waxerh 
drunke, bicauſe it dijth exceedingly amazc and 


IF 


KANE EEE 
I \ A, —_ JY 


s 
4 bo 
F Ss 4 4 \ 

I ARR 
| 
"a 
P 
” 


ore \ Bw, 
IIB 
S x % 


C\ 
cl au Py 


altoniſh the lenſes. | ] 

When the Indians are vexed with ſome into. B 
lerable ache or paine, or muſt of necefliticendure 
ſome great tormentor torture, then do they take 
of this fruite , wheteby. the 1igor of that paine 
(which| otherwiſe they ſhould teele)is very much 
[ns | mitigated. | b 

The ivice of the fruit cf Areca doth ſtrengthen the gums4faſten theteerh,comfortthe ſtomacke, C 
ſtay vomiting, and !ooſeneſic of the belly; it doth allo putge the bodie from congealed or clocted 
blood gathered within the lame. * | 


| Of the Fndian Nut tree, *C þapin4- 


% The aeſeri tom, 


I He Grecians haue notknowen, nor the Atabians once remembred this Indian/Nur tree ; 
FT the bodie whereot is very great, ſmooth and plaine, voide of boughes or branches , of a 
grcat height, wherefore the Indians do wrap ropes abour the body thereof, as they do vp- 

onthe tree laſt deſcribed ; fortheir more caſe in gathering the fruire z the timber whereof is very 
ſpungic within,bur hard withont,a marrer very firro make their Cannoos and boaresol: on the rop 
of the tice growe the leaues like thoſe of the Date tree, butbroader, and ſharpearrhepoint as 
thornes,whereof they vic to make needles, bodkins,and ſuch like infttuments ,vherewithchey fowe 
the ſailes of their (Hips, and dd ſuch like buſines : among theſe leaues come foorth cluſters of flow- 
ers like thoſe of the Cheltnur tree, which rurne into great fruit of 4 round forme, andfomewhar 
ſharpe at one end; inthat end next vnto the tree is one hole, fometimes two, bored throngh : this 
nut or fruit is wrapped in a couverture, conſiſting of a/{ubſtance notnlike vnto Hempe before it 
be beaten ſoft ;there is alſo a finer and more gentler ſtuife next vnto the (hel, like vnto Flaxe before 
it be made ſoft :- in the middle whereof is containeda great Nur covered with a very hatd thell, of 
a browne colour before it bepolithed, afterward of a os ſhining} colour like burniſhed horne z 
| | Rrrr 3 _next 


1338 THE| THIRD \BOOKE\| OF THE 
next vnto the ſhell yponthe inſide there cleaueth a white cornellic ſubſtance firme and ſolide, of 


the colour andraſte of a blanched Almdhd; within the caui vs mas _—_— is Contained 
a moſt deleable liquor like ye wille,nd off a ay x—= 


I Nux tedicdebbors 
The Indian Nuc tree. 


' Nuculs Indica. fi þ 
The little Indian Nut, 


1 

? : 
lt. a... 
1-1 _ ; ek aa 
vt , - 


| © Thelndian Nur. 


| " 7 he deſcription. 
We haue no certaine knowledge from thoſe 


| that hauc wer mt into the Indies, of the'tree 
| whichbeare 


this lirtle Indian Nut; cneirher rhaue 


we any thing of our owne knowledge, more than 


thatwe ſee by experience, tharthe fruithereof is 


| one wherein conliſteth the difference, 


SY % The place. | 
| This Indian Nut groweth i in all che Handes of 


| the We eſt Indies, eſpecially in Hiſpaniola, Cuba, 


d$S.lohns Wand, and atfo vpon the continent by 
arthagena }Nombre de Dios, and Panama, and 


| ih Virginia otherwiſe called Norembega parr of 


eſame continent, for the molt part neere vnto 
the ſea ſide,andin moyſt places ; ſeldome foundin 


| they !andiſh countries. 


*T 


The fratei is called in \ Latine N ux bodice: : of 


| uh Thetime. 
Ir growerh greene winter and ſommer. 
Bames, | | 
je Indians Corus: of the Portingales thatdwellin 


| 
; 
| 
; 


the Eaſt Indies Cocco, taken from theend wherei are oles, repreſenting the head of a mun- 


Ke: : AYE and " do call the ___ 


ﬀ, arts erem PT eram aici, that is toſay,a tree 
bearing 


!HISTORIEOOF, PLANTS.! :: 1739 
aring Nuts: of. Anicen Jaucia Lind: of the vulgare people Mara, and the fruit Xf are? which 
name XN aretis common amongſt the Perbang and Arabians: it is calicd in Malavar Tengamarans — 
the ripe truit Tengaand wy won lruite Elers: :1n Goa itis called Laphan: 1m Maino 7 FICG4M, aud 
the nut IN cher. $221 
The —_— liquoris called Sale and thacglechici is madethereofCoprs- H ence 
:\ The rp 


| 


| kigofameane temperature berneene hot ak 344 debate 


oY jmyrmerer ane ries, oi 

"Thibladiansdovie twoourthe and tender branches toward deaeaing at thernds where- &: 
of they hang bore grande, hole canes; andf{uch like things, fittoreceiue the watershatdrop- 
perh tromthe branched thercof, which pleaſant liquor they drinke/in ſteede-of wine.z from the 
-whichisdrawen a ſtrong and comfortable vitz, R_—_ viein time of neceſſicie; againſt 
allmannerof: wan 22-4 wee are 0 4. an their houſes z of the trunke oc; 
bodyof the tree ſhips and boates; h Contheoumudparl Salknit, make ropes. 
into of the finer ſtuffe failes for their hips. «& oh on 

Likewiſe they make of the ſhe!l of the Nut, ctips todrinke in, which we likewiſe ve io Reged, B 
garniſhed with filuerfot the ſamepurpoles. LThekernell ſerueth them for bread and meate; the 
milkie inficedoth ferueto toole and retreſh their fainting ſpirits 2 out of tha kernell when it1s tam: 
pedyis preſled a.maftpretious oyle, not onely good for meate,/butallo fornyedicine, wherewuh 
they annointtheir fcebi2 lims attertheir tedious travel, by meancy whereaf the ache and Rent 
mitigated,and other D—— quite taken away Ny | cauſes. . | 


fi 


Of the Dragon tree. "Gag 3 5 


\ <c * 4; TH 3 


K meds; 


His range ndadminblehe tree groweth very great , ceſemblin the Pine tree; by reaſ 
doth alwaics flouriſh,and wp antes branches of equal - equall length and > Avro | 
are bareor naked,of eight or nine cubirs, ons of the bigneſſe of a mans arme: from the 
ends of which do ſhoote our leaucs of a cubite anda ful ewo inches broad, ſorwhar 
thicke,and raiſed vpin the middle,thenthinner ; rey like: a two edged ſword: among which 
© come foorth lirtle moſſie flowers, of ſmall moment,which tur; ,of the bi pe 
ries, of ayelowiſh colour, rognd, light and bictercoucred with a threefolde skinor flme,wherein 
1s to be ſcene, as Afonartimand diuers other repart;the forme ofa dragon; having a long necke,or 
Eng g mouth zthe ridge or backe armed with ſharpe pricklesy like rhe Porpentinez ithath alſo a 
g taile, & fower feet, very cafie to betdiſcernedzhe figure of it we haue ſer foorth vnto you accor. 
ding tothegrearnes thereof, bicauſe our wprds and meanin may bethe better miderſt 00d ,andal- 
ſo the leafe of the tree in his full bigneſle, bicauſe it is to be expreſſed in the figure: the 
' trunke or body of the tree is coucred with a barke {99110 ram bes nr eller nba 
ded with any {mall toole or inſtrument; which being ſo: woundedin the Dopgge daies , bruſed or 
bored,doth yeeld foorth drops of a thicke &-rn lie or, which ofthe name of there are called Drz- 
gons teares,or Sargais Draconis, Drag :diuers have doubred whetherthe liquor or gum. 
| mic iujce were all oe with Cimebjris (not ahi that Cizaber made of quicke ſiluer)bur the re. 
I is hey differ nor, by and temperatureworke the like cffe&. 
Be» 
This eroweth j in an Iland which the =; es call Madera, and in one of the Carnarie 
lands, called [nſals Portws Santi: and as it it was firſt brought out of Aﬀrike , although 


ſome are ofacontrarie opinion, and (ay,chatit $ firſt ds iepen Carthagena, in Nene orbe 
che biſhop of the ſame Pee. » 
| rhe] have. |. 
The time ofhis: owingive have acted! in thedeſeriprion,where we ſaid that it ouriſheth and 
groweth greene a the yeere.” | £1 
I» Themowes, ! | 
Thenames haue beene ſufficiently ſpoken of in hodefeciplion and in their ſeuerall ritles, 
| _% Thetemperature andvertges. 
of the Dragontree or of the fruice thereof , there hath nor/beene any certaintie affirmed byany 
of authoritic, therefore we haucforborne to write ——— of a thing fo difficile, referring ths 
reſt to ſecond edlipþ us furthorcyniderarp, WEED» ON 


o CLE or dre tree. | | Gepazs 


V the hopes | 


He Saffaſtas ther grower! es hobch like ehtþthb Pine etver : the trunke or body is 
ſtraight, ſmooth,and voide py genr, fo a great height: itis couered with a two fold groſle 
©” rinde,the vppermoſt ofthe colour of aſhes, that next the wood of arawnie colour:on the top 
came foorth many goodly branches , like choſe of the Palme'trer , whereon do growe greene 
ſeaues, ſomewhat like thoſe of the Fig tree, of a ſweere ſinell when they be greene, bur much ſwee- 
ter when they be drie declining to the ſmell of Fenell,with much ſweernes in taſte : :they are greene 
winter and ſommer,ncither bearing fruite nor bur is alrogirher barren asit is ſaid: the roots 
are groſſe,conformable ro the greatnes of the tree,of a tawiic = pay rs, diſperſing themſclues farre 
0 omaha 111 te nabh hens pay cif {ber gBGn ri 

" 377 ow of winde, | Y | 

: 54/4f6 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1341 


Saſſaff 4s. | | 
Tf Seffakas tree, *+ The place, 

—_ | | This tree growerh.in the molt parts of the weſt 
pr ul rt abqur the cape of Floridaie Win- 
—=_s and Virginia, otherwiſe nated Norem- 

* Thetmne. 


Ic flouriſberh and keepeth greene winter and ſom- 
mer, | 


5” 


| The Hames. 
The Spaniards and French men have named this 


tree, Saſſafras: the Indians in their roong Pareme : 
y for want of an Engliſh name weare contented to 
| callit che Ague tice, of his vertuein healing the 
J x Ague. | + 
4 The boughes 
1 dry in the ſecond d| 

itenrreth hid degre: 

as is manifeſtly perceiued inthe decoCion, 

* The wertues. - | 
Thebeltof allthd we ie the roots d that wor- A 


keth the beſt effe&,' the which hath therinde clea- 
uing very faſt ro the inner part, and is of colour taw- 
nic,and much more ſweete of ſme!l chen all thetree 
and his branches, 7 | 
The rinde taſtethof a more ſweete ſmell then the B 
tree3and the water being ſodden with.he roote is 
| of greater and better effe&s then any other part of 
S611 | thetree, andis of amore fweerte ſmell, and there. ' 
 forethe Spaniards vſc it,for that it worketh berter and greater effedts, + 


, 


Itis a tree thatgroweth neere vnto the ſea, and in temperate places that haue not much drouth, C, 
nor moiſture: there be mountaines growing full of them, and theycaſt foorth a moſt ſweete ſmell, 
| fothatar the beginning when they ſaw them firſt, they thought they had beene crees of Cinamon, 

and in part they were not decciued:for that the rinde of this tree hathas ſweete a linell as Cinamon 
harh,and doth imitate it incolour and ſharpnes of taſte, andpleaſantnes of ſmell: and ſo the water 
that is made of itis of a moſt ſiveer ſmel and taſte,as the Cinnamon is;&procureth the ſame works  ® 
and effe&ts as Cinnamon doth. | | 
The wood heerofcut into ſmall peeces and boiled inwater , tothe colour of Clarer wine, and TJ 
drunke for certaine daies togither,helperh the dropfie, remooueth oppilation or ſtopying of the li- 
uer, cureth quotidian and tertian agves,and long feuers. ; F 
The roote of Saffafras hath power to comfort the liuer , and to diflolue oppilations ocomfort E 
the weake and feeble ſtomacke, to cauſe a good appetite, to conſume windines , the chicteſt cauſe 
of cruditic and indigeſtion, ſtay vomiting,and make ſweere a ſtinking breath. "| 
Irproucketh vrine, remooueththe impediments that dagauſc barrennes, and maketh women F 
apt to Conceaue, | $34 j 


| Of the Storaxtree. (hap 137. \ 
| T * The deſeription. | | 
He Storax tree growethto the height and bignes of the Qyince tree : the trunke orbodie is 
eoucred with a barke or rinde , like vnto the Birch tree; the: branches are {mall and limmer; 
wheron do grow leaues like thole of the Quince treezgreeniſh aboue and whuter vnderneath; 
| | _ - among 


+ p 
.- 
 þ 
Y | 


[| 
p | 


2 


1242 THE THIRD BROOKE Lok THE 


among w -hich come foorth white flowers, like thoſe of the Orange rree,of an vnpleaſant ſmel] : af. 
rercommeth the fruite orberries Randing vpori long andflenger footeſtalks, covered ouer with a 
little woollines,of the bigncs of the bladder nur,ard of the ſame colourz wherein isconteined ſmall 
ſeede, kereunto alſo cleaue certaine gummic our cs pon oy name of Ok which iſſue from 
the trunke or body wheh i itis wounded, | Bol | 

[1 

| 


Sd. «4 

a wal : 
» oy + 
w * 


| E*:c4 3 v5Y bk IN 
| This tree groweth in diuers places of Fraunce, 
| Kaly, and Sv hers where it bringethfoorch little 
1 or no-gum at all in Indea,Pawphylia, 
DR or [ Syria, Pifidia, Sidon , Ars other places of 
| | lewric, and Paleſtina z as alſo in diwers Ilands in 
+ the Mediterranean ſca, Tas Wand » Cilicia, 
# Candy,and Zant,and otherplaces,wherc it brin- 
-| {geth foorth his gummic liquor, in full perfection 
| {of lweerenes, and allo in grear plenty, where ic is 
| [gatheted and put into great Canes or Reedes, 
: | [whercofas fome deeme, itrooke the name Ce/s- 
). | |\rgta; others deeme ofthe leauies of Reeds, wher. 
lin they wrapitz : whereof I haue two ſmall trees in 
| {my gardeb, he which I hauc recouercd of ſeede, 


Sryrax arbor, 
The Storax tree. 


| oe The £1. 
1.2 It downad f in Maic , and the fruit isripe in 
j Seprember. 
| % Therons. 
i] Thistreeas may be gathered by ſome was cal- 
: 1 led Styrex, by reaſon of that gum or liquor which 
+ |droppeth'outof the ſame,being like vnro the hol- 
» How pipes of Iſe, that hang at the caues of houſes 
: {11 winter; called Sryria, or of the canes or-the 
| {leaues of  Reedes ipoken of before in | Latine 
| | Storax calamme © in Engliſh- Storax,, which | 
| {iy keprin Canes or the leaues of Reedes * there 
| ; | lowethfromſomeof theſe trees a certaine pum: 
| mie liquor, which neuer groweth naturally bard 
108 LOG. alvaics chinnebichi called er Styrax,orStorax. | 
* T he termpe rature. | 
The gum of this rree is of an heaingollſyhe and conco@ingqualitie. | 
A It helperh the cou 'Y. the falling R—— of \rheumes and humours intothe cheſt, and hoarſcnes 
of the voice; itallo eth the noileand ſounditg inthe cares z prevailerh againſt Srrwmas, of the 
Kings euill ; ; nodes onthe nerues,andharde ſwellings procerting, ofa colde caulezit peeuailerh alſo 
againſt all colde poiſonszas Hemlockes and ſuth like. | | 
B Ofthis gumchere are made ſundry excellent perfumes, poranders, ſweete waters, ſfweete bags, 
and ſweete waſhing bals, and eprnce ſwocee chaines Gy i 09s 6mm to write were im- 
pertinent to this hiſtorie, 


> 


Of the Sorrowfull in tree, or Foul Io ourner. Chap.138. 


Rbor triſts,the bad orfbrrowſ tree way ha bios as an Olive tree, garniſhed with manie 
A: oodly br woo" full of leaves like chote of the Plum erree:among which come foorth moſt 
Thenirrons and; WEete 1. loan of the” colour of Saffron, which gouriſh andſhewe 


them- 


: bs. 
” 


| HISTORIE OF PLANTS. |. 1343 
- themſelues onely inthe nightrime,and inthe daytime looke withered and with a mourning cheere: 
che leaues alſoar that timeſhrinke-in themſclues rogither, much like atender plant thar is troſt bir- 
ten, very {adly lumping, lowring, and hanging downe the head, as though irlochedthe light, 
and could not abide the heate of the funne, 1ſhould but in vaine loſeJabour in repeating/a fooliſh 
| fanficof the Poerical) Indians, who woulde make fooles beleeue , that this tree was once a faire 


| daughterofa great Lord arKing, andthatthe funne was in loue with hirz with other tojes which 
I omit. | ; | | 
The Sortowfull cre. ©, | The place tine and names, 


This tree groweth in the Eaſt Indies, efpecial- 

ly in Goazand Malayo: in Goa it is called Par#- 

 ataco: inMalayo Sing:di: in Decan Pal: of the 

Arabians Guart : and of the Perſians and Turkes 

G{: in Englith the Sad or Sorrowfull tree, or 

' the Indian Mourner, The time is ſpecified inthe 
deſcription, | 


* The temperature ard wvertues. 


We haveno certaine knowledge of rhe tem- A 
perature heereof, neuerthelefle wereade thar the 
Indians do colour their brothes and meates with 
the flowers heereof inſteede of Saffron, or any 
other thing whartſ2euer that they defire to haue 
ofa yellow colour, s 

It is reported, thatifa linnen cloth be ſteeped B 
in the diſt:lled water of the flowers ; and the cics 
bathed and waſhed therewith, helperh the itch- 
ing and paine thereof, and ſtaieth the humours 
that faltcowne tothe fame. p- 

There is made! of the ſplinters of the woode C 
certaine tooth pickes, and many pretie toics for 
pleaſure, ' 


| Of the Balſame tree.” Chap.139. 


* The kindes. : 


ere be diuers ſorts of trees from which doth flowe Balſame , very different one from an 
other,not onely in forme, but alſoin fruire, liquor, and place of growing; the which to diſtin- 
guiſh would require mare time and trauell, then cither ur {mall ciqze will affoord, or riches for our 
maintenance to.diſcoyer the ſame in their naturall countries : which otherwiſe by report to ſer 
downe certaine matter by incertainties, woulde dilcredire the author, and no profite ſhall ariſe 
thereby to the Reader : notwithſtanding we will fer downe ſomuch as wehauc found in the workes 
of ſome trauellers, which beſt agree withthe truth of rift hiſtorie, | | 


| 1 Balſam 


1344 THE THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 


T Ballomi fruit us. + 2 Xylobalſammn. 


The frurt of the Balfametree., 7 _ | The woodoftthe Balſame tree, 


* 14 1}  #Thoaforition, | 
I Here be diuers trees growing in the In lies, whoſe fruits are called by the nameof the fruit 
' ofthe Balſame tree: amongthe reſt this whoſe figure we haue ſet foorth vnto your viewe, 

we our ſelues haue ſeene & handled; and therforethe berter able ro deſcribe it. It is a fruite 


ar z two inches long halfe an inch thicke ; co- 


very crooked, and hollowed like the palme of a | 
ueredwith a thicke {ſmooth rinde, ofthe colour bf a dry Oken leafe z wherein is conteined a kernell 


(ofthe ſame length and thicknes apt to fill the faid ſhell or rinde) of the ſubſtarice of an Almond z 
of the colour of aſhes ; fat,and oilie z of a good ſmell, and very vnpleafant in taſte. 

2 Thewood we hauz dry brought vnto vs from the Indies for our vic in Phificke (a ſwall deſcrip- 
tion may ſerue for a dryſticke) neuertheleſle wethaue other fruits brought from the Indies, whoſe 
figures are nor ſetfoorch, by reaſon they are not ſo well knowne as defired; whereof one is of the 
bignes ofa Walnut, ſomewhat broade on the vpper ſide , witharoughor rugged ſhell , vneuen, 
blacke of colout,andfull of a white kernel! , with much iuice{in itzof apleaſznt raſte and ſmell , like 
the oile of Mace: the whole fruite is exceeding light , inteſpe of the quantitie or bignes, cucn as 
itwere apeeccof Corkez which notwithſtanding ſinketh to the bottome when it falleth intothe 
warter,like as doth a ſtone, | | Ss DN tg 
3 This rreefaith Gartzas that beateth the fruit Car pobelſamwn, is alſo one of the Balfame rrees: it 
groweth rothe height and bignes of the Ponjegranate tree, garniſhed with very many branches: 
whereon doe growe leaues like thoſe of Rewe , butofcolþur whiter, alwaies growing greene: 
among which come foorth flowers, whereof «ve have no certainrie : after which commeth frue 
like that of the Turpentinetree, which in ſhops is called Carpeba/ſamion, of a pleaſant ſmell ; bur 
the liquor which floweth from the woundedtree,is much fweerer : which liquor of ſomcis called 


Opobal/amum. | [41 
+. | 3 Carpobalſamus 


7 


ſl 
| 
4 
, 
j 
- j 
f 
+ 


; 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1345 


3 Carpobalſamn. | 0G” EP | 
The fruite of one ofthe Balſame trees. * Thedeſcription. 


Oftheſe- Balſame trees thereis yer another ſorr: 


| the fruite whereof is as it were a kernell without a 
| 0 ( Q 0 | Q ſhell, couered with a thin $skin ſtraked with manic 


vaines, of a browne colour: the meare is firme and 


y- 


| = ſolide, like the kernellof the Indian Nut, of a white 
JF Þ colour, and wicthour ſmell , bur of a gratefull raſte; 

| | andis thought to be hotin the firſt degree,or inthe 
0 9 0 _ ted bicauſe of rediouſnes : neuertheleſſeT will trou- 
| ble you with two eſpecial trees woorthy the noring: 


beginning of the ſecond. 
(# 0 (0 There is faith my author in America a great tree, of -- 


ere be diuers ſorts more which mightbe omit- 
monſtrous hugenes, beſet with leaues and boughes 
Caorke ; and another. thinne next rothetree: from - 
berweene which barks doth flowe (the vpper barke_ 
| being wounded) a white Balfame like vnto teares 
$1 or drops, of a moſt ſweet ſauour,& ſingular offe&s, 

1 for one drop of this which thus diſtilleth out of the 

rice, is woorth apqund of that whichis made by 

_ decoQtion: the fruite heereof is ſmall in reſpc& of 

theothers;it ſeldome exceedeth the bignes of. a Peaſe, ofa birrer taſte zincloſed in a narrow husk, 
ot the length of a finger, ſomthing hin, and of a white colour; which the Indians do vie againſt 

headach: which fruite of moſt, is that we haue before deſcribed, called Carbobatſammm. 

Ir is alſo written, thatin the Iland called Hjſanio/a; there growetha ſmall tree, of the height of 
etwo men, without the induſtry of man, hauing ſtalkes or ſtems of the colour of aſhes ; whereon do 
grow greene leaues,ſharpear both endes,burt more greene on the vpyer fide then on the lower; ha- 
ving a middle rib ſormwhat thicke and ſtanding out ; the footeſtalkes whereon they grow are ſome- 
whatreddith : among which leaues commerh truite growing by cluſters , as longas a mans hande 
fingers andall: the ſtones or graines in the truite be fewe , and greene; bur growing] to redneſl; 
more andmore, as the fruite waxeth ripe. From the which is gathered a juice;atter this maner : they 
cake the yoong ſhootes and buds of therree, and alſo the cluſters ofthe fruire, whichthey bruie, 
and boile in water tothe chickneſle of honie, which being ftraincd , they keepe it tor theit 
vies. | --- | | i 

They vſe it againſt wounds and vicers; it ſtoppeth & ſtancheth the blood; maketh them cleane 
bringeth vp the fleſh, and healeth chem mightily, and with berrer ſucceſle chen true Balfame. The 
branches of the tree being cut , doth caſt toorth by drops acertaine cleare water, more woorth 
then uHqua wite, moſt holſome againit woundes, and all other diſcales proceeding from colde 
cauſes tit be drunken fome fewe daics togirher, | | 

| % The place. | | 

Theſe trees grow in divers parts of the world, ſome in Egypt,and moſt of thoſe countries adia- 
cent: there groweth of them inthe caſt and weſt Indies ; as trauellers into thoſe parts tepore, 

| * The time. | 

Theſe trees for the moſt part keepe greene winterand ſommer. | — 

| *% The names. | | 

Balſame is called in Greeke Be>awr :in Latine alſo Be/ſamum: of the Arabians Balſen;, Þa/eſma, 
and Be//an:in Italian Balſam: in French Bawne. oy 

The licuor that flowerh out of the tree when it is wounded, is called Op.ba//amum ; the woode 
Tiobalſamum : the fruite Carpobalſamum : and the liquor which naturally floweth trom the tree in 


Ee” | euento the ground; rhe trunke whereof is couered 
| & "1 6: with a twotolde barke, the one thicke like vnto 


Egypt Ba//ammas. 


% The 


1346 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

& + Thetemperature., | | | 

Ballame is hot anddry in the ſecond degree. with aſtriction; | 
{Fiikas | % The wertues. | |} |: 

A Natural! Balfame taken in a morning faſting with alittle Roſe water or wine,tothe quantitie of 
{re or ſixe drops; heipeth thole that bg althmarikezor ſhort of winde:it prevaileth againſt the Pains 
ofthe bladder,and tomack,and carforterh theſame mightily; & alſo amenderh a ſtinking breth, 
and taketh away the (haking fits of the quoridian ague,jf it be raken'twoor three times, L 

/ I belpeth conſunprons,clenſerh che barren wbmbe. eſpecially being annointed vpon apeſlary, 
or mother ſuppoſitorie,and vied. || * |} bet 14 | 

© Theſtomacke beingannointed therwith,digeſtion is helped|thereby ; italſo preſerueth the ſto. 
macke from obſtruftions and windinefle zit helperh the hardnes ofthe ſpleene; eaſeth the griefes 
© the raines and belly,procceding of cold cautes F11 | | 


D fltalfotaketh awayallmanesr de cooreetit g of colde cauſes,if they be annointed therwith; 


Y 


[4 


bur more ſpeedily, if alinnen cloth bewer ow i laide thereon:vſed in the ſame maner, it diſ- 
{olueth hard rumours,called ademata and ftrengrthneth the weake members. 
E Thefameretreſheth the braine,and comforterh the parts adioining z it helpeth the palſie, con- 
uul{ſions,andall griefes of the fincwes;it they be atnointed therewith, 
F Themaruellous effects that it worketh in newgand greene wounds, were heere tolong to ſer 
downe, and alſo ſuperfiuonsz confidering the gkilfull Chirurgion whom it moſt concerneth, 
1doth know the vſe therof; and as for the beggerlyQuackſaluers, Runnagates,and knauiſh Mounti- 
banks, we are notwilling to inſtruct in things {q tarre adouetheir reach,capacitic and worthineſle, 


Of akinde of Balme,or Balſame tree. Chap.14.0. 


Mele, fine Molly Cluſit gf L'Obely.. 


z 


The Balſame tree of Cluſre, and L Obelity deſcription. | | *Thedeſcription. 


; FT His tree which the people of the Indies do 
call Me{;, growerh tothe bignes ofa grear 
| tree; hauing a trunke or body of a darke 
; greenecolour, ſprinkled ouer with many ath co. 
Jouredſpots: the branches are many, and of very 
; great beauty 3 whereupon do grow leaues not vn. 
; {like to thoſgof the Aſh tree, conliſting of many 
| {ſmall leaues, ſer ypon a middlerib z growing nar- 
; |rower euer towards the point , every parrticulac 
; {one 1agged on the ſides like the —_ of a ſawez 
| {which bing played from the ſtemme, yeeldeth 
; {foortha milkie ivice,tough and ———— 
; [like the bruſed leaues of Fenell, and as itfeeme 
| {intaſteſomwhat aſtringent: the flowers grow in 
cluſters vpon the twiggie branches , like thoſe of 
the Vine tree- a. little before the grapes be for- 
| | med: afterfolloweth the fruite or berries, ſome- 
| | whatgreaterthen Pepper cornes, of an ollie ſub- 
' ſtance; greene at the Eſt, and of a darke reddiſh 
| colour wheh they beripe. 
HELEST | | | * Theplace. 
1 This tree faith a learned Phiſition called 7h. 
Fr agoſus, doth grow in the king of Spaine his gar- 
den, at Madryll, which was the firſt that cuer he 
| | didſee:fince which time, John Ferdinando Secre- 
| | tarie vntothe forcſaide king , didſhewe ___ 


| 
| 
| 
[ 
| 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1347 


ſaid Fregeſwms, in his owne garden a tree ſolarge, andof ſuch beaurie, thathe was nener ſatisfied 
 withlooking on it, and meditating vpon the vertues thereof, VVhich wordes I have receiued from 


the handes of a famous learned man, Called M. Lancelot Erowne , Door in Phificke,and Phiſicion 
vnto. the Queenes Maieſtic,at the impreſſion heerof;faithfully tranſlared our of the Spaniſh toong, 
without adding or taking any thing away, | 4 


They grow plentifully in the vales and low grounds of Peru, as all affirme thathane trauelled co 


the welt Indieszas alfothole that haue deſcribed the ſingularities therof:My ſelte with diuers others, 


as namely Maſter Nicholas Lete, aworſhipfull marchanc of the citic of London; and allo a moſt - 
«kilfull Apothecarie, Maſter James Garret, who haue receiued ſeedes thereof from the right Ho- 
norable the Lord of Hunſdon, Lord high Chamberlaine of England, woorthie of triple Honor 
for his care in getting, as alſo for hiscurious keeping rare and ſtrange things'brought from the 
fartheſt parts of the world ; which ſcedes we haue ſowen in our gardens, where they haue broughe 
foortl1 plants of a foote highz and alſo their beautifull leaues : notwithſtanding our cate, diligence, 
and induſtry they haue periſhed at the firſt approch of winter, as not being able by reaſon of their 
rendernes to indure the colde of our winter blaſts. KS 1. | | 
| * The time, | | 

As touching the time of his louriſhing,and bringing his fruite tomaturitie , we hate as yet no 

certaine knowledge, but is thought to be greene borh winter and ſommer. | 
| + The names, | 


This moſt notable tree is called by the Indian name Molle,of ome Molly, and Mucllejraken from 


| hisrender ſoftnes,as ſome haue deemed: it may be calledthe Fennell treeor one of the Balme, or 


Balſame trees. | 
%-T he temperathre. 


This tree is thought tobe of an aſtringent or binding qualitie ; whereby it appeeres beſides the 
hot temperature it hath,to be compounded of other diuers faculties. 


* Thewertues. | | 

The Indians vſe to ſeeth the fruite or berries heereof in water, and by a ſpeciall skill they haue in a 
the boiling,do make a moſt holſome wine or drinke.as alſoa kinde of vineger, and ſometimes ho- 
nic; which are very ſtrange efte&s, theſe three things being ſo contrary in taſte. 

The leaues boiled,and the decoction drunke,helperh chem of any diſeafe proceeding ofa colde g 
cauſe. | 

The gum which iſſueth from the tree , being white like vnto Manna, diflolued in milke, taketh C 
away the web of the cies,and cleereth the fight,being wiped over with ir. 

The barke of this tree boiled,and the legs that be ſwollen and full of paine, bathed and waſhed D 
with the decoction diuers times,taketh away both infirmities in ſhort ſpace. | 

This tree is of fuch eſtimation among the Indians, thatthey worthip it asa god , according ro E 
their ſauage rites and ceremonies:much like as P/:zy reporteth of Hemers Moty,the moſt renowmed 
of allplants, which they hadin old time in ſuch eſtimation and reuerence , that as it is recorded, 
the gods gaue itthename of Moy, and fo writeth Ouid, | . 


Pacifer huit dedeyat florem Cyllenius albums, 
Aoby vorant Swperi, nigra radice renetur. 


* Cyllenize bearing Peace, vpon this tree | _* Mereurie the 
Gaue and beſtowda flowre or blofſome white: herald and orator, 
* Moly the gods would hane itnamed bee, © *Mohylingularagainſt 
I'rs held to haue a roote tha'ts blacke in ſight, | | ww... 


If any be deſirous to ſee more heereof they may reade a learned diſcourſe of it ſer foorth in the 


| Latinetoong,by the learned U Obe/zaes, who hathat large written the hiſtorie thereof, dedicated to 


the Right Honorable,the Lord Chamberlaine,at the Impreſſion heerof; faithfully ouerſeene and 
examined by the lcarned Phiſition before remembred, Maſter Door Browwe,and his cenſure vp- 


on the ſame, 
of 


: 
z 


13438 THE: THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 


mags Of the Canell,or Cinnamom tree. Chap.141. 


Canelle folium,e Batillu, buds i 


— C _ 


- The keafe anderuuke of the Cinnamom tree, | | | The deſeription. 


| "T" Hetree which hath the Cinnamon for his 

barkejis ofthe ſtature ofan Oliue tree: ha. 

wng a body as thicke as a wans thigh, 
fromwhich the Cinnamon is taken; bur that ta« 
ken from| the ſmaller branches is much bexter : 
which branches'or boughes are many,and yerie 
ſtraight; whereon Co-grow beaurifull leaues, in 
| | ſhate-like thoſe of the Orenge tree, and of the 
;- | colour of the Baxc lcafe,, (nor as it hath beene 
| reported) like vijto the leaues of flags or flower. 
Deluce: amongthele pleaſantleaues and bran- 
ches :come toorth many faite white flowers, 
which'rune into roundand blacke fruite or ber. 
Ties,of the bigzesof an Hateil Nur, or the Olue'- | 
beriie, and of ablacke colour z ourof which is 
-prefled 'an vile, that hath no fincll ar all vill 
+. rberubhed and chafed berweenethe handes: 
; | tbe trunke or body: with the greater armies or 
' { boughes of the tree, are covered with a double 
' | or two tolde barke,like that of Seber,the Curke 
tree: the/innermott whereof is thetrue & plea- 
ſant Cinngpygs 1 wluch is taken from the rice, 
| | and caſt yon the grounde inthe hcate of the 
| | ſunnezchroughhe heate thereof it turnerhand 
{ + folderh ir (eltc rounde togither, as we daily fee 
| | by viewingithed 0g it (elle; this tree being thus 
; | peeled, recoucteth a newe barke inthe ſpace of 
; | three yceres, aud 15 thenready to be disbarked 
: | as afore. That Cinnan:om which is of apale 
PE EF---4 ; | colour, hathn-x becne well dried in the ſunne: 
that ofa faire brownecolour is beſt; and that which is blackaſh, hach been too much diicd, andalts 
hath taken ſome wetin the time of drying. |! | ba 


+ > I 


* 
* > 34% « » 
- , pl = * 


a 109% ery vg —4 $5247 
TEC” 
= FR." > 
FP Go 
EST” 9 -*. d 
2 $- »%- 44644 4 "+ 299 - 


» o 
MO ect > MEG > i NEG 
o & VW% 
4 "a. _— » dd + 


= Yogi ur | 
MN au IF 
NY 


. 
” oy 
er, 
F"'# 
* 


+ + Z u "CA ” bh - 3 _ ., 
FX”. ”, 4 £7 4 og. > 
A po / ” x 2 
/ x A 4 : A * v4, * "4, »% py 
2 


"; 4 (1 % 
- 7 


| * The place. | 

The chiefeſt places where the trees do growe that beare Cinnamom, are Zeilan, and Malauar: 
bur thoſe of Zeilan are the belt : they grow in other of the Moluceaes Liands, as Iaoa , or Iaua, the 
greater and the lefle, and alſoin Mindanoa, for the moſt part ypon mountaines. 

| —_— *% Thetime. | | | 
The Cinnawom tree groweth greene winterahd ſommer,as do all the other trees of the Moluc- 
caes,and Eaſt Indies for the mc! part :the boughes whereof are cur off arſeaſonable times, by the 
exprefle commangement af the k ng of the couptrie zandnor before he haue appointed the rime. 

1 here hatli beene tome controve; fie among writers concetning the tree, whoſe barke is Caſ/s, 
and thattree that beareth Cinnamon, making them both one tree 3, bur that opinion is not tobe 
reccived :for there is as grea. difference berweenethem as there is betwixr an Oke, and a Cheſtnut 
rrec; for the tree whoſe barke 15 Caſa,is doubrleſſe a baſtard kinde of Caxel,,or Cinnamom: in ſhew 
it is vetylike, bur in ſivectenes 0! uncll and other circumſtances belonging to Cinnamon, farrein- 
ferior, [ "1 1} 7 + 
| | + Theaaven: | | 
Cinnamom is called in Italian Canet ; in Spanith Cano/a: in French Canele : inhigh cons. 


* -3 - 
Ee 
$ 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1349 
| zimimet coe3lin; the Grecians »«uwr: the Latines likewiſe Cimnamonuyy : the Arabians Day« 
ll ſen, and as ſome fay Querfas, others Querfe : in Zeilan Cutrde : intheTland Tana theyname itg a- 
' meas: in Ormus Darchins, ideft, lignum Chinenſe,the wood of China : in Malauar Cais marns, which: 


: 
' * 


in their toong fignifieth Dulce [ignum Sweete wood: in Engliſh Cinnamome,Cinnamon,and Ca- 
nell: it is called of ſome Cafzz,and Caſialtgnea,but vnproperly., = | "Tp, 
' w* Thetemperature and vertnes. | : | 

Dioſcorides writerh that Cinnamom hath power to warme,and is of thinne partes:itis alſo drie A 
and aſtringenr, it prouoketh vrine,cleereth the cies,and makerh {weere breath. | 

The decoction bringeth downe the menſes, preuaileth againſt the birings of venemous beaſtes, B 
the inflammarion of the inteſtines and raines, Hy = | 

Thediſtilled water hereof is profitable ro many, and for divers infirmities, it comforteth the C 
weake,colde,and feeble ſtomacke, eaſerh the paines and frettings of the guts and intrailes procee- 
ding of cold cauſes,ir amenderh the euill colour of the face,maketh ſiveere breth,and giuech a moſt 
pleaſant raſte vnto diuers ſortes of meates, and maketh the ſame nor onely more pleataur, bur alſo 
more holeſome for any bodies of what conſtitution ſocuer they be, norwithſtanding rhe binding 

ualitie, | WD | | | 
The oyle drawne chimically preuaileth againſt the paines of the breaſt, comforterh the ſtomack, D 


| breaketh windinefle, cauſeth good digeſtion, and being mixed with ſome honie, taketh away ſpors 


1 
b 


from the face,being annointed therewith, | | | 

The diſtilled water of the flowers of the tree, as Garce45 the Luſitanian Phiſirion writeth, excel- E 
leth far in ſweetnefle all other waters wharlſocuer, which is profitable for ſuch things as the batke 
it ſelfe is. | | | 

Out of the berries of this tree is drawen by expreſſion, as out of the berries of the Oliue tree, a F 
certaine oyle,or rather a kinde of fat hike butter, without any ſmell ar all, exceptirbe made warme, 
| andthenit ſmelleth as the Cinnamom doth, and is much vicd againſt the 5 Foe of the finewes, 
| allpainesof theioints,and alfo the paines and diſtemperature of the ſtomacke and breaſt. 

Towrite as the woorthinefle of the ſubie requireth, would aske more time than we haue to be. G 
ſtowe vpon any one plant; therefore theſe few ſhall ſuffice, knowing that the thing is of great vie 
ainong mayy,and knowen to oſt, CG ag” 


_ Of Gum Lackand his rotten tree. Chap.142. 


| * The deſcription. | 

He tree that bringeth foorth that excrementall ſubſtance, called Zaccs both in the ſhops of 
| Europeand elſewhere, is calledof the Arabians, Perfians and Tutkes Lee Surmutri, as who 

ſhould ſay Lacca of Sumurra : ſome which haue ſo termedir,haue thought that the firſt plentie 
thereof came from Sunutra,but herein they haue erred; for the abundanritore thereof came from 
Pegu,where the inhabitants thereof do call it Lac,and others of the ſame prouince Tres. The hiſto- 
rie of which tree,according to that famous Herbariſt Claw is as followerh: There is in the country 
of Peguand Malabar,a great tree, whcſe leaues are like themof the Plum tree, bauing many ſmall 
wiggie branches; when the trunke or body of the tree waxeth olde, jt rotreth in ſundrie places, 
wherein do breede certaine great ants or Pifmires, which continually worke and labour in the rime 
ot harueſt and ſonumer againit the penurie of wintec : ſuch is the diligence of thefe Ants, or ſuch is 
the nature of the tree wherein they harbour, or both, that they provide for their winter foode, a 
lumpeor maſſe of ſubſtance, which is ofa crimſon colour, ſo beautifull and fo faire, as in the whole 
world the like cannot be ſeene, which ſerueth nor onely tophiſicall vſes, buris a perfe&tand coſtly 
colour for Painters, called by vs Indian Lack. The Piſiires(as I aid) worke out this colout,by fuc- 
king the ſubſtance or matter of Lacca from the tree, as Bees do make honie and waxe, by ſucking 
the matterthereof from allherbes, trees, and flowers, and the inhabitants of that countrie, do as 
diligently ſearch for this Lacca, as we in England and other countries, ſeeke inthe woods for ho- 
nie; which Lacca after they. haue found, they take from the tree, and dric it into a lumpe z among 
which ſometimes there come ouer ſome ſticks and peeces of the tree with the wings of the Ants, 


- 


which haue fallen amongſt it,as we daily lee, 


Sſiſr Laces 


1356 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 


Laces cum ſuis becithis & 
Gum Lack with his Raffe, or ſticke, 


The tree which beareth Lacca groweth in 
Zeilan and Malauar,and in other partes of the 
| * Thetamne. 

Of the time we haue no certaine knowledge. 
| ___ * Thenames. 

Indian Lack is called in ſhops Laces : in 
Jralian Lachetta : CAwicen calleth it Lach : 
Paulus and Dioſeorides Cancamwn : the other 
names are <xpreſlcd in the deſcription, 

* The temperature and vertucs. 

Lack or Lacca1s hot in the ſecond degree, 
it comforteth the hart and liver, openeth @b- 
ſtruſions, expelleth vrine, aud preuaileth a- 
gainſt the dropſic, 

There is an arrificiall Lack made of the 
ſcrapings of Brafill and Saffron, which is vid 
of Painters, andnotto be vicd in phiſicke as 
the other naturall Lacca, 


[ " 
"3 i 
x | 7 


* | 
q 


eafe. Chap 143. 


> 
1 
» 
A 
3 


* T he deſeription. 


Amalapatra, orthe Indian Leafe groweth 

vpon a great tree like to the Orenge tree, 

with like leaues alſo, but ſomewhat broa- 
der,a lictle ſharpe pointed, of a greene gliſtering 
colour, and three ſinall ribs running through 
each leafe,after the manner of Ribwoort,where- 
by it is cafie ro be knowen : it ſmelleth ſomwhar 
like vato Cloues, bur notſo ſtrong as Spikenard 
| or Mace(as ſome hauedeemed)nor yet of ſo ſub- 
' | | tileandquicke a ſentas Cinnamom, There was 

ſent or added vato this figure by Cortuſas a Cer- 
eaine fruit like ynto a ſmall Acorne, with this in- 
ſcription Frum Canelle, the ftuitof the Canell 
tree, which may be doubted of, conſidering the 
deſcription of the forenamed tree holden gene- 
rally of moſt to be perfe&. 


» s % 
% 


AO Q: 


A] 


A | 


77 
WEAYY 
LD IIS 
AY 


#47, FAA Fr CL 
4 ATTY: 
\ 
\.. 


— 
"SY 
25) 


VIFDD, 
SAL SISE. 
SISSY SM» 


lis; 0 
Vitae" 


NG 


( 


#& < = 
> - 
© 2% 
"WK 
þ- 2 
+$ LE 
= 


: 
ly 
$ 


{ 
{4 


painfull writers) bur is the leafe of a great tree, 
a branch whereof we haue ſer foorth vnto = 
view, which groweth in Arabia and Cambaya 
far fromthe water (ide. — 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1351 
; KEEN *% The time. | | 

Of the time we haue no certaine knowledge, bur is ſuppoſed tobe greene winter and ſommer. 

| *% The names. 7 

T amalapatra is called of the Indians in their mother toong, eſpecially the Arabians Cadce# 
Indi,or Ladegi Indi, that is, Folium Indicwn, or Indwm, the Indian leafe: but the Mauriranians do 
_ Tembul. The Latines and Grecians following ſome of the Atabians haue calledit 3als- 
bathrum. | 
| | | * The temperature and vertues. | 

. TheIndian leafe is horanddrie inthe ſeconde degree, agreeing with Nardus intemperature; A 
other report of Mace : it prouoketh vrine moſt mightily , warmeth and comforteth the ſto- 


| | macke, | 


Ic preuaileth againſt thepin and web in the eies,the inflammation and warerie cies, andall other B 
 imperfeions of the ſame. 

Ir is laide among clothes as well to keepe them from moths and ather vermine, as alſorogiue G 
' yntothemaſweete ſmell. . 


Of the Clone tree. Chap.14.4. j 


1 Ceryophylli ver; Cluch. | 2 cAntophylh. | 
The true forme of the Cloue tree, Fuſles,gr ouerripe Cloues, 


# + Thedefeription. | 
I He Cloue tree groweth greatin forme like vnco the Bay tree,the trunke or bodie whergf is 
{| coueredwith aruſfet bark : the branches are many,long, yery brittle, wherupon co grow 


leaues like thoſe of the Bay tree,but ſomewhat narrower ; arnong which come the flowers, 
5] | Sifſf 2 _ white 


7 
ia! 
I 


EY 
}: 


1352 THE JHIRD BOOKE OF THE 

white at the firſt aftcPaFfa greeniſh colour,waxing of a darke redcglourin theend ; which lowers 
are the yery Cloues wheypffhey are growen hardzafter whenrhey be driedin the ſunne,they become 
of that duſtic blacke cotolr hich we gaily ſee wherein they continue, 

2 Theother figure ſetteth foorth the frunwhehiris over ripe; for rhoſe that we haue in eſtima. 
tion, arc beatefi downe to the ground beforethey beripe, andare ſuffered theiero lie vpon the 
ground vntill they be dried throughly, where there isneither graſle, weedes, nor any other heres 
growing to hinder the ſame, by rcaſon the rreegdrawerh vnt91t felfe for his nouriſhment allthe 
moyſture of the carthof a great circuite round about, ſo that nothing can there growe for want of 
moyſturez and therefore the more conuentent for the drying of the Cloues, Contrariwiſe, thoſe 
erofle kinde of Cloues, which haue beene ſuppoſed to bethe male, arenothing elle than ſruite of 
the ſame rree, rarrying there vnrill it fall downe of it ſelfe vnto the ground, where by reaſon of his 
long lying,and meeting with ſome raine in the nicane ſeaſon, Ibſeth the quicke taſte rhat the others 
"eb which oftlic ancients are called Fu#zwheteof wehaue engliſhed chem Fuſſes. Some affirme, 
that the flowers: hereof ſurpaſle all other lowers in {weetnefle whenthey are greene, and hold the 
. opiniongrhat the hardened lowers arcmor the Clpucs themſelues (as wehaue written) but thinke 
them rather thefſcare or huske whereip the lowers do growetthe greater number hold the former 
opinion, And further,thatthetrees arencreaſed without labour,graffing,planting,or induſtrie,bur 
by the falling of che fruit, which beare fruir within cight yeeres afterthey be riſen vp, and fo conti- 


nue beating ior an hundred yeeres togither, as theinhabirants of that countrie do aftirme, 


[ 


St $ 
= | 
"7 

1 
1H | 
wn: | 


- 


3 Caryophyllas fhrens. Ss | 
| |. *7 he deſcription. 


The Cloue tree: flowring,! lf 
3 | The deſcyiption and true figure of the Cloue 
tree we hauc alreadie ſer foorch : this figure ſerterh 
foorth the tree! with his flowers in his perfection , 
thatis to ſay, whenthey are come to a greeniſh 
yeilow colour, Tneleaues hereof donor anfivere 
the truc figure, therefore are you nor to regarde 


them, | 


fi} 
> 


* WF; 
” o 
= a 
Ip 5 


| '{ *% Theprce. 
|| The Cloue tree groweth in ſome few places of 
the Moluccaes Ilands, as in Zeilan, Iaua the grea- 
tet and the lefſe and divers other places. 
Þ: | _»# Thetmne. 


[|| The Cloues are pmet fromthe 1 5.of Sep- 


tejnber vnto the endof Februacie, not with their 
hands, as we| gather Apples, Cherries, and ſuch 
like frut, bur by beating the tree, as Walnurs arc 
potten,as wehaue written inthe deſcription. 


©: CE |  *% The names. l 

| || The fruit hereof was vnknowen tothe ancient 
'Grecians : ofthe laters writers called rprigmer: in 
Licineallo Caryophylin and Claum: in French Cl 
deGyrofle: the! Mautitanians Charhurmfel : in Ita- 
han Carefano;in high Dutch Nacgets in Spaniſh 
\CRuo de efpecix): of the Indians Calafar: inthe Mo- 


Iutcaes Changye : of the Pandets Arwwfel, and 
\Charweſel: in\Eggliſh Clouetree,and Cloues, 

: } | | | Letempcrature. 

| 1 | |{Cloves arehot and dric in the thirde degree. 
Cloues ſtrengthen theſtomackegtheliuer and hatt,helpe digeſtion,and proucke vrine, 


4 
4 


2 
l 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1353 

. ThePortingale women that dwell in the Eaſt Indies, drawe from the Clones when they be yer B 
greene,a certaine liquor by diſtillation,ofa moſtfragranc ſmell,which comforteth the hart ;and of 
all cordials is themoſt effectuall, CD} | WEE 1 

Cloues ſtop the belly; rhe oile or water thereof dropped into the cies, doth ſharpen the fight, C 
cleanſerh away the cloud or webin the ſame... | | DES | 
The waighr of fower drams of the powder of Cloues taken in milke, procuteth the a& of gene- D 
ration. | | | 
_ There is extracted from the Cloues a certaine oy!e, orrather a thicke butter of a yellow colour, E 
which being chafedinthe hands ſmelleth like the Clones themſclues, wherewith the Indians do 
cure their wounds and other hurtes,as we do with'Balſame. | 

The vſe of Clouesnot onely in meate and medicine, but alſo in Fveetepowders and ſuch like,is F 
ſufficiently knowen,therefore this ſhall ſuffice, _ Ld 


x: 
Pp v — 


Of the Nutmeg tree. Chap. 145. 


1 Nux Ayriftics & Mact. | | w 2 Nux Muſeara. | 
The Nutmeg with his Mace. TREES: 0 | The Nurmeg rree. 


| | % Thedeſeription. | 
I Hetree that beareth the Nutmeg andthe Mace, informeis like vnto the Peach tree, fa. 
uingthat the leaues heereof are narrower, _ ſo Jong: _—_ gem a V = 
(fide, and vnderncath of a greene tending toyellowneſle: among which cCometoort the |» 
Nut and the Mace.as it were the flowers. The Nut appeereth firſt compaſſed about with the Mace, 
as it were in the middleof a fingle Roſe, which in proceſſe of time doth wrap andincloſe rhe Nut 


roundon cuery ſide: after cometh a husk like that of the Walnur,bur of an harder ſubſtance, which 
| | Siſ1'3 incloſeth 


1354 THE THIRD: BOOKE OF _ THE 


 incloſeththe Nut with his Mace, as the Walnuthuskedoths couer the Nut, whichintimeof ripe. 
neſle doth cleaue of it ſelfe, as che Walnut huske doth, and ſhewerh his Mace, which then isof a 
perfect crimſon colour, and maketh a muſt goodly ſhew, eſpecially when the tree is well Iaden with 
fruit: after the Nurbecommetch eric, the Mace likewiſe gapeth and forfakerh the Nur, euen asthe 
firſt haske or coucrrure, and leaueth idbare and naked as weall doknowe, at which time it getreth 
toit ſclfe a kinde of darke yellow colour, and boo! that braye crimſon die,vhich ic had ac thefirſt, * 
' w+Theplace, | 
The Nutneg tree FE HIP in the Infdies,in an Llandeſpecially called Banda, and inthe Ilauds of 
Molucca,though not ſo;good as the Prent thoſe that do growe in Zeilan, 
| & Thetime, | 
The fruit is gatheredin Septemberi va great abundance, allching being common in thoſe coun - 
rries, { 
| * Thinowes. | 
The Nutmeg rree is called of the Grecians' x94ver perm , The "Wl 00 Nax Moſchata,and N ux 
Myr iſtics :in Italian N oce Hoſeads : in Spaniſh N.wez de eſcetie : in French Nox Muſeade: in high 
Durch Boſchat Nufz ; of the Arabians Leuzbaze,or Gianztben :'the countric people where they 
growe Pall1.,The Maces Bunapalis: in Decan theNuris called Japatry, and the Maces Jazfol; of + 
wicen Janfiband TT Baxndenſis : the Maces lie calleth Befbaſe: in Engliſh Nutmeg, 
iv The remperature. | 
The Nutmeg, as «he Mprerang write, ts hoc and drie i inthe end degree, complete and 


Noun 1 . 
% 7 3 ORs 


A Nutmegs cauſe a faekee brech,and  EER thaſe that do ſtinke, if they be much chewed and hal. 
den in the mouth. 

B The Nutmeg is goodagainſt freckles in the fice, quickenerh the ſight, ſtrengrheneth the belly, 
andthe feeble luer; it taketh away theſvclling in the ſpleenefitaicrh the laske, breaketh winde,and 
is good againſt all cold diſeaſes in the body. 

C Noutmegs bruiſed and boyled in Aquavitz, [vhell it haue waſted and dried vp the moyſture, ad. 
ding thereto of Rhodomel(char is honieand the iutice ofRoſes) gently boyling them ro the forme of = 
afirupe and ſtrained,curerh all paines Mb of windie and colg cauſes, if three ſpoonefuls be 

 __ giuenfaſting forcerraine daies togither | IN 
D_ | Theſamebruiſed and boyled in ſtrong white wine vntill three ets be ſodden away , with the 

xootes of Motherwoortadded theretgin the boyling and this liquor drunke with ſome 
Sngar,cureth all gr ripings ofthe belly procceding of windinefſe, | 

E As rouching the choiſc there is notany ſo {iniple,but knowerh char the heauicſt farteſt, and ful- 

leſt _— is the beſt hich Poy caſil [be found out by pricking the ſame with apin, or ſuchlike, 


; 
þ 
{ 
f 


o the Pipe = ” 46. 


* 7 be kindes. | 


cer and oy than the r,and | plio a kin 


| * The der ption ; 
Heplanethar bearerh Pepper, whether we may call ita tree Oran herbie plant, it is diſputa- 
bp; fomc holding ir for a eee, ſome al de of Vine, and others for an herbe like vntothe 
Connolauli, or Bindweedes , whe we will not diſpute : but ycelding the cenfures 
ada choſe learned tharhave written thereof, ſaving thereſt that might be ſaid ro afurther confide- 


"The plant A a $a * the white ret vp like a Vine po 


Herebe donrs forts ofPe REY is to 6 white and lacke tper, long Pepper,one grea- 


cot wi n "En 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1355 


and brambles where it naturally groweth ; bur 1 Piper nigrum.albun & longun., 
where it is manured, it is ſowen at the bend of Blackewhite,and long Pepper. 
the tree Faufel & the Date trees, wheron it raketh TEEN IOOIEE IF 
hold and cluneth vp cuen tothe rop, as doth the WE DOB r BOD MENT” 


Vine, ramping and taking hold with his claſping 4 
rendrels of any other thing icmeeteth withall,. The fre 
leaues are few in number, in ſhape like thoſe of the 
Aſſyrian Apple tree,burleſler,ſharpe pointed,and 
of a freſh greene colour; in taſte ſomewhat horas 
are thefruirand alſo the leaues of Berre, Thefrut 
is cluſtered _ many ſet vpon along ſlender 
ſtem, like alictle bunch of Grapes, of an handfull 
ong,greene at the firſt, and blackiſh when they be ES 
' ripeanddiied. The roote is finall, andas itſbould . ora 
 ſeemethreddie, being as it is thought an annuall © 
plant, which muſt be ſowen yeerely, or come vp 
of it ſelfe by the falling ofthe truir. Some reporr it 
to have the roote of Coſtus, which is of a woodic 
ſubſtance, nothing according with reaſon, for the 
reaſons before alledged. 
The plant that bringeth white Pepper is notto 
be diſtinguiſhed from the other plant, bur onely 
by the colour of the fruite, no more rhana Vine 
that beareth blacke Grapes,from that which brin. 
eth white : and of ſomeit is thought,thatrhe ſelfe 
Ts plant doth ſometimes change it ſelfe from 
blacke to white ,as diuers other plants do. 


o 


2 Piper AEthiopitum ſiuc Vita lonte. 
Pepper of Acrhiopis. 


—_— EN 
b4 (WS \ 
, ®” 
4 AW [ » 
, + 
AYE 4 
” ” #4 
4 ” - : 
', " 27 
o 


 ** Thedeſeription. 
2 This other kinde of Pepper brought vnto vs 
from Acthiopia, called of the countrie where ir 
groweth Piper _Aethiopicum, in ſhops Amomun, 
 andalfo Zzga Ye. It groweth vpen a ſmaltreegin 
manner of an hedge buſh, whereupon growe 
long cods in bunches, a fingerlong, of a browne 
colour, vneuen, and bunched or puft yp in divers 
places, diuided into fine or {ixe lockers or cels, 
each whereof containeth a round ſcede ſomewhat 
long,leſſer than the ſeedes of Pxonie, intaſte like 
common Pepper or Cardamomwn, whoſe facultic ' 
and remperarture it isthought to haue, whereof we 
holditakinde, | 
Thetree that beareth long Pepper, hath no fi 
militude ar all with the plant that bringerh blacke 
and whire Pepper : ſome haue deemed them to 
* groweall on one tree, which js not conſonantro 
ch: for they growe in countries far diſtantone 
from another and alfo that countrie where there 
| is blacke Pepper, hathnor Argh hens os oak 
and therefore Galen following Dzoſeorides, were 
rogither both'ouerſcene in this poine; This tree, 
faith Monardes, is not great, yet of a woodieſub- 
ſtance, diſperſing here and there his claſping ren- 
'S1ff 4 7 "els, 


4; 
py 
Ln 


b; 


22 
3 
- 
”- 


1355 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 

drels, wherewithir taketh holde of 9ther trees, and ſachother things as do growe neerevnrgie. 

The branches are many and rwiggie, whereondoth grow;rhe fruire, conſiſting ofmany graines 

growing vpon a ſlender fooreſtaike, thruſt or compact clafe togither; greenearthe firlt, ang af. | 

refwarde blackiſh; in raſte ſharper and borter than commods blacke Pepper , yerfweerer, and of 
| | 


3 Piper Mathiolj, | Þ [| [+:5e/1] 
AMathiolas his figure of Pepper. | i wu Thedeſeription. 


| | : | 3 Mathiolu, hath ſer foorth a _ of Pepper, 
! | condemned of msſt robe faigned; neuerthelefle 
/-» | it agreeth| with 'the firſt deſcriprion in diuers 
$ | | pointszitdiffercthfrom the others in the cloſe and 
| | round bunches of fruit. l he which figure we have 
>. | likewiſe inſerted among the reſt, varill further 
57 | | certaintic may beknowen hereof. 
|| Thercigalſo 2notherkindeof Pepper ſeldome 
| | broughtintotheſepartesof Europe,called >;per 
2 | Canerinm': itis hollow within, light and emprie, 
#p | | bur good todrawe flegme from the head,tohelpe 
5B, 7 the toothach,andcholerike affeRs, 
+3. | Anotherkind of Pepper is ſomtimes brought, 
7 | whichthe:Spaniards docall Pimenta de rabo, that 
' | is, Peppetwith a'caile : itis like vato Cubebes, 
| | round,full ſomewhat rough,blacke of colour,and 
| | of a ſharpe quicketaſte, like the common Pep. 
| | per, ofa good ſmell: ir growerh by cluſters vpon 
| | ſmallſtemy or ſtalkes, which ſome haue vnadui- 
| | ſedlyraken for CAmomem, The king of Portin- 
| | gale forbad this kinde of Pepper to be brought 
7; | ouer, for fearc leaſt the right Pepper ſhould bee 
; | theleſlceeſfteemed,andſo himſelfe hinderedinthe 
| { | % Theplace. | 
| | Blackeand white Pepper growerh in the king. | 
| | domeof Malauar,andthat very good; in Malaca | 
| | alſo, butnÞtſo good; and alſo in the Hands Sunde 
; | and Cude;: there is grear ſtore growing in rhe 
: | kingdome of China, and ſome in Cananor, but 
$i" ; [| normuch;| - / 
Pepper of Acthiopia groweth in America, it all the trad of the countrie where Nara and Car- | 
thago are ſituated. The reſt hath beene thing in theirſeverall deſcriptions. The white Pepper | 
is not ſocommonas theblacke, and is vicd therc in ſtecde gffalt. | 
Theplant riſeth vp in the firſt of rhe ſpring zthe fruit is gathered in Auguſt, 


The Grecians, who had beſt knowledgeof Pepper, do call itminen the Latines Piper : the Ara- 


» 


bians Fulfel and Fuful : in Italian Pepe: in Spaniſh P iments : in French Paiare : (in high Dutch | 


: 


Pfeſiet: in Engliſh Pepper. | i I ® © 
That of Acthiopia is called Piper LActhiopigum, AmanumYitalongaand of ſome Cardamomum, 
whereof we holde it to be a kinde.. Ikeceiued, branch heereof arghe hands of a learned Phiſicion | 
of London,called M. Steeven Brednel,with his fruit alſo. || | 
| © : + Thetemperature. 


The Arabians and Perſian Phiſicions iudge,thar Pepperis bot in the third degr _ | 


Bur 


[/"N , 
” - 
4 a 
M 
Ws 
Ks 4 $. £ 
IJ a þ 
E 3 fi 
* 8 pk þ 
|" 


LY 3 
3 | 
Fj 
: 


E 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1355 
But che Indian Phiſitians which for the moſt part are Emperickes, hold that Pepper is colde, as "if 
+ | almoſtallotherſpice,which are hot indeed: the long Pepperis hor allo in the third degree, and as 4 
we hauc ſaide, is thought to be the beſt of all thekings, E5{rvet | 
| | *% The vertwes. T 
Diefeorides and others agreeing with him, aftirme, that Pepper reſiſterh poiſon, andis goodto A 
bepurin medicaments for the cies. | 
Ail Pepper healeth,prouoketh vrine,digeſterh drawerhdifperſeth, and clen{erh the dimneſſe of g: 
the ſight,as the ſame Dzoſcor/des noterh, OL ; Eg: 


Of bailard Pepper,called Betle,or Betre. Chap.14-7.. 


Betle,/eue Betre. += ; 
Baſtard Pepper. |, *K The deſeription. 


= |. | 
"THis plantclimeth andrarpperh ypon trees, : 
buſhes, or wharſocuer elſe it meeteth with- . 
all, like vntorhe Vine,or the blacke Pepper, 
whereof ſome holke it for a kinde, The leaves 
arc like thoſe of the Limon tree , but ſomewhar 
longer, of a duſtiecolour, with diners veines or 
ribs running through the fame. The fruite gro- 
weth among the leaues,very crookedly writhed, 
in ſhape liketheraile ofa Lyzard, of the taſte of 
Pepper, vet very pleaſant to the palate. 
* ws to F- 
_ Irgroweth amang the Dare trees,and ureex, 
in moſt of the Molucca llands , eſpecially in the 
marriſh grounds, | 
: * Thetime. 
The time anſwereth that of Pepper, © 
7 he names. © 
This hath beene taken for the Indian leafe, 

* butyor wy ofmoſt it is called Temba!, and 
Tambyl : in Malauar Zetre: in Decan Guzarate, 
and Cana”: itis called Pam in Molaio Siri, 

* Thewſe and temperature. 
The leaues chawed in the month are ofa bir- A 
ter taſte, eſpecially rhoſe that climbe vpon the 
tree Areca, or any other bjrrer tree from whence 
it taketh his birterneſle 3 otherwiſe it is very plea- 
ſant,, which the people do mixe-with the lime 
made of oyſter ſhels, whereunto they alſo adde 

| ſome Amber Greice, Lignum Ales, & ſuchlike, 

which they ſtampe regither;, making it'inro a 
paſte,which they role vp into round bals, keepe drie for their vſe, Slcarie the ſame in their mourhs 
vntill by lictle and little it is conſumed; as when, we carie ſugar Candiein ourmonthes,-or-the 
juice of Licorice ; which is not onely vnto the ſeely Indians micate , bur alſo drinkein their redious 
trauels , refreſhing their wearied ſpirits3 and helpeth memorie : which is eſteemed among the Em- 

,Pericke Phiſitions,to be hot and dricin the ſecond degree. Nth 2 c4tha ED oAkgT Heel? BRI 


Of 


2 | 
K $ 
2 8 * 3 
WS 4 6 + 


£ 
*' þ 
' 
43 þ 
= '3 
# 1 
8 +$% 
"| 

+ 

[4 
c = 


> 


| ; | 
258 THE THIRD BOOK 


OF THE 


? 


£ 
E] 


Of Graines, or Graines of Paradice. Chap.14.8. 
- OT TETINC TE 2 vibe 11 
Jn | | | 


"ee be diuers ſorts of Graines, ſome long, others Peare faſhion ; ſome greater; and others 
\ > leſter. | '$ i T 


The kindes,or ſorts of Graines, [| {| #FT he deſcription. 


He vppermoſt figure heereoffſerteth foorth 
_ vntoyour viewe the cod wherein the hor 
| ſpicelierlf, which we call Graines: in ſhops 
|  Grans Faradiſi : it groweth by the report of £ 
| learned vpon an hearbyplant, of theheight of 
| [onecubite, not vnlike in ſubſtance to the herbe 
| \that bearexh Ginger z whereupon doth growe a 
| great cod pr huske, in ſhape like a Fig when ic 
| \proweth vpon the tree,bur of colour ruſſer, thruſt 
| {full of ſmall ſeedes or graines, ofa darke reddiſh — 
| (colour, (as the figure ſheweth which is diuided ) 
| | eeding hor taſte, ; 


[| her forts may be diſtinguiſhed by the 
| [ſight of the Jr , conſidering the onely dit. 
| mri iſtechinfonne, and we haſten roan 
| jende. || -': 


1A > ee | 
\.| TheygrowinalltheEaſt Indies,fromtheport 
| of Calccute vnto Cananor; it groweth in Mala- 
| luar, in Ioa,anddiuers other places. 
| |! Thetime, . 
' | Theyſpringyp in Maic, being ſowen of ſeede, 
 andbring their fruite ro ripenes in September. 
| | &Thenames. | 
| | Grains arecalledin Greeke KAP 4 A'MQ MON: 
' in Latine Caydemomwn: the Arabians Corrumen;, 
| | lofdiuers Gentils Dore: of Auicen Saccola4 quebir, 
; | deft Magnum: the other Saccolas ceguer, id cit 
| [Minw:ivis called in Malauar Erremell;: in Zeilan 
| (Encal: inBengala,Guzarats, and Decan Hil, and 
Englith Graines, and Graines of Paradice, 
NT | |} %Thetemperature. 
Azicen writeth,that Saccolas Cardamomumn, of Grena Paradifi, are hot and dric in thethirde de- 
&* The wertaes. | 


A + The Graines chewedinthe mouth,drawcth orth from the head and ſtomacke', wateriſh and 
B It alſo comforteth and warmeththe weake, calde, and feeble ſtomacke, helperh the agewe,and 
riddeth the ſhaking firs, being drunke with ſome Spaniſh wine, called Secke. 


- Hen wack Lo 
Co ay ee one EET TT, CORR 


HISTORIE OF PLANT $i | 1959 


Of Nica or Fucca. Chap.14.9. \\ 


Tucs, fit Tucea Perana.. | | 
The roote wherof the bread Caſaua,or Cazaua is made. * Thede ſcription. 5 

; ; " 0 %h IVS 2 3 4 WK 4 

Heplantof whoſe root the Tndian bret# 
called Cazaua is made, is a lowe herbe, 
conſiſting onely of leaues and Togtes it 
hath neither ſtalke, flowers, nor truite, that I 
can proqarqn, of others , or by experience. 
from the plant it ſelfe , which hath growen in 
my garden fower yeers togither, and yer doth 
groweand pot zerexceccinglyzneuerthelefſe 
without ſtalke, fruite, or flowers, as aforeſaid. 
It hatha very greatroorte,thicke,and tiiberons, 
and very knobbie, full of iuice, fomwhar ſweer 
in taſte, but of a perniciousqualitie ( as faith 
my author) from which rooteriſeth vp imme- 
|  diately forth oftheground very many leaves, 
toined vnto the headof therootein a rounde 
circle , the which are long, of the length 6f a 
cubite, hollowed like a gutter, ortroughgvery 
ſmooth, and of a greene colour, like that of 
Woade: theedges of the leaves are ſharpe, 
like the cdge of a knife , and of a browne co- 
Jour the point of the leafe is a pricke,as ſharpe 
as aneedle, which hurteth thoſe that vnadui- 
ſedly pafle by it : the leafe with aduiſcd ei, 
- viewed, is like vnto a little VWherrie, or fuck 
like bote: they are alſo very tough, harde to 
breake, and noteafic tocut , cxceptthe knife 

be very ſharpe. 

* Theplace. [+ 

This plant growerh in all the tra of the 


| Indies, from CO _ ſtraights vnto the 


cape of Florida, and in moſt of the Nands of 

the Canibals, and others adioining , from 

| whence I had that plant brought mee that 

doth growe in my garden, by a ſeruant of a learned and Skilfull A>orhecarie of Exceſter, named 
Maſter Thomas Edwards. | ? 


* The time. 
Ir keepeth greene both winter and ſommer in my garden , notwithſtanding the iniutie of our 
colde climate, without any couerture at all, | h 
* The names. 


It is reported vnto me by trauellers, that the Indians do call it in ſome parts M:njbot, but gene- 
rally Tace,or Jucca; it is thought to be the plant called of Theophraitus Arachidna, and of Plinie 
CAracidna. | | He 
*% The temperature. 

This plant is hot and drie in the firſt degree, whichis ment by the feces or drofle, when the poi- 


ſonous iuice is preſſed or ſtrained foorrh , and is alſodric in the middle of the ſeconde degree, 


p—_ 


of 


fs 4 
[4 » 
4 


|| 


THE THIRD zOOKE OF THE 


Of he F rut of oceans wid Catons, Or 
Caiocus. his we. 


The Beineof Malaca, Thelaey8 Bean of Maas ' w%Thedeſeription, 


"Hear ancientwriters haue beene very briefe _ 
in the hiſtorie of Hnacardiwm:the Greci. 
ans mou touched it by the name of avay,. 
ſtor, taking the name from the likenes it hath 
; | ofa hart, both inſhapeand colour: called of 
| | the Portingals that inhabite the Eaſt Indies | 
' | Feuede Malaqua,thatis,the Beane of Malaca: 
| | for —__ greene,and as ithangeth onthe tree, 
| | irreſembletha Bane, _ chat it is much | 
| | biggerzbur when they be dry,they are of a ſhi. | 
| | ningblackiſhcolour, conteining berweenethe 
outward rinde and the kernell( which is like an 
almond) acertaine oile, of a ſharpe cauſticke 
or burning qualitie, called Ac! anacardinum, 
and very venemous.,although the kernel is vſed 
in meates and ſawces,as we do Oliucs ang ſuch | 
like to procure appetite. | 
The ather fruit groweth ypon atree, of the 
bignes of a Peare tree: the leaues are muchlike | 
to thoſe of the Orengetree, bur thicker and | 
farter, ofa faint greene colour: the flowers are | 
white conſiſting of many ſmall leaues , much 
like the flowers of the Cherrierzee, bur much © 
doubled ,' without ſmell: after commeth the 
fruite , in ſhape likCan Hares kidney, hauing | 
ewwo rindes, between which is conteined a moſt 
hot and i ſharpe vile, like that of Camacerdium, 
whereofitis a kinde. 
The Beane or kernell it ſelfe is noleſſeplea- 
ſant and holſome in eating then the Pjſtacie, of 
fiſticke Nur, whereof the Indians a0 cate with cm gry , affirming that icprouoketh venerie, | 
wherein is their chiefe felicitie. The fruire is conteined in long cods like thoſe of Beanes, burgrea- | 
ter : neere vnto which cods commeth foorth ancxcreſcencelike vnto an apple , very yellowe, of a 
"_ ſmell; ſpungious wirhin,and full of iuice; wirhoutany ſeedes, ſtones, orgraines at all,'ſome- 
QT ſweete in taſte; atthe one ende narrowed then the other, Peare faſhion,orlike a lictle borde, | 
which hath beenereputed of ſome forthe fruitp, but not nightly forit is rather an excreſcence, | 


as is the Oke Apple. 
* The place. 


Theſe haue beeneRdukle HWEN'S it { 3 of Cicilia, They growe alſoin moſt partsof the 
Eaſt Indies, eſpecially in Chiknes Calecure ;-ybaya.,and Decan, | 
he time . 
Theſe trees, gower, and fouriſh winter andſommer. 
*% The names. 

Thelrnames hue bbene uchedhn their deſeriptions. The firſt i is called _Anacardium, of the | 
likenes ithath with a hart: of the Arabians 3 y : ofthe Indians Bibo. | 

The {econdis called Caom5,and thus wricrers [Fea Pas,of ſome Caircws, 


A AA 4 
PF 2 ar 4h 
"8 SHETTY, 


F; 
; 


| 


1 Wa 1-2, her eg; aps 


2 


2 wa 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1361 
; 1 uh Thetemperature and vertues. | 
The oile of the fruite is hot and dry in the fourth degree,ir hath alfo a cauſticke or coroſiue quali- A 
ric zit taketh away warts, vreaketh apoſtumes z prenaileth againſt leprie, Alopecia , andeaſeth the 
paine of the recrh,being put into the hollownes thereof, | | 
The peopleof Malauar do vie the{aid oile mingled with chalke , to marke their clothes or anie B 
other thing they deſire to be coloured or marked, az we do vie chalke,oker,and red marking ſtones, 
but their colour will not be taken foorth againe,by any manerof Art whatſoever, | 
They alſo giue the kernell {ſteeped in whaie , to them that be aſthmaticke or ſhort winded, and C 
when the fruit is yet greene,they giuethe {ame fo ſtteped againſt thewoormes, | 
The Indians for their pleature will ſticke the {ruize vpon a thorne;, or ſome other ſharpe thing, D 
and holde it in the flame of a candie,or anyother flame,which there wil burne with ſuch crackings, 
lightnings , and withall yeelde fo many ſtrange colours, that itis great pleaſure to the beholders, 
which haue nor ſcene the like betore, | | | 


. Of Fndiane«Morrice Bels,and diners other Indian —* 
fruits. (hap.t52. | | 


1 Ahoy Theuets. 2 Frattas Higuero. 
Indian Morrice Bels, _ | IndianMoroſcoBels, 


ED” 1140 | Þ3 
AC mLe $1152 HLHALE | 1, FA 
aALHTt EST | {a * 

"f- 


o :, —» q 
| : ps ” YC, 
W Ty PF O08 vo 1 0 4194s 

ws, TT f 
ESSAY AT - 


FEEL 
: 
/ 
q 


= 
CA 27 rr PIPTILU j 


"01 $0164" 
, Wy; PTTL add HOW a5 


_ p 
\ A; 


- 
= 
p WJ 


A311; 


= 
7 
I at = on nr mn aero co vale cl 


% The deſeription. | 

I His fruit groweth vpon a great tree,of the bignes of a Pearetree;ful of branches, garniſhed 
\Þ min many leaues,which are alwaies log or fower fingers long,andin bredth two; 
when the branches be cut off, there ifſuerh a milkie juice, not inferior tothe fruite in his 
venemous qualitic, The trunke or body is coucred with a grayiſh batkez the tunber is white _ 
| tr, 


1362 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
ſofr,notfitto make fire of, much leſlie for any other vic; for being cut and put tothe fireto burne, ir 
yceld; forth ſuch a lothſome &hotrible ſtinke,that-neither mannor beaſtis able to endure it:wher. 
fore che Indians haue no vie thereof , bur onely'of the fruite , which inſhape is like the Grecke let 
tera, ofthe bignes of a TnyarenLe's omar with a moſt hard ſhell, wherein is conteined a ker. 
nell of a moſt venemous and poiſonſome qualitie,wherwith, the men being angry with their wiues, 
do poiſon them, and likewiſe rhe wormen theic husbands : they likewiſe vſe to dip or annoint and 
' enuenome their arrowestherewith,the more ſpetdilyro diſpatch their enimies. Which kernpllthey 
rake forth with ſome conuenient inſtrument, leaving the ſhe{las whole as may be,not touching the 
kernell with their hands,bicauſe of the venemous qualitic , which woulde ſpoile their handes, and 
ſometime take away their life alſo: in which ſhels,|thzy pur ſome little ſtones , and tic them vpon 
ſtrings,as you may perceiue by the figure,which they dry in che ſunne,and after tiethem abour their 
legs(as we do bels)to ſer foorth their dances, and/Moroſco Matachinaes, wherein they take great 
pleaſure, by reaſon they thinke therpſelues roexcell in thoſe kinde of dances; which ratling ſound 
doth much delight them, bicauſe ir ſetteth foorth the diſtinRion of ſounds, for they tune them, 
and mixe them with great ones, and little ones,in ſuch ſort,as we do chimes or bels, 
2 Thereisalſo Ho At fort heerof,differing onely in forme,they are of the like venemous quality, 
and vicd for the ſamepurvoſes. | EH GE ENT cl 3 


Theſe do growe in moſtparts of the Weſt Indies, eſpecially in ſome of the Ilands of the Cani- 
bals,who vie them in their dances,more then agy of the other Indians, 


| *Therme, 
Wehaue no certaine knowledge of the time pf flowring or bringing the fruite ro maturitie, 


[1 


| | %+ The names andwſe. 
We haue ſufficiently ſpoken ofthe names ang yſe heerof, therefore what hath beene ſaide may 
ſufyce. [4 | 


z 


> 

4 

i 

« } 
. : 


Of the vomiting and purging Nuts. (hap .153- 


I N aces vomice. | [ 2 Nucespurgantes. 
Vomiting Nuts. | | Purging Nuts, 


- 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1363 


SN * The defer iption. 


Vicen and Serapio make Nux vomice, and N.ux Methel, to be one, whereabout there. 

hath beene much cauilling yer the caſe isplaine,fthe textbe true, that the Thorne apple 

is N.sx Methel.Of the tree that beareth the fruire,thatis called in ſhops Nx womecs,and 
#x Methet,we hauec no certaine m_—_ : ſome are of opinion, that the truit is the roore of an 
herbe, and not the Nur ofa tree :andrheretore ſince the caſe among the learned reſteth doubtfull, | 
we leauethe reſt that might be ſaideroa further conſideration. The fruit is rounde,far, like alict!c 
cake,of a ruſſer ouerworne colour,fat and firme, in taſte fivecte,and bf ſuch an oilie ſubſtance, thac 
it is not poſſible ro ſtampe ir in a morter to powder; but when it isto be ved, it muſt begrated, or 
ſcrapedwith ſome inſtrument for thatpurpole, 1 Panty 
2 There be certaine Nuts brought from the Indies, called Purging Nuts, of theirqualitie in 
 purgin grofle, and filchic humours , for want of good inſtruction ne thoſe that haue tra- 

uelled the Indies, wecan writenothing of the ree/it ſelfe : the Nut js ſomewhatlong, ouallorin 
ſhapelike = egge,of a browne colour; within the ſhell is conteined a kerne!l,in taſte lweere,and of 
aculuic. 


apurging [ON 
F | $7beplaredudehine Wed nee 
Theſe Nuts do grow inthe deſarts of Arabia, and in ſome placesof the caſt Indies» we haue no 


. 


þ 
4 


\_ 


p | 
| . 


F 


# 


certaine knowledge of their ſpringing,or time ofmaturitie. 


4 The temperature. aus 
| Anicen aſfirmeth the Vomiting Nut to be of a poiſonous qualitiezcolde in the fourth degreeha- 
- uinga ſtupifying nature,and bringeth deadly ſleepe. "5 | | 


n * The vertues. | 
Ofthe Phiſicall vertues of the vomiting Nuts, we thinke itnot neceſlaric to write, bicauſe the A 
danger is great,and not to be giuen inwardly, but mixed with other | compoſitions , andthart veric 

_ curiouſly - the hands of a faithfull Apothecarie, | 

The powder ofthe Nut mixed with ſome fleſh, and caſt vnto Crowes & other raucnous foules, B 
doth kill,or ſo dull their fences at the leaſt,that you may take them with your hands. 

They make alſoan excellenc fallet , mixed with ſome meate or butrer , and laide in the garden C 
where cats vſe to ſcrape to burie their excrements, ſpoiling both the herbes and alſo ſeedes newe 


lowen, R 


Of diners ſorts of Fndian fruits. Chap.150. 


* The kindes. 


T Hefe fruits are of divers ſorts and kinds, whereof we hauclittle knowledge, more then the fruits 
themſclues,with the names of fome of them: therefore ir ſhall ſuffice ro ſer foorth vnto your - 
viewe the forme onely, leauing vnto time, and thoſe that ſhall ſucceede, to write of them at large, 
which in time may know that, thatin this time of in infancic is ynkgowne, 


Beretinus fruits. 


5 


He twolowermoſt of theſe 4. fruits called Beretinu fuZ7win theſe figures, are thoſe that 
ſome of the Indians dopaie vnto theirking for tribute, as we do money, 49" relation of Sir 
Frances Drake, who broughtthem into England, which in forme reſemble the Bezoar ſtone. 


: 


: 
» 


F THE 
in Sulfan 


Beret 


RV ARLURR ST PAVTER A 


* 
i 
» 
, 
8 


TITEL OL IT OE TOY FE ITT 


LEND TUPUBYLAE A HCA KATY I 1 L2e;” HANSEN BANC AG ARS IRE LS 13 HANG UNS EBERT TR OOF 


DI 


O 
mt 
P 
O 
© 
Q 

_ 


i 
! 
j 

Ly 


PROCEED VERITY HRC BET CIO EET CE OC Ci hr IS LES WEEN YELL 2 typ RE 


fruits, 


1am! 


THE THI 
VP 1.11 
{nila eh. 


1364 


& 


1 Coccs Orientales. | 2 Cucioplors, 
Scarlet Tufts of the Eaſt, Baſtard Indian Nuts, 


HISTORIE OF | PPANMS.8— 165 


Y/ 


Y 
it 
" 
” = 


PLL 
SOT 
, 
# ——5< - Ws 
, OI am ) , 5 BL 
+ FEE zz : mere # #: i , FO FO. þ 
- #7 >>. <8 * 4 #F 4 FF 
4 { 4##; = —_ 4 | 4 wo 
Q : " : ———_ if Y/ #1 £35477; 
67% 114 H | - WH, ESSTTV 
Ms 1 #7 " w_ 4 my + f; p 4 
F - © P, "we s/f 


wm 4 4 F "wv 1164 a 


E 
” 
$4 
bd TH a h 
p Fi - ", * £ 
# #s. i he © S » 
HW "© a x "®. 
5 FE w »s' 34+ '43 
/ " C BEET oO 
"s / ” » H HL P k. " 
0 : % : w 
i id j, Y bY; : b. 


UL, 
M7 


TTY, 
1, 
WHY, 

HH 


, i p A of 
ail”, [41 
; Fe, - VI110h 
% - 4 P, 1, 4 
/ f/ 
£3 2 UH 


// 
4 
v 
FE Td As 43” 1 A 
% WE LO UW PAM >.7 , 
wtf # 4 & GS > ee" s | 
YT. : : 


PI -- 
Af "od 


4J\ 


3 Fageras,Cubebe & Bunk. 0 
' Coculus Indic,Cubcbes,and Beanes of Tolu, | 


* 


& The te ſcription. 5 


1 Thereis brought from the Eaſt Indies 
acertaine Thfc that groweth vpon trees, 
euen as do the donble flowers of the wilde 
; Pomegranate called Ba{ay#ja, of 2 moſt 
faire Scarletcolour, Of the vic either for 
P_ or chirurgerie, we haueno certain 
nowledge.. | 
'chauereceiued from the Weſt In- 
dies 2 certaine fruit like vnto that Core, 
which we call Indian Nuts , whereof we 
haue writren, apart : it differeth from thoſe; 
eſpecially inthis point, rharthe husk heer- 
of hathnoriany hempe or taxe wherewith 
| tomake ſailes or other things, but is 2s ir 
were the hujske of a Walnut, inclofinga 
miſhapen nat : the kernell whereof is no- 
thing pleaſaht to be eaten, © 


Ny 


Tettn © 1:2-0f 


: 


' 
: 


THE. T RD hoors OF THE | 


Of Sun den Yubwarig 05 Sali. | Cp 


Fl 
þ RES | j | | \2 Ris Soliuminer... 
Great Sun deav. | 1 | BY | Little Sundeaw. 
| . It. | | 
[ ['Y || | 


Vndeaw is alittle herbe,and | wad hs lowe, ithath a few leaues ſtanding vpon ſlender 
ſtems, very ſmall,fomerhing pan like an eare picker,hairie and reddiſh 
. asbealſothe ſtems, hauing ' moyſture vpon them at the drieſt timeof the yeere, 


and when the ſunne ſhinerh hotre at highnoone; and amoneth after there ſpring vp little 
og 197 ,ahandbredth high, on which ſtand fanall whitiſh flowers : the rootes are very ſlender and 


age way kindeis like vnto the former inJeaus, talks and flowers How much po 
contyuyarhe cifeinace, | | | by 
* T be place. 


anongtke mh in deſarr, ſandic bob la ww bur yer VE. and ſeldome other where than 
white marriſh Moſſe whi cth onthe ground ang alſo ypon bogs. 


reth in Mayor Iune: itis tobe gathered when the wea- 
rheerof that js drawen foorth with a glaſle Still,is of 
,andcolourerh ſiluer pur theyeia, like golde. 
| ** Thenones. | 
| | Iriscalledofthe Latines Ros Sola: of diy Royella : irisnamed of others Sal Roſe, ofthe deaw 
which hangeth vponir, when the fi ar the hotteſt : it is calledin high Dutch Sonbawand | 
and Duſan! in low Dutch Lo Which in Engliſh Gignifieth Luſt woort, bicauſe ſheepe 
and other cattell, ifrheydo bur onely taſte of [2 are prouoked to Juſt, Itiscalled in Engliſh Sunne 


deaw,Ros Solis Youth woort : inthe North ſaces Red rot, bicauſe itrorteth Terps, and in Yorke- | 
ſhice Moore grafle, | | 


Þ+-1: : Thetemgerature, | 
Icis aſcaring or cauſticke herbe, nd very nuch _ being hor FP dric in the fourth degree. 


A Theleaues being tamped wich | be do cxukertar an raiſe bliſters.20 what per of rhebody ſoe- | 
uer they be Tres. | | i = hy 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1367 
The later Phiſitions haue thought this herbe robe a rareand ſingular remedie for all thoſe that A 
be in a conſiunption of the jungs, andeſpecially thediſtilled water thereof; "tor as thEAgibe dori 
keepe and hold faſt the moiſture and dew,ando falt, thatthe q_—_ drying heate of the {lun cail 
not conſume and waſte away the fame zo likewife men thought thatheecwith che naturall and 
lively heatc in mens bodies is preferued andcherithed, Bur the vie thereof doth;orherwaſe teach, . 
and reaſon ſhewerth the contraric: for ſecing itis an extreme biting herbeand that theeiſilled wit, 
er is not alrogither withour this biting qualinezit cannor be taken with ſaſerie: tor it hathialſo-boens, 
obſcrued, that they haue ſooner periſhed that vied the diſtilled water heereof, then thoſe that ab- . 
ſtained from it,and haue followed the right and ordinary courſe of digt.. Lb erts ff 43 bes 
. Cattle of the female kindle are ſtirred vp to luſt by eating cuen ofa ſmall quantitie: hich thing B 


[o 


: 


hath greatly increaſed their vaine opinion, withour ſence or reaſon zt9r it Goth not moone nor pro- 
uoke cattle ro luſt, for char it increaſeth the ſubitance of the ſeede, hn bicauſc thorow his ſharpe 
and biting qualitic it ſtirrerh vp a dcfire of luſt yhich before was dullgs, and as it were alleepe. 

It ſtrengthneth and nouriſherth the body, eſpecially it it be diſtilled with wine, and chathguor CG 
made thereof which the cominon people do call Roſa Solis. | 

If any be deſirous to have the ſaide drinke effeAuall for the purpoſes aforclaid, let them lay the D 
leaues of Rolafolis in the ſpirit oi wine, adcing chejeto Cinnamom,Cloves,Maces,Gitger,N ut- 

; megs,Sugar,and a fewe grains of Muske, ſuffering it ſo ro ſtand in a | ann clote ſtopr frot the aire, 

and ſetin the ſunne by theſſpace of ren daics more: then ſtraine the ſame,and keepe it for yuur vic, 


Of the Marriſh]hortes, or Fen berries. (jhap.156. 


V acciniapaluſtris. F | 
Marrith Vhor tes. | *% The deſcription, 


FT” He Marriſhi Whortle berries growe'vpon 
the bogs, rharriſh, ormooriſh groundes, 
creeping thereupon like viito wilde Time, 

hauing many ſmall limmer and tengler {takkes, 

laide almoſt flat : 341 thegrounde , beler with 


ſmall narrow leaues , faſhioned almolt like the 

leaves of Thym& but lefler, among which come 

foorth lirtle bexries, like vrito the common 

blacke Whortleberric in ſhape, but ſomewhar 

longer 3ſomerinfes all red; and {omriynes ſpots 

}/) . red orſpecked with red ſpots, of 4 deeper co- 
Jour; in taſte rough and aſtringent.| | 


: 


tf Theplace, | y 

The Marriſty Whortle groweth ypon bogs 
| and ſuch like wateriſh and Fennie places, e{pe- 
cially in Cheſhige, and Staſfordihire,, where I 
| have founditingreatplentie. - 

| wv T he time. PE 5 
\ The- berries are ripe about the endof lulie, 
; andin Auguſt, | 2 
% Thenames. | 
|  Theyarecalledin high Durch @Pol3bceren, . 
. Geenbeſicn : chat is to faie Fen grapes gor Fen 
| berries,and Marriſh Whortes , or Matriſh ber- 
Ties: Yalerims Cordianameth them Oxycocten - 
_ wehauecalled them Yaccinia paluſtria,or Mar- 
_ Tiſh Whortle herries , of the ikenes they haue 
 tothcothkerberries, | 
"> | +" "REEL % 7 he 


— 


1386 THE THIRD BOOKE oF THE | 


| + The temperature. | 

Theſe Whortle berries are coldeand dric,hayin withall a'certaine thinneſle of partes and ſub- 

ſtance,which hauc noryichſtanding acerraine binding qualitie oyged, 
* The vertues. | 

A Theytake away the heate of burni ing agues, andalſothe drought, they nid thefurious heate 

of choler, they ſtay vomiting, reſtore an appetite to meate, which was loſt by regſon of cholericke 

and corrupt humors.and are good againſt the peſtilent diſeaſes. | 
B Thiejuice of theſe alſo is boyled till it be thigke with ſugar addy thar it may be kept, whichis 

goodfor allthings thatthe berries arc yea andfas bereer.” © | 


Of Chad bee Chap.156.* 


FP accinia 7 wy [aj | 
Cloud wank | HL ce he WO « Thedorption 


He Cloud berrie hath: many ſmall thred. 

dic rootes ,creeping far abroad vnder the 

vpper cruſt of the carth, (andalſo the 
Moſſe)like vato Couch graffe, of an ouerworne 
reddiſh colour, ſet here and there with ſmall 
tufts of hairie ſtrings: from which riſe vp two 
ſmall ſtalkes , harde, rough, and of a woodic 
ſubſtance (neuer mo nor lefle) on which doe 
ſtande the leaves like thoſe of the wilde Mal- 
low,andof the ſame colour, full of ſmall nerues 
or finewes running in each part of the fame: * 
betweene> the leaues commeth foorth a ſtalke 
likewiſe of a woodie ſubſtance, wheredh doth 
growe a {mail flower conſiſting of fiue leaues, 
of an herbie or yellowiſh greene colour , 
like thoſe of ithe wilde Auens : after com- 
meth the fruit, greenear the firſt, after yellow, 
and the fides next the ſunne red when they be 
ripe; in forme almoſt like vnto a little hart,made 
; |! . as it wereoftwo, burtis no more but one; open 

aboue, and cloſed rogither i inthe botromegl ah arſh or (hatpe ns, whercinis contained the or 
) fower little white ſeedes. | | 


+1 he place. _ 

This plant erowell naturally vpoh the tops bf Co hight mounraines cnonglics moſhe places) 
one in Yorkſhire called Ingleborough, the 9ther in Lancaſhire called Pendle, two of the higheſt 
mouncaines in all England, where ic cloudesþre lower than the tops of the faine all winter long, 
whereupon the ons of the countric haue cþlled them Cloud berries, found there by a curious 
gentleman in the knowledge of p lants ,called] ir ter Heskerh often remembred, 

| * The tame. | 
The leaues ſpring wp in May,at _ time alſoir fowreth : thefruiti isripe in Ju, 
* The temperature. | 
The fruit is cold and dric and "0 aſtringent. | | | 
* The vertues. 
C Thefruit quencheth thirſt , cooleth the ſtgmacke , and alaiet inflammation being earen as 
Whartes Wager the decoGtion made anddrun L- | 


; 


F + 4 LD 


' HISTORIE' OF PLANTS. 


Works Of <Mſoſe of trees. Chap.156. 


"PT Here be diuers kindes of Mofles, and thoſe Gciag orthe moſt part in their native places3 
lune groweand are faſtenedto trees, others ſpring from the ſuperficial or vppermoſt partof 
thecartb., there be othersalſothat growe in theſea,, 0, © |, | 


b 


The Mole of the Oke and of other trees. + . *% The deſcription. © 
$8 Ree Moſle hath certaine things like haires, 
_ | madevpas itwereof a multitnde of {lender 
leaues,now ang then all tobe iagged, hackr, 
and finely carued, twiſted and interlaced one in 
another, whichcleaue faſt ro the barks of trees, 
hanging downe from the bodies : one of this kind 
is moreſlender andfhin, another morethicke, an 
other ſhorter,anorherlonger zall of them for the 
moſt being of a whitiſh colour, yer. oftentimes 
thereis a certaine one alſo which is blacke, bur 
lefſer and r}:inner [7 moſt commendable of 
them all, as Plinje faith,bethoſe that are whitiſh, 
chen the reddiſh,andlaſtly ſuch as be blacke, 
* Theplace. 


i 


This Mofle is found on the Oke tree, the white 
and blacke Povlartree, the Oliue tree, the Birch 
tree, the Apple tree,the Peare tree,the Pine tree, 
the wilde Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the Firre tree, 
the Cedazree, the Larch tree,and ona great ſorr 
of other trees. The beſt, as Dioſeorides ſaith,isthar 
of the Cedar tree,the nextofthe Poplar,in which 
kinde the white and the ſiveere ſmelling Mofle is 
the chicfeſt ; the blackiſh ſort is'of no account 
Mathiclus writetly, that in Italie that Moſle is 
ſweetc which graweth on the Pine rxce, the Pirch 
rrec, the Firre tree, andthe Larch mee; andthe 
ſweeteſt that of the Larchrree. 

* The tame. | 

| Moſle vwpon the trees continuerh all the yeere 
long. | | 
+ The names. | | 

Itiscalled of the Grecians Yr , of the Latines Muſews : the Arabians andthe Apothecaries 

call it ſea : in high Ducch Moſz : in low Durch Moſth: rhe French men Lu Monjeh : the Ira- 


lians Meaſz0 : in Spanith Muſeo de los arboles: in En ghſh Mofle rec Mofle,or Moſle of trees. 
| * The temperature. BY: : 

Moſſe is ſomething colde and binding, whichnotwithſtanding is more and eſſe, according to 
the hatureand facukie of that tree on which it growerth, andeſpecially of his barke :/for ir rakerh 
to it ſelfe and alſo retajneth a certaine properrie of thatbarke, as of his breeder of which he is 
ingendred: therefore the Moſſe which commeth of the Oke doth coole and very tnuch binde, 
—_—_ his owne and proper facultic, ir receiuerh alſo rhe extreme binding qualitie of the Oke 

arke it ſelfe, © n = | | 
The Mofle which commeth of rhe Cedarrree, the Pinerree, the Pirchrree, the Firre tree, the 
Larch tecc, and generally all the Rofin trees are binding, i” do moreouer digeſt andſofcen. Ph 
5% 43'F-P "| * 7 


| R , , 
- 4X 3 


— — 
o 


1370 _- THE THI RD + BOOKE. oF THE 
| *% 7 & vertues. - 
Sergpioſith, , that Seite i in ail Moſle | 7 certait þ Yeligerh found 

RE engtheneth the 19 Yamw;y aane> vomiting op th | St 
B Dickoride, writeth, that the decoRion of V is good-for women to fitin, FR are troubled 
ph _ = ms is mixed _ the qyle of Be and with oyles to thicken them withall. 
| tis hittobevicd in compoſitions w &for ſweet perfumes, and rhar tale 

ela which —_ Waris beſt of wane)! moſt bee of lnell, # >| 77 gan " 


'y 


0 


Tf $ 
LELh 


log wp V4 5 ; (hep 157. 


Here growerh aſa on the ſuperfi Ppermoſt part of the Link Neves Moſergea alſo vpon 
rocks Gd ſtonie places,and: ma ds, differing it in forme notalitcle, A 


Z Altuſc we: terrefiris vnlga re, | | ! 2 Muſeru terreſtr ii PN” 
Common 0 Mole. Ii | Deplome Pang Mole. 


Fas | 


Fn 


+ «& 
— 


\ 
. ” 
— - / ip 
—_ - - - 
. NO. - 
La © 4 
—_— © £4 * " 
WI I nR.-, 4,1 ow 
__ k. 4 I -” 4 [ g ” FS : 4 
em : MB > S. 
n \ of = 
p4 | —_— 
2 _ 
” wy 
% % OS an 


oY 
os” - 


<A het - 

—_ W2. - I 
=. _ ES 
Don RES Em 

4 
- AND 


\ 


- # # - 
= ow - % * 
—_ 
* WWW % — Ys *&.\ 
" ry \ . ” . A— - Fi 
ay * - \ io \ \ _ 
RR . = - 
4 y_ a \ - 


_ 
—_ \ IR —< 
S—_ F - a A 


kk 
TY 
\ A — 
LO 


i 

19,4 4 
Wo -/ A 
4 


CAN Ee 
S—_ 
3 _— 
W_= 


o xy £ | 
= - 
% Fl 
% 
W— 


W- 
. —_— 
—_ 
/ x 
f OA 
F - 


Leh 4 


DIR 


KAN 
WW E 


* 
\_ 


WV 1 
% 


—W—— 
kN 
of - 
4 
- 


% T; bellferp thaw. | Jr reaed 
" He common Moſſe rowerh vpon the —_ and che bottome of 6lde and ancient trees, 
. buteſpeciallyvpon ſrch as gtowe in hadowic woods,andalſo at the bottome of ſhadowie 
| hedges andditches, and ſuch like places: it is very well knowen by the ſoftnes andlengrh 
. thereof, being a Moſle moſt commod,and therefore neederh notany = deſcription. 
2 Beelome ie Moſſe which ſeldome qrneuer is found butin bogs and.marriſh places, yet ſorrimes 
haveI found it in ſhadowie driedirghes where the ſunne neuer ſheweth his face; 4tgroweth vp 
halfe a cubire high; eucry particular leafe copſiſting of an innumerable fort of hairie threds ſer 
vponamiddlerib, of a ſhining bla Por ike that of Fo? Maiden hain, or the Gopilare 
Moſlc Cadcanthun ai vmhoncd i 


 HISTORTE OF PLA [ Fs 
4-4 ' CMuſews capilleris fave Abienchum cream. f 4 Res | vb aniner, 
'- Goldilocks,or Golden Maiden haute Moſle. | Little Golde locks... 


_ 


: 
o 
” 
” 
4 


= OY _ 
EO 6. 
Wy v .”” x 
W-4- = —_— 


oF 
es 
SOS. 
#0 


w% The deſeription. b | - Y 

3 Thiskinde of Moſſe called Muſews capillaris, 15 leldome found but vpon bogs and mootiſh pla- 
ces, andalfo in ſome ſhadowie dric ditches where the ſunne doth notcome, I found itin great 
abundauce in a ſhadowie ditch vpon the !cft hand neere vntoa gate that leaceth from Hawpltced 
heath toward Highgare, which place I have {hewed vnto divers expertchirurgions of London, in 
our wandering abroad forour further knowledge in ſimples. This kinde of Mofle,the ſtalks where- 
of are not aboue one handful} high, coucted with ſhort hatres ſtanding very thicke togirher, of an 
obſcure yellow greene colour; our of which ſtaikes ſpring vp ſomerimes very fine naked ſtems 
ſomwhart black,vpon the tops of which hang as ir were little graines like wheare comes: theroores 
are very {lender,and marvellous fine. "N Ee # | 
4 Of this there is alſo another kinde altogitherleſler and lower, This kinde of Mofle groweth in 
moylt places alſo,commonly in olde moſlic and rotten trees ; likeyiſe vpon rocks, and oftentimes 
in the chinks and cranies of ſtone wals, | | 
5 Thereis oftentimes found in the ſhadowie places of rough and tonie monntaines, a kinde of 
Moſlc having many ſlender branches, which diuide rhemſelues intÞ other ſmaller branches;where- 
on are placed confuſedly very many ſmall threds like haires,of a brownecolour: the raote groweth 
hard vnto the ſtones like vnto Sea Coralline, . , FP 
6 This otherkinde of branched Moff: in ſtalkes and leaves is like theprecedent: vpon the endes 
of the tender branches commeth foortha flower, in ſhape like vpto a little buckler, or hollowe 
Muſtrom,of a whitiſh colour tending to yellowneſle, and garniſhed with the like leaues of thoſe 
ypon the lower branches, | | 

Of this Moſſe there is another kinde,which Z Obelims in his learned obſernations hath ſer forth 
ynder the title of Ilauſews Pyxidatos,which Thane englithed Cup Moſle,or Chalice Moſlezirgrow- 
eth inthe moſt barren,drie,and grauelly ditch banks, creepiag flarypon the graund like vato Liver 
woort, but of a yellowiſh white colour : among which leanes ſtare vp here and chere certaine little 
things, faſhioned like a little cup calleda Beaker or Chalice, _ of the ſame colour and gs" 

| | | 'Tret 4 | O 


4 
£ 
7 


: 
: 


a THE/THIRD' BOOKE/OF [THE 
ofthe lower leaves, which yndoubtedlyjmay be raken for the flowers ; the powder of which Mole 
given ro children in any liquorfor a ha daics fogither, isa moſtcerrame remedie againſt thar 
perilous maladie called che Chin cough. fi ealees- wad Wants | 


5 Anſcus r amoſius, oa | 
Branched Mofle. \ Flowring branched Moſſe, 


Ny + A 
FS. EX A LOOM 2 - ves + SIS, ? FRY. So > 1 RY”. 
: "IC, "$I PL 44S. "Y + FI nd ad - at 21> & 
& " 2 "2-3 I : . 8 T þ+ " &*, * » *%\ A X $0» « : » wy s 
, "/ ; 4 . <4 VL Wh Þ _ þ\ - £ _ 
__ 7 , i "JE Rn \ 6 *. Yh A <5 Y 2G; =: 
@\ B75 We " | Fi »* WOE Qu 
. A k £4 | : bs 4 / : $; ; .. 
Wi 5 o - -* : 36 
D %. 40 q Y of# f Y} 7D 
" -” —_ - : - co $ 1 k 
" Pr. , — F « 2 


4 s 
FA . : "Te! ” 
: - \\ , we of Y * o 
WW G 4 - N - | 6-2, 
JJ " L i 4 AS 5 
>» . - 3 we 7; 
. 4 - A = 


x 0 


DON IN SONR HOO, Ry FIC < 


28 DOONEY 


.* 
\ k 
+ 
o 
% 


$5 WS 
4 - 
a 4 
* 
-_ 
% 4 
_ 
” v 


FA 


\ 

'4 

- >2 

ny 
- 


 \ Py 
* 


7 Muſew Filicinus. il - | 8 Muſemcorniculatue. 
Mofle Ferne, | | ; tes |  Hornedorknagged Moſſe, 


Fo 7s 


o% Thifeferipeies PE 


wie places of high mountaines, and at the foote of olde and 
rotten trees,a certainekinde of Moſle in face an ſhew not vnlike to that kinde of oke ferne, called 
Dryopteris. It creepeth vpon the ground, haumg diucrs long branches, conſiſting of many ſmall 
leaues,euery particular leafe made vp of ſundrelitelc leaues, ſer vpon a middle rib, one oppolite ro 
another, | 1 b---.--T 1 | | 
$ Thereis found vpon the tops of our moſt barren mountains,bur eſpecia!ly where Seacoles are 
accuſtomed to be digged, ſtone tomake ironof, and alſo where oare is gotten for tine and lead, it 
riſeth foorth of the ground with many bare and naked branches,diuiding thernſelues at the top 0- 
toſundrie knags, like the forked hornes of a Deere, cucry part whereof 1s of an;oucrworne whi 
colour, Br { # 1 ; | 
1 m1 | = 9 Muſem 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1373 


9 Muſcus denticulatus. f 10 Muſcusminer dent ien/atie, | 
Toothed Mofle.  Lirtlecoothed Mofle. 


* The aeſcri;tion. 


9 Thereis found cm_ing ypon the pround a certaine kinde of Moſſe at the bottome'of Heath 
ke bu 


and Ling, and ſuch | 1s growing vpon b#rren mountaines , conſiſting as :t were of ſcales 
made vp into a long rope or corde, diſperfingit ſelfe farre abroadinto ſundry branches , thruſting 
out heere and there certaine rootes like threds, which take holde vpon the vpper cruſtof the earth, 
whereby it is ſent and diſperſed farre abroade : the whole plant is of a yeilowiſh greene colour, 
19 'ihis other kinde of Moſſe is founde in thelike places: it alſo diſperſerh ir felfe farre abroade, 
andis altogither leflerthen the precedent, wherein confiſteth the difference. | 
11| Theres likewiſe anotherkinde of Moſſe, which I have notelfe where found then vpon Ham- 
ſtcad Heath,neere vnto alittle cortage. growing cloſe vpon the ground among buthes and brakes, 
which L haue ſhewed vnto divers Chirurgions of London , that have walked rhither with mefor 
their further knowledge in Simplesz who haue gathered this kinde of Moſſe, whereof ſome haue 
made them har bands, girdles, and alſo bands to tie ſuch things as they had before gathered, for 
the which purpoſe it moſt firly ſerued: ſome peeces whereof are fixeor eight foore long, confiſting 
as it were of many hairic leaues, ſer ypon a tough {tring, very cloſe couched and compaQttogither, 
from which is allo ſent foorth certaine other branches like the firſt 3 in ſundry places there be ſent 
dawne fine little ſtrings which ſeruc in ſteede of rootes,wherewith iris faſtned to the vpper part of 
the carth,and taketh holde likewiſe vpon ſuch things as growe next ynto ir. There ſpring alfo from 
the branches bare or naked ſtalkes , on which growe cerraine cares, as ir were like the catkines or 
blowings of the Haſell tree, in ſhape like alittle club,or the read Mace,ſauingthatit is much lefler, 
and ofa yellowiſh white colour, very well reſembling theclawe of a Woolte , whereof it tooke his 
name; which knobby catkins are altogither barren,and bring #oorth neither ſeede nor lower, 
12 Thiskinde of Moſſe is found vpon the ſcull ot bare ſcalpesof men and women, lying ou ” | 
| | | charn 


_— 


| 
1374 THE THIRD BOOKE ( T3 THE 


charneil houſes,and other places wherethe bones ofmen are kept t ither: it groweth \ thicke 
white,like vnto the ſhorrMofle vpon the trunkes of olde Okes: iti ht to be afi Tn reme. 


Cic againſt the falling euill, andthe Chincough cluldrenjif OE I al then giuen in 
ſvecte wine,for certaine daics togither, [1 


It Auſcus clauatie foe Lye 
Club Moſle,or Veoote may) M8 


| | places | | 
Their ſeverall criti ſet fooked theirna wrall Wit of feroving. 


; 


] * The 1mMC. 


Goldilocke is calledi in bigh Durch T Wedder = t, go | Urndertodt Y ow Frauwenhar! 
inlow Dutch Guitacn UTieder2oot : Euchſgu nameth it Pohjtrichon , and thought it to be 26 wg 
chon Apwletj, or Abalerys his Maiden haire , nevertheleſle £ Louleins his Maiden haire is not Ing 
cl{c bur Dirſeorides T richorranes , callet Engliſh: it, and for that cauſe wehad ratherit 
ſhould be termed Muſcns caveliares, or Haire Mole 
chon ; I would rather call it Goldilockes, leauir " 
Moſlc,or Hairic Vofle.: |- «440 [ 

Wooltesclawe is calledof divers Herbariſt, I our age Muſems terrefiris: : in high Durch Beer- 
lay, Surtclkraut, Sellkraut : in lowe Durch/Uolts chauwenz whereupon we firſt named it 
Lycopodren,and Pes Lupi : in Engliſh Wooltes foe 'oplfesclawe, and lkewjſe Club Moſſe: 
molt i ſhops do falſely rexme it Spice celtica: burr they do woofle, and are very much to blame that 
vie itin compound medicines in ſteedeof Spica et/trca ,or Fren ach Spicknard: as rouching the reſt, 
they are ſufficiently ſpoken of in their ſeuerall deſcriprions, }. | 

The temperature. | 

Fog Moles of the carth are drieand aſtrix gent, ofa inding emalitie, wichou any heate of 
co i bi Y | 
Goldilockes and the Woolſes clawes ; are redry.a ang te $in heate and colde. 


cg OO FEE COL ED 


HISTORIEOEF EEANTS. |!) © | $254 
*% The vertues. | 
The Arabian Phiſitians do pe Mofle among their cordiall medicines,as fortifying the ſtomac{;, /\ 
to ſtay yomire,and to ſtop the laske, _ .. . | SER, FR] 
Wh Ehoiledin wine and drunke;ſtopperh rhe ſpitting of bloud, piſſing of bloude/thetearnes 3 
and bloudie flixe, as 2} TART ON $1 969926 gortcge bo 12; 
Mofle made into powderis good to ſtanch the bleeding of greene and freſh wounds, /and is a C 
eathelpe ynto the cure of the fame, * TRnpat 266? Ne T3257 Dig 
Woolfes claw prouoketh vrine,and as 77/eronynn Trazmreporteth,waſterh the ſtone, arid dri. D 
ueth it foorth, FH | 
Being ſtamped and boiled in wine,and applied, it mitigateth the paineof the gout." E 
Floting wine, which is now become ilimic,js reſtored to his former goodnes , ifit be hanged in F 
the veſlell,as the ſame author reſtifieth, - EM 


4, 


: 


'. Of Linerwoort. (hap.158. : 


SELL =2= 


1 Hepatica terreftris. | W-;, | 2 Hepataa altera. 


Ground Liuerwoort.” : | Small Liuerwoorr, 


A 
: 


"TALES; d 


*% The defeription. _ | Agr 


I Iterwoortisalſo,a kinde of Moſle which fpreadethit ſelfe abroad vpen thegroung, having 
many vnecuen 0 pare tar leaues lying one over another, as the ſcalesof fiſhes do, greene 
aboue,and browhe vnderneath ; among theſe grow vp ſmall ſhort ſtalkes , ſpred ar . rop 

like a blaſing ſtar, cerraine fine little threds arc ſent downe, bywhich ircleauerh and ſticketh faſt 

von ſtones, and vpon the ground and by which it liverh and flouriſherh, | 


% The 


F 


OF/THE 


+ - 
| «1 
+ 


9 Panceed 
tn rounde 


Hepatica petr 44. 

- Ste Liwewdoh. 

a. F $11 ; its | | | 
> is found ypon rockes andſtonie pla. 
e}| neere vnto the ſea, as further in- 
[| £3 it groweth flat yponthe ſtones, and 
| | creepeth nor tarabroad as the grounde Liuer- 
| | woortdath, it onely reſteth ir felfe in ſpors and 
rufts, ſethcere andrhere; of aduſtieruſſer co- 
| -Jour above, and blackiſh ynderneath; among 
nþled leanes riſe vp divers ſmall ſtems, 
0 do grow lirtle ſtarlike lowers,of the 
the leaues:it is often found at the bot. 
ligh trees , growing vpon high moun- 

| Bly in ado E. Ha 4 
* Thfplace. | 


eh foorth hisblazing ſtars and leaucs 

cs itlune and luly, | 

| YU Thenons. 

illed of the Grecians +94»: of the La- 
ex : and of fome Bpvby, that isto ſaic, 

Muſcws,or Moſſe, as Dioſeorides witneſſeth : itis 

namedin ſhops Hepatica, yetarethere alſoma- 

nic other herbes named Hepatic, or Liuer- 


uing taken that name from the Germaines, wh | 
low Dutch Steen Leuercrupt : this is commor 
$ Wil * The ter 


This ſtone Liuerwoortis oft 


a 


* 
: 


low iaunc by theinflammati- 
ir quencherh the inflammarions of the toong. 


-— 


#.-i 
5 y 
-- 
: £ 
b4 i 


HISTORIE. OF I 1377 


Of Lungwoort,or woode Liverwoortand Oifter greene. Chap. 159. 


|| 1 Lichen arborwn. > 2' Lichen Marin. | 
| | Tree Lungwoort. oiek wt NG ng Sea Lungwoort,or Oilter greene. 


= . 
Ps . ir 
: Q & 
'< . 
by DIW 
-& » 


: _— AY 
N CYL 
; RAND 


A 
—_——_— 


IJINIVE Tl 


* The deſcription. \_ | ESTI l 


I O Liuerwoort there is ioined Lungwoorr, which is alſo another kinde of Moſſe.drier,broa- 
der, andof alargerfife, and ſet with ſcales: the leaues heereof are greater, and diuerſly | 
folded one in another,not ſo ſmooth,but more wrinckled, rough and thick almoſtlike a Fell R 
or Hide, andrough withall; on the vpper fide whitiſh , and onthe neather fide blackiſh or duſtie, | 
it ſeemerhto be after a ſort like to lungs or lights, | | [/ 


: 


: 


2 This kinde of ſea Mofle is an herbie matter , much like vnto' Liuerwoort, altogither withour 
ſtalke or ſtem, bearing many greene leaues,very vneeuen or crumpled, and full of wrinickles,fome. 
what broad, not much differing from leaucs of criſpe/or curled Lettuce: this groweth ypon rockes 
within the bowels of the ſea,bur eſpecially among Oiſters, and in greater plentie among thoſe Ot- 
ſters which are called Walflecte Oiſters : it is very well knowne euen to the poote Qilterwomen 
which carrie Oiſters to ſel! vp and down,and are greatly deſirous of the faid Moſſe, for the decking 
and beaurifying of their Oiſters, to make them ſell the berter z this Mofle they call Oiſtergreene. 
3 Thereis alſo another ſort of ſea weede founde vpon the drownedrockes, which ate naked and | 
bare of water, at cuerie tide. This ſea weede growerth vnto the rocke, faſtned vnto the ſame at one | oF 
ende, being aſoft herbie plant, very ſlipperie, infomuch thar it is a harde matterro ſtande vpon ir 
* without falling zit rampeth farre abroad, and heereand there ſctwith certaine putt vp tubercles or i 
bladders, full ofwinde , which giueth a cracke when it is broken: the leafe it ſelſe doth ſomewhar |: 
reſemble the Okenleafe,whereof it rooke his name Quercus marrmus, the ſea Oke: of forme VWrzke 
| and Crowe Gall. His vſe in Phiſicke hath nor beene ict foorth, and therefore this bate Ceſcription 
tay ſuffice, = | 8; | hg - 
| 3 Que): =. 


THE THIRD BOOKE| OF THE 


3 QOneremmarints. 
Sea Oke,or W rake. 


| 


D Moreouer,it Roppeth the bloudie " Bw ot 
wards eſpecially if they proccede of choler: i if 


q 


# * The place. | 

Ir growerh vpon the bocies of old Okes,Beech, 

nd other wilde trees ,in darke and thicke woods; 

Ir is oftentimes found growing Vpon rockes , and 
'foin othet ſhadowie places, | 


i % T he time, 


| It flouti cth eſpecially in| hs ſommer mo- 
cths. | 
l | | *% The names. 
It raketh hi narfle Pulmonaria of the likenes of 
- forme, which it hath with lungs or light, cal. 
edin Lat f: ulmenes, of ſome Lichen: it is cal- 
ledin Lag ch Lungeni.caut $ in low Durch 
i onghincruyts; in French Herbe a Poul: Pon : in 
ngliſh Lu in Kafp 56497 woode Liuerwoott, 
1 The temperature. 
this emer tobe colde anddrie, 
!|| wThevertnes., 
Ic is reported that ſhepheatds and certaine 


| horleleechts, do with good lucces giue the pow. 


der heereof with ſalt vntorheir ſheepe and vrther 
cattle which be troubled with the cough, and be 
broken winded. . | 

Lungwoort is much commehded of the lear- 
ned Phiſitjons of qur time agaihſt the diſcales of 


[the lungs eſpecially for che i: Aammacions and 


vicers of the ſame, being brought intopowder, 


| , and drunke with water. 


Itis likewiſe commended for bloudy & greene 
' wounds,and for vicers in the lecret parts, andal- 


foto ſtayche reds, 


her flixes and [courings, either vpwards or toni 
ajeth vomiting as men faic , and it alſo ſtoppeth 


the belly. 


E Miſter greene fried with egges and made in ro atanſi and eaten a ſingular rewedy for to ſtreng- 


then the weakenes of the backe. 


Of ſee *Mo Ew [pots Chaco 


[1] lf kindes. 
| 
It 


: #3 'Here be diuers ſorts of Moſſe,grohinga as 6 
diſtinguiſhed ynder fundiic My | 


3 HONWS. 1 


1 *% The 
(His kinde of Sea ' Moſſe hath many 
leaues,very much cut or iagged,cucn] 
ſtance. 


ll within the bowels of the ſea, a as ow the rockes, 


ſcription. | | | | | 
all Fhatked finely covered or ſet ouer with ſmall 
ce the leaues of Dill, bur harde, ag of a ſtonie ſub- 


2 Theſecond is much like vnto the kirmer, b tlismore finely cor ahd groweth more wright bran- 


ching ir ſelfe into many diviſions at the top, Þ 


wing veriethicke togither, and in great quanritic, 


out of a peece of ſtonegyhich is faſhipned lis Mi n hator "= ſton aca, mhgryoy! itis faſtned vn- 


to the rocks. 


I Mun/7 (0 


HISTORIE OF PPANYY 1379 


1 Muſcusmarinu,/iuc Coralling atba, 2 Muſes marinus, fave Corallina rubra, 
| White Coralline,orfea Moſle. Red Coralline,or ſea Mofſe, 


2295 PLN) 
F< << FELL > x) 


w 


A 
fx p 
% : " 
[ ” Oo 
: - 
EW 
LW” / : g 
v/ \ ”; | - 
# F | 
14 


W 
_t — 


3 Corallina Angliea. | | 4 Corallina minima. 
Engliſh Coralline. The ſmalleſt Coralline. 


by N 
: , 
\ i 248 : C 
3 a3 \ 
vs #X } +* \v L 
va \ 4; F 
} y * 


* The deſeription. ® 
3 Thisthirde kinde of ſea Moſle is very wellknowne inſhops by the name Coralling : it yeeldet!; 
foorth agreat number of ſhootes,in ſhape much like vnto Corall; _ of ſmall branches ©: 
ſperſed heere and there, diverſly varying his colour, according to the place where it is founde, be- 
Ingin ſomeplaces red in other ſome yellow; and of an herbie colour; in ſome graie, or of an Aih | 
colour z and in other ſome very white. ty | j 
A The fourth kind of ſea Moſle , is —— like the former Ng _— 3 _ notſo © "rOEEm 
nere it groweth,proſpering alwaics ls,as of Oyſters, Muſc Ps, as allo vpon 
rolling fin jin Ss bed ofthe —_ which have tumbled downe from the highclecues and 
rockes: notwichſtanding the old prouerbez Thar rolling ſtones never gather Moſle, os” 
gn ST ENTY nana 1 ey pr tne "> Auf 


#' 


1380- | "THE THIRD | noorE oF. THE 
1 F 'Þ | 
5 Muſens Coraliinus ſe Coraline montana. || ©& Fucwmayinus. | 
Corall Molic,or mountaine 0459.0 it | Tha Corline ge Fenel Mot, 


1 +T bi mh ſeripion 1 
5 Thereis found vpon the rocks and mountaines of Frange, bordering ypon ba Mediterranean 
ſea, a certainekinde of Coralline,whych in theſe parts hathnor beene found: nd of fc in maner 
like vato a branch of Corall, but aYogirher leſler, of a pang red colour, and of a ſtonie ſub- 
ſtance, 
6 Thereisalſo found! von the rocks neere ro Natbongi in France, and not has "SY the ſea, a 
kinde of Coralline; it gtowerh vp tg the forme of a ſmall ſhxub,branched heyofztonik do grow 
ſmall graflelike leaues,; very finely cut or iagged,like varo Fenell; a are they ofa ſtonie ſubſtance, 
as arethereſt of the Corallines; ; of adarke riifler colour, |: I | 
3 %The place. {| | | 
Theſe Moſles erowin theſea vpon the rockes,and are ofleminds found vpon Oyſter ſhels,Mul- 
kell ſhels,and vpon ſtones: I found verie great plentic thergof vnder Reculuers and Margate,in the 
He of Thanet zand in other places alþn gft the ſands from thence vato Douer. 
% The time, | | 
The time anſwereth the other Mgſſs, jtiee foundar all times 'of the yeere. 
| wv Thenones. | 
Sea Moſle is calledi In Greebe bet 3«7n;in Latine Muſes aubrina: : of the Apothecaties,[ta- 
lians,and French meriCorallina : in Spaniſh | AMatbarquiany yerus : in high Dutch £Fecrmoſ;: in 
low Dutch 3 3ce Poſcht in Engliſhea Moſle,and hu many | orallina,after the Apothecarics word, 
and it may be called Corall Mole. The titles ſhall diſtinguiſh the other kinds. | | - 
| 21 Theremperature.| 
Corallina confiſteth as Galen, with, of aniearthicand wateriſh eflence,both &« them cablak :for by 
bis caſte it bindeth, and being applied to any hot mig alſo cuidently cooleth : the carthic 
cfſcnce of this Mofle hathin ac allo a certain jalcnes byr whereof __ it drieth moo 
| 4 K195e 


ww 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 7 1381 
Fz % The Verfaues. 
; Dioſcoridescommendeth it to be good tar the gourguhich hath needeto be cooled, A 
|  ThelaterPhiſirions haue founde by experience, thatitkillech wormes in the belly; it is given B 
| againſtrheſerochildren in the waightofa.dram or thereabours, | Yield iT to 
That which cleaueth to Corrall, andis of a reddiſh colour, is of moſt men preferred and taken C 
| forthebeſt: they count that whichis whitiſh, ro be the woorſer, Notwithſtanding in che French, 
* Ocean, the Britaine, the lowe countrey, orelſe in the Germaine Ocean ſea, there 1s ſcarce founde 
| anyotherthenthe whitiſh Coralline,which the nations neere adioining doctieually vic. 


of Corrall. (ſhap.161. kad 


| * The kindes. 


| YG Yoke be diuers ſorts ef Corrall,differing in colour, one red, another blacke ; and one of a white 
| colour. | Fl SY _ BY HI 
1 Corallnm rubrum. 2 Corallium nigrum ſive Atipathes. 


Red Corrall, | Blacke Corrall, 


« \<- 
$ wu 
Ww \ 


| * T he deſeription. | 

I Lrhough Corrall be a matter or ſubſtance, even as hard as ſtoneszyer I thinke/it not amiſle 
| toplace and infert it here next vnto the Moſles, and the rather for that the kindes thereof 
do ihew rhemfelues, as well in the manner of their growing, as intheir place and forme, 

like vnto the Moſſes. This later age wherein we live, hath found moe kinds heereof then euer were 
knowne or mentioned among the old authors. Some of theſe Corrals growe in the likenes of a 

ſhrub,or ſtonie warrer ; others in a ſtraight forme, with crags and ioints., ſuch as we ſee by experi 

ence: the which for thatthey are ſo well knowne, and in ſuch requeſt for Phiſicke, I willnot ſtande 
to deſcribe; onely this remember, that there is ſome Corrall of a pale yellowe colour, as there be 
ſome red andſome white, | | | 
Vyvv x | | * The 


THE TRIRD noorn | THE 


rem mracopm for- 
, and very MIIng 


| % T befor 


3 Thewhite Corrall is like vntothe Lenth gro win <= FP © neere the "Op in the weſt 
parts of England,about Saint Michaels mountz bur Þ branches heerofare ſmaller,and more brit- 
te, finelier diſperſed into a numberof branciite ,ofa white colour. 
4 Thefouwrth and laſt groweth alſo ypon the weſterne rockes of he ſea,and in the place aforena- 
med,and varicth his colour , ſomtimes waxing white, ſometimes yellow,and ſomtimes red. * 
5 Thereis found growing vpon the rocks neere vnto the ſea, a certaine matrer wrought togither, 
of the forme or fror rs ectſge 'the Latine name, which may very fit- 
ly be inſerted among towri | degreatly increaſe our volume, 
al 1, andalſo 46x the vic is ſowel knowne 
vntoall: therefore theſe feweelines _ ſerve weil furcher | A a ALT: Edition. 


Fi i 

[-4 - £ a.z 

uw - C v7 i4 

« FOE » IJ 1 5 Spong 

$ : / £4 . 

X E171 > 

Ts F s © Z v 
3 z 

; 


2 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1383 


5 Spongia marina alba. | % 6 Spongia marina flaua, | . 
White Spunge. Yellow Sponge. 


_ 


4 " FF, Y 


= L 
== PESTS pe b WI | 
2 ty 0, > 


1a wt TEA 
» —» \\\\DV wt 2 
+ 221528 ti;,0 33/49] = 9. L ha VP - 
MEELZEIS 2 Ps A 
EZ EONS; Ie EY 
FLA 24% i "4 + © 7M Y yo * F 


ER 


| | | | The place | [EF 
The place of their growing is ſufficiently ſpoken ofin their ſeuerall deſcriptions. 
| ** Thetime. 
The time anſivereth the other kindes of the ſea Mofles, 
| %T he names. 
Coralliumrubrum, is called in Engliſh red Corrall. Corallizmnigrwn, blacke Corrall Coralling 
alba, white Corralline: Coraline rubens,red Corralline, 
| % The temperature. 
Corrall bindeth, and meanely cooleth: it clenſeth the ſcars and ſpots of rhe cies, and is verie 
effecuall againſt the _ of bloud,and eaſerh the difficultic of making water, 
*% The vertnes. 
Corrall drunke in wits or water,preſerueth from the ſpleene3and ſome hang it about che necks 
of HS hauec Morbum comitialem; and iris giuen indrinke for the ſame purpoſe, 
| NIN remedie to drie, to ſtop , and ſtaicall iſſues of bloud whartſocuer in manor wo- 
Pages the dyſcnteric 
Burned Corrall ith more then whenitis d, and being giuen todrinke in water,it A | 
| helperhthe gripingsofthebcllie,and the griefes of eſtoneinthe bladder. 
_ ., Corralldrunke1n wine,prouoketh : bur if he patient haue an ague, then iris with better B 
ſuccefſe miniſtred in wa ,for the Conallcooleth,, and the water moiſtnerh the body, 4 


We it reſtrainerh Ebucaing hea in ages, pin ont char hinder 


Motor? ond Ivy's SIN 


THE 
of EM rugs, or Taudfole, Chep 162. 


*T be kindes. 


g Ome Muſhrums growe foorth of the earth; lier vpon the bodies of old rrees, | which differ al. 
rogither in kindes. Many wantons that dwellneere the ſea $ and hauefiſh atwill, are very deſi- 
rous for change of diet to feede vpon the birds of the Re — and {uch as\dwell vpon the 
hils or champion grounds,do long after ſea fiſh; many thathaue plenty of both, doc hunger after 
the earthieexcreſcence3, called Muſhtums : whereot ſome are very yenemous and full of poiſon; 
others not ſo noiſome and neither of them very wholeſome meate : wherefore forthe auoiding of 
the venemous qualirie of the one, and that the other which js lefle venemous may be diſcerned 
from it, I haue thought good olet foogth their Fetures with | heir BT and places of growing. 


£t 
3 
$i 
£ i 


1 Fungi vulgatiffmi eſeulenti. "Xe || i lethates. 
Common Muſhrems or 14] Wh lis | | ” Pol ous or dea Aly Muſhrums, 


tos 


© Oo % 
2 "+ 24 un” ZJ Si 
LA / FA RI 8 
4 3 
4 w 


| ll w oy Wy 


air 
(14) 4.0 


/ bo 
4 


To #3 
pry me 


Round Muſhrinns grow pin Lt iaoding Mm 2 this eand ade nike, like yn- 
to a broad hator buckler, of a' ery white colour vncill it begin to wither, arwharttimeir 
lofeth his faire white, ceclinin ngroy yellownes: the loy er fide is. ſomewhat hollow, fer or 


decked with fine gurters ,drawne along tro > middle cencer to the circumference or round edge 
of the brim. | 14 "20 

2 AllMuſhrums arc nixhout p ith,ribpr vaine they differ nbta berle' in bignes and colour, ſome 
are grcatgand like a wig: He Leer hatz others ſh out the bignefſe of a filuer coine conan 
a doller : moſt of them; are red vndemeath; ſome 1 elſe + others"litcle or nothing red at 
all: the vpperſide which beareth our, is ticher pale or whitiſh , \orelſc of an ill fauoured colour like 
aſhes ( yy call it —— Aſh A ellF3 it ſeemeth tc | oh PRs - & 3 


#8 AY TY Pn BIT Fr AIRS nary OE EIA Ai cs See. 


\HISTORIE” OF PLANITS.''! i385 


Ne IP 0 *% The deſeription. "MA bet 
There is another kinde of Muſhrums called Fungi parujlethales galeriew at: in Engliſh deadly 


Muſhrums,which arc taſhioriedlike vnto an heodgand are molt venemous and full of poiſon.;;; 


There is a kinde of Muſhrumycalled Fung Clypeiformis lethalis, that is allo a deadly Muſhrum 
faſhioned like alittle buckler, © - he | I Y Fl mma ztig 
There is another kinde of Muſhrum, which is alſo moſt venemous and full of poiſon bearing al- 
ſo the (ſhape ot a buckler being called F UNE 5 VERCHAT HS clypeiformis :1n Englith the ſtinking vene - 
mous Muſhrum, | Leia ed . "e EOS | Xo RO 

There is alſo another kinde of Muſhrum. or Toadſtoole, growing inthe moſſic and ſhadowie 
woods,and ſuch like places, which the learned hae left vnto the diſcretion of the Reader, neither 
allowing it for foode varo man, nor yer profitable-for 'any other vſe 3; wherefore I do the more 
briefly paſſe them ouer,not purpoling,to vie many words about ſuch fruitleſſe matters, 

The Muſhrums or Toad(tooles which grow vpon.therrunks or bodies of old trees , verie much 
reſembling C2uricula Judethat is lewes care, doin continuance of time growe vato the ſubſtance 
of wood,which the Fowlers docall Touchwood, and are for the moſt halfe circuled orhalfe cound, 
whoſe vpper part is ſomwhar plaine ,and ſomerime alittle hollow , but the lower part is plaited or 
purſed togither, This kinde of Muſhrum the Grecians do call «5<&=z, and is as full of venomeor - 
poiſon as the former,eſpecially thoſe which grow vpon the ex, Oliue,and Oketrees, _ | | 

There 1s likewiſe a kinde of Vuſhrum called Fangas Fauegiroſms, growing vp in moiſt and 
{hadowie woods which is alſo venemous,having a thick and tuberous ſtalke,an handfull high, ofa 


 duskifh colour; the top whereof is compadt of many ſmall diuiſions,like ynto the Hony combe. 


There is alſo found another, ſer foorth vnder the title Fungus virclis penis aretth; which we En- 
gliſh pricke Muſhrum,taken from his forme. | | 


3 Tuberaterre. Pf” | . | | 
Fuſle bals,orPuckfiſts, The deſeription. | | 
-" | 3 Fanzt Orbicalaris,of Lupt —_—— do 
CD EN FT Am  _ Callit Lecernerwn fungi: in Engliſh Buſſe bals, 


Pucke Fufle,and Bulfilts with which infomepla- 


INES 
EI. 7 


bereaue the poore Bees of their meate, houſts, 
and liues: rheſe arealſo vied in ſome places where 
neighbours dwellfarre a ſunder, to cartie arid re- 
ſerue fire fromplace to place , whereof it tooke 
the name Lucernarwn fungt: in forme they are 
very round, ſticking &cleauing vnto the groung, 
withour any ſtalks or ſtems; ar the firſt white, bur 
afrerwarde of 2 dukiſheolour, hating nohole or 
breach in them , whereby a man may ſee into 
them, which being troden vpon do breath foorth 
a moſtthinne and fine powder , like vito ſmoke, 
verynoiſome and hurtful vntorhe eies,cauſinga 
kinde of blindnes,which is called Poor-blinde;or 
Sand-blinde. wed 


0% I 
BIOL 
: Wd "kv 
fe. FAX 


wa fy $, There is anotherkinde of Fangw,or Muſhrum, 
es Ze which growerhin moiſt medowes , and by ditch 


ſides, ftue or ſixe inches high ,, conered over with 
a skin like a peece of ſheepes leather, of a ruſicr 


if 
g" 
With, 7; 


» _ 


Cp 
4, 
* = 
"= 
I $ \. 


a long and white ſtumpe, in forme not much vn- 
| iketoan handle, mentioned in the title , orlike 

Rory vato the whize and tender ſtalke of Aron / bir 
© « " greater: this kinde is alſo full of venome and 


"Vvvvy 3 | $The 


ces of England they vieto killor {molder their” 
Bees , when they,woulde drive the Hives , and 


colour zwhich being taken away thereappeetech 7. 


- 


p me OO OOTY 


_— 
- 
16 199) PHE ous HY I 24 9D, 
- 


O_o 


| 
| 
| 


Are rr ge gs ar A Rn 1 or 
, o 


— 


Po {EW eres Yo rages RT <5 we "_— bo : 
4 f q Ay » 1 . £46" va" 
_ s = * 
# F , » 
1 - 3 y 
" 


ſ | 


's.\ 
; 
F 

= 

£ 


1386 ' THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE | 
| [| al * The deſeription. | j | 
There is likewiſe a kinde of Mu ou , with a certaine round excreſcence growing within the 
© earth,vnder the vpper cruſt orface ofthe ſame, in dric and gravelly | ds in Pannonia and the 
Prouinces adioining,which do cauſe the ground to {well,and be full vfhils like Molehils, The peo- 
where they grow,are conſtrained to diggethem vp and caſt them abroad like as we do Mole. 
meg wry I won grounds,as Molchils arc huxtfull vnto ourfoile: theſe have neither ſtalks,leaues, - 
fibres,nor ſtrings annexed or faſtned ynto thay, and for theimoſt part are ofa reddiſh/colour, bur 
within of a whitiſh yellow: the Greei e is berous excreſcenceidve,/and the La. 
tines Tubers : the {arc | in Engliſh we may call them Spaniſh 
W121 | *Theplece, | © | 
Muſhrums come'vp about the roojes of trees,in graffic places of medowes, and ley land newel 
turned; in woods alſo where the ground is ſanddie, bur yer dagkiſh; they grow likewiſe out of wood, 
foorth of the rotten bodies of trees}, butthey are vnprofitable and nothing weorth. Poiſonſome 
Muſhrums as Dieſcorides {aith, growe where 6lde ruſtic ironflierh, or rotten clours, or neere to ſer- 
pents dens,or roots of trees that bring foorth/venemous fruke. Diyers eſteeme thoſe for the beſt - 
which grow vpon mounraines and hilly places, as Horace (alth: | | 
| : [1 \ ? | 
Hor lib.ſer.2. | gopratenſibmoptima fungis | 


: 


fatyr4. ' [Natura ef, aliis malt cyeditar, | 


The medow Muſhrums are in | dethe beſt, | 
Icis ill ruſting anyofthe reſt. | 


| I l | | 
! Rs { WTjnetime, | | © | 2-3] 
) Divuetscome vp in Aprill,and laſtnor till Maic: for theyfRouriſh bur whileR Aprill continverh , 
others grow laterabout Auguſt; yet all of them after raine,and therefore they are found one yeere 
ſooner; and another later, Muſhrums faith Pie grow in h wers of raine, they come of theſlime 
of trees;as tho(ame authoraffirmeth, | 1-3 . | 
WI: [ *% The names. | 

They are called in Latine Fungi: ; | Greekeaizxnnu: jn Icalian Fonghi: in Spaniſh FHungos,Cugume- 

los: in French Campinion, whichworde the low.country menalfo * callrhem Campernoellen: 


oY j 


in gd Dutch Schwemine, Pfifferling : in Engliſh Muſhrums, Toadſtooles, of Paddockſtooles, 
-. The Muſhrumsthartcome vp in Aprillarecalled in Latineof diners Spongizlze : of the Italians | 
Prignoli : and in high Dutch £2 o2chel. 11989 Rn: | 

They thatare of a lightred be ca led of ſome Bolers, among the later ones whichriſe and fall 
away in ſeuendaies. The white or thoſe which be ſomewhatyellowbe calledin Latin $u:{j: which 
the later Phiſitions name Porcini, or Swine Muſhrums : Sui{t, faith Plnie are dried, being hanged 
ypon ruſhes,which are chruſt thorow them. The dry ones arc in outage alſo eaten in Bohemia and 
Auſtria: they that grow by the rootts of the Poplar trees are called bf the Larines Popaine;,Poplar 

Muſhrums. 7% i Il | "44 
Puſfes Fiſtes, are commonly callet in Latine Zapi cr itws, or Woolfes Fiſtes: in Italian Peſcie 
| Þ, Plinie eth them Pez/ce, as though 

| 


P: 


de Lupo : in Engliſh Puffes Fiſtes, & Fuſſebalsin the nor 
he ſhould ſay flat. ; [| | | 
Tree Muſhrums becalled in Greeke wwxir; in Latine Fungi arborwn, and Fungi arborei :in En- 
liſh tree Mu{hrums, or Touchwood: in high Dutch alſo &chwemme, They are all thought to- 
be ifonſomebeing inwardly taken; Nrcander writeth that the Muſhrums of the Olive tree, the 
Ts death. || | | 
| I  ** Thetemperaturt and ventues, | STEELE 
Galen affirmeth that they are all verycolde and moiſt , and therefore do approoch vntoa vene- 
mous and murthering facultie ; and ingender a clammie, pituitous,and colde nutriment if they be 
_caten, Toconclude,fewe of them are good to be caten; and moſtoffthem do ſuffocate and po or 
the eater. Therefore I giue my ſimple aduice vntothoſethatloue fuch ſtrangeand newe farg cd 
meates, tobewarg of licking honic among thornes , leaſt the ſweerenes of the one do not counter- 


uaile the ſharp dpricking of the other. //. | 
+ e the —_— HinkA Yi 6 " ruſſcbals 


- 


Ilex tree,and of the Oke tree 


« 


; 


'HISTORIE/ OF PLANTS. / £487 


Fuſſebals are no way caten, the powder of them doth dry without biting itis firly applied to B 
merigals, kibed heeles and fi uch like. 

In diuers parts of England where people dwell farre from neighbours, they carie them kindled C 
with fire, whichlaſterh long ; whereupon they werecalled Zocermarum Fung; 

The duſtor powder heerof is very dangerous for the cies, for ithath beene often ſcene thardi- D 
vers haue beene ON cuer after, when ſome ſmall quantitie thereof hath beene blowen 
into their cies, 

The countrey ve we ro kill or ſmoother Bees with theſe Fuſſebals, being ſet on fr forthe E | 
which purpoſe it fitly ſeruerh. 

[ Oftherem am of Fuſſebals we finde rele, and that briefly ſer Sb; and thar itis moiſt F 
| Pirgil inhis firſt bookeof Georgickes doth write ina i. when he Ronen vp the 
ackty thar go beforeFaine: 
Twmn Cornixplena pluniam wvocat ext improbs Voce, 
Et ſola in ficca ſecum ſpatiatur arena: 
Nee noeturna quidem car pentes penſa puells 
Neſeinere hyemem : teſt a cion ardente viderent 
 Scmtillaye olewn, & putres comcreſcere Funges. 
Then with a fullcall 4 proving 
| A ſturdie Crowe raine doth demand, 
Firg: And having Beſide hirſelfenone, | 
| Georg. She ters vp and downe the dry ſand: nh 
_ ib.t. And maidens which * night tasks do handle, * Pinching the flaxe 
I A winterly ſtorme haue forcknowne, from the di 
When ſparkle they marked the candle: 
And vp rotten Muſhrums be mee; | 


Of great Toothwoorth,or Ch lownes Lungwoort. Chap. 163. 3. 


1 Dentariamaior Mathiols. 2 Dentariaminor.. 


13338 _ THE/THIRD BOOKE OF [THE | 
* The deſeription. . | {Se 


'x px Hereisofteri found among Muſbnams acertaine kinde of excreſcence, conſiſting of 
is he iellie, or ſoft ſubſtance, like that of the Muſhrums, and therefore may the more fitly be 
heere inſerted: ixriſerh foorth gfthe grounde in forme: to Orobanche,or the Broome 
Rape,and alſo in ſubſtance, having atcpder, rhicke, tuberous, or miſhapgn bodie, conſiſting as i 
wereof ſcales like reech {whereotit ropke his name)of a duſtie ſhiningcolour , rending to purple, 
The ſtalke riſeth vpin the middle,garniſked with lictle aping hollow flowers, like rhofe of Satyri- 
on; onthe ourſide of an querwornewhitiſh'colbur,daſhrt ouet with allabic porple, and within the 
hollownes thereof,of adarke blackiſh colour: the whole plant reſembleth a ruce forme of that gel- 
lie; orſlimic marter,founde inthe fieldes , which wecall the falling of ſtars: The roote is ſmall and 
render. | | |. | . | 
2 Thereis alſo another ſortheereof founde , nordiffering from the precedent: the chiefe diffe. 
rence conſiſterhin thar,that this plantis alogitherleflcry in g es like, | 
B21 | ; . _* Theplace. | 
Theſe plants do grow at the bottome of Fn. ſuch like, in ſhadowie places :1foundir 
growing in alane called Eaſtlane, vpon the right hande as yee gofrom Maidſtone in Kent vans | 
Cockes Hoath,halfe a mile from the cowne ; &in other places thereabour: ir doth grow alſo in the” 
fieldes about Croidon, eſpecially abou a placecalled Groutes , being the lande of a worſhiptull 
Gentleman called Maſter Garth : andalfo in 4woode in Keht neerg Crayfoord , called Rowe or 
Rough hill:ir groweth likewiſe necre Harwood jn Lancalhire,amile | Whanley,in a wood cal- 
lcd Talbot banke. . ; ; tt ; | 


They flouriſhin Maie andIune, * [7 


There is not any othername extant;more then is ſer foorth:i 
=q b| *%. T he temperature and vertges. 
A There is nothingextantofthefaculrics heetcof, cither of the an | 
haue we any thing of our owne experience; onely our countrey wornen do call it (n29- 4 , and 
do vſc it againſtthe cough, andall other imperfeRions of thelungs } bur what benefit they reape 
chereby I know not 3neither can any of iudgemient giue me further inſtrution thexeof. 


[ 


- 
of 


#ciasand others deſeribethree, | 


we 


I 


come foorth ver 

the fruite,ofthe bignes ofa £ 

andreadie to fall downe with cuery{ 

2 Theſecond fort differeth nor frog: 

rally of theſe trees are neere of colout, yet ſom redder then others, 
There is likewiſe another which gfoweth very great, the fowers 


” 
© 3 


of his kinde : the woode is of ayello , iſh colour, wherein conſiſter] 


$0” Dara 9 er med . : , 1 «THF E, 
p BI wo. a} W9 wth 6 OP IOW" nh _— - EVE * TI. — On" 
hs ol P F g + v3 WS 6 = . MN 4, 7 Y an] 1.0 a 
% Q f » ” , 
" 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1389 


4 * —_— | 
1 Santaluwn album. _2 Santalum rubrum. 
White Saunders, | HO Red Saunders, 


Sa * 


- = < 
- = wy 4 
pon_ SA3 __ —_ n _ - 
94 SLY Y _ = - 
- - _ bY LK» 
go =; Li. - Eo = : _—_— 
D — - - pt, 
—# _ LY 
- p F<: "Y, - .-S — 
- - => 
” ar _— 47 4 . I, wt wm. q 
ON > 
p A _ o _ 
- = = 
— a" _ =_ _—_ 
k - "RM om . 
ji , - <= 
_ -—- ” - oO - - a _ 
- 7 _ A ow __ 
_ , any = w_ w ad. cotton 
q - 


" , . 
- , , 
- 'S [ 
'S. + 4 
" ' fi 
$NLEFI 19 
" Fit #45 4 
44? Sf / 7 
; CGIRITL FE 
: k\ L277 
\ ; F4 / 
4% if 
: 
C F : 
, , iT 
_ i 
4 D PL 
, 5; 
k "7 
4 4 - .. 
A : ++ 
WW w_ 
1 
it $17 
: . 
FÞ 1 
' 
[0 
x! F k 
1 


4/5 


, 
” 
0 
/ ny 
I 
. 
i 
- . 
1 
4 
\ 
y 
” 
* 
\ 
* 
*1\ 
* 
% 
% 
» 
#< 
\ 
>a "bu 
3, 
< / 
»% 
14 
T 
4% 
$3 
v 
* 
y! 
»* & 
4 
.. 
OI 
<4 
% D 
V 
% 
3% 
\ _&. 
$ 
v5 
Y 
NS) 
\ 
a 


v17 is ( 


w, * - b 
-_ " _- - 
_ S RT. en FP, 2 - rf —_ - & - i 
na a f/ 00 —x _7 
” Hi - 
Of; SF FF - 7 
ww - f 6 4 "EFF i " 4 f + , 
Son II Age £3597 = - x IE. 5 _ (hh -; an 4 , 
f 4 FITOP ATA p 6 f , 
f » - o &e - »f, % 4 / P - 
P o - = Fl ro # - 1 
_ , FF, o EF "5 - F is Wm Pp 
—_ — — "1 - , es * - < "F 7 #, ; Ab _ 
: wy ; we# 
>= LS hed 4g - - A ” 4 74 < 2 h Y 
&.. ww - " . wandre + gp : - 
o C2 
\ 


= 


CAA PHI TTAGAESHEI CG SES 


#4: # #4 57 
es 
ps 8-4 

-- - 
pz *YF 
—_ - 


"#8 


”"y 
. _- 
# 
SSA - 
- me 
> ow 
> ” p ln. 


CO a  _ A re IE FORO RESTS 
| DV 
| 
| 
pf | | 
Dk | | a] 


| OR * The place, Sj - 
The white and yellow Saunders grow narurally,and that in great abundance, inanTlandealled 

Timor,andalſo inthe Eaſt Indies beyond the riuer Sanges ot rather Ganges, whichthe Tadians 
call Harga, and alſo about Taua, where it is of better odor then any that groweth elſe where. 

- Thered Sanders groweth withi'the riner Ganges,efpeciallyabour Tanafarim, andin the mar- 
riſh grounds about Chatamandel : it growerh far diſtant from theſe places, that istg fate , ir moſt 
parts of Braftle : _Aurcen, Serap/o, and moſt of the Mauritanians, call it by a corruprname Sandal: 
in Timor Malace,and placesneere adioining Chandams, in Decan and Guzarate Sercaxda : in La- 
tine Sarda/umand Semralum adding thereto fot thc colour a/bum, flauum, Or Citrinumn, and rabrum, 
red, white,and yellow. EY i ne FOR OE OL TONER” 

Theſe trees grow greene winter and ſommer,andare not oneknowne fromanorher, but by the 

Indianisthewſelves,who have taken very certaine hotes and matkes of them, bicauſe they may the 


* 4 " - 


moreſpeedily diſtinguiſhthem when the Marecommeth, © | 
* Theirnames havebeene ſuffictently ſpoken of m their deſcriprions, or 
| HEALS - ESIH Fe + k + The temperature. | : of G7 | : 
Saunders is coldein the firſt degree vito the thirde,and dric in the ſecond. The red Saunders is 
— —  _—_——_—_—_——— —— ages oe 
. +> Trey 333 F49 


. we 


| Thelhdians dovſcthedecoRtion thade in waret, againſt hot burning ages, and the overmuch 
ear. *r the menſes , Eri/pelas the gour,and affinflammations cſpecially 
Mice © | 


if itbe mixed with the 
ightſhade, Houſlecke, or Purflane.,. Hb | 


”s# 

4 8 
Fi] 
| 

; 


1390 3 HE THIRD BOOKE|OF THE 
B Thewhite Saunders mixed with Boſewater,and the temples bathed therewith,ceaſeth the pain 
of the megrim, and keepeth backe the fipwing of humors to the cies. | | 
Abvicen aftirmerh it to be good for al paſſions of the hart, and makerb» it glad and merrie, and 
therefore good to be pur in colliſes , icltics , and| all delicate jmeates which necde to haue their 
colour made mozepleaſant to the fight. | | ; 


: 

Fol 

% 
: 

z 


? 


5 ; 


Of the Stonie wood,or woode made Stones. | Chap.166. 


; 
»* 
; 


Li idea, ive PP Lapides HERD. | | 
ER 0-47 6y 12, 1999" ſtones, | | w%The deſcription. 20 i 
* | j | Mong the woonders of England this is 
'% ql one of great admiration, and contrarie 
i Jl vnto mans; reaſon and capacitie , thac 
| | there ſhoulde begkind of woode alterableinro 
| the hardnes ofa ſtone called Stonie woode, or 
| rather akinde of water, which hardneth woode 
cc tothenature and matter of 
| ſtones, But we know that the works of God are 
' woonderfhill, if wedo bur'narrowly ſearch the 
leaſt of them, whichwe daily bcholde; much 
more if we turnequr cies vpor. thoſe that are 
ſeldome gene, and knowne but of a fewe, and 
that of ſuch as have painfully trauglled in the 
| ſecrets of nature. This ſtrange alteration ofna- 
| rufeis tobe ſcenein fundry parts of England 
| and Wales, throwghthe qualities of ſome wa- 
rers and earth, which change ſuch things into 
ſtones as do fall therein; or which are of pur- 
poſe ( for rriall ) put into them. In the north 
part of Englande there is a VVell necre vnto 
:Knaesborovgh , which will change any thing 
into ſtone, whether it be wood, timber, leaues 
of trees, mole, [leather gloues or ſuch like, 
| TherebedGliuers placesin Bedfordſhire, War- 
|. wickſhirejand VWales,wherethere is ground of 
* that gualitie, that if a ſtake be. driucaintoir, 
| that part of the; ſtake which is within the 
ground will be afirme and bard ſtone, & al that 
! ; | whichis, abaucthe carthretaineth his former 
g | | RX $I Lhe” & | ſubſtance andnature. Alſo my ſelfe being at 
Rougby (about ſuch time as ourfanrafticke people did with| great concourſe and multitudes, re- 


| Fet* = 
"Yu 
. - 


PL 


W117 
We "12 


F7 C 
'S./ - _ _ -» bs 
bs,” e— o __ mom - w_—_ * - ond -—_ = - Fa 
+ G * - . 
. 6g S ia > 7 dc 4Þ'*: > hip * 2 
38) : \! 2B ow "= - ' *, = oy - a = S.. > 
as t Fri ”— = . * - = vos PL 4 7 
4 £ . 27 »h -_ - « 5 - - 4 p 
: : 4 \ Op... < p * 0, = % wth ©. horl WE. —_— YL 
4 -” , *#+i7 % © © _—_ » + \ Bs - ++ £ , " -- l p wo £4 3 FEY 
d LF" IL AITVC. g 2 - 43. ee. " LEI ER? "% +» - 2 AL AO - 
{< k ID k 4 _— £ oY 6 Wong Pe Te . C IP , 
WES « =. > LIITT> LEND ENL dAiA3Z>0 
i” \\ : ” Y %* 4 Sa vP yy ' . _ . : 
k ” . q 


4 


FTILZ 
7 . 


|: 


- 
| \ 
' \ , iv 
<\ 
: I» " 


.___ 
> 
_— 
—— 
w5 


'' 


is 


Uh} WH 


' 


{41:1 
\l! Wy þ 
1% By 
F'Þ 1448 


paire and run headlong vnto the ſacred Wels off N,ewmnam rg#, inthe edge of Warwickthire, as 
vntothe water of life, which could cure all diſcafes ) lwentfromrhence vato theſe Wels, where 
{ounde growing ouer the ſame a faire Aſh tree, whoſe boughes did Pang ouet the ſpring of water, 
het ove nat wereſeare and rott mn, and C þ 


ofe were broken off,, fell into the 

water,$& werea!l turnedinto ſtones.Of theſe bo Is of the tree, I brought vnto London, 
| which when Ihad broken in peeces, therci be har the pith andallche reſt was curred - 

into ſtones zycamanybuds and flowripgs of the reefalling into the Jaide warer , were alfo rurned 

ſtones, ſtill retaining rhe ſanje ſhape & faſhion thatthey were of before they were in the 

oubt not but if this water wete prooued about the hardning of ſome kinde of confections 

,for the preſervation of themgor '{peciallends, itrwot Ut! offer greater occaſion of ad- 


miration for the health and bencfire, of mankinke,, thenic doth about luclachings as already have 


; *; Lf . as 
, 4 ; = + ; 
: # \ ws z$ 67 
. I p - þ | - q ” 4 l » 4 4 
" - [4 . « W y Z ">, : » 1 | 
"== $« + eo + & P by. : F - 4 ; : 
_ > . . (1 by 
= 4 4 . 


3 + 


HISTORIE OF PLANTS. 1391 


Of the Gooſe tree, Barnakle tree, or the tree bearings _ 
Geeſe. ( hap.16 7. 


Britannica Conche anatifer 4. 
The breede of Barnakles. : | * Thedeſeription. | 
T Auing trauelled from the Grafles gro- 
| His in the botrome ofthe fenny warers, 
== *thewoods, and mounntaings, cuen vnto . 
\ Libanus irſelfe ; and alfo the ſea, and bowels of 
the ſame:we are arriucd to the end of Qur Hiſtc- 
ric, thinking it not impertinent ro th ecpnelſ 
on of the ſame , to end with one of the maruels 
of this land (we may fay of the world.) The Hi- 
ſtorie whereof to ſer toorth according to the 
wootthines and raritie thereof , woulde not 
onely require a large and peculiar volume , but 
alſo a deeper ſearch into the bowels of nature, 
then my intended purpoſe wil {uffer me to wade | 
into, my inſufficiencie alſo confidered ; leauing 
the hiſtorie thereof rovgh hewen , vnro ſerme 
excellent men, learnedin the ſecrets of nature, 
| tobeboth fined andrefined: in the nieane ſpace 
| rakeitas ir falleth ourthenaked and bare truth, 
| though vnpoliſhed, There are four de im the 
' north parts of Scotland, & the Tlands adiaccnr, 
| called Orchades, certaine trees, whereon doe 
| growe certaine ſhell fiſhes, of a white colour 
tending to ruſlet z whercin are comcined lictle 
living creatures: which ſhel5 in time of maturt- 
tic doc open, and out of them grow thole little 
living things; which falling into the water, doe - 
become foules, whom we call Barnakles, inthe 
north of England Brant Geeſe, and in Lanca- 
ſhire tree Geeſe : bur che other that Co fall vp- 
on the land, periſh and come to nothing: thus 
much by the writings of others , and alſo from 
the inouths of people of thoſe parts which may 
| very well accord with rruth, 
 Butwhat our eies haue ſeene,and hands hauerouched,we ſhall declare. There is a {mail I'ande 
in Lancaſhire called the Pile of Foulders, wherein ate found the broken peeces of old and bruſed 
ſhips, ſome whercofbaue beene caſt thither by (hupwracke,and alſo the trunks or bodies with the 
branches of old and rotten trees caſt vpthere likewiſe: wheron is found acerraine {pume or froth, 
that in time breedeth vnco certaine ſhels, in ſhape like thoſe of the muskle , bur —_— pointed, 
and of a whitiſh colourz wherein is conteined a Seng in forme like a lace of (i)ke finely woven, 
asit were togither, of a whitiſh colour; one ende whereof is taſtned ynto the infide of the thel!, 
euen asthe fiſh of Oiſters and Muskles are; the other ende is made faſt vnto the belly of a rude 
maſſe or lumpe, which in time commeth to the ſhape & forme of a Bird : when it is perfeRly for- 
med,the ſhel gaperh open. & the firſt thing that __—_— is the forefaid lace orſtringz nextcome 
the legs of the Birde hanging our; and as it growe ater, it openeth the ſhell by degrees, will ac 
length ir is ali coine focrr.ond hangerh onely by the bill z in ſhort ſpace aſter it commeth ro fnll 


maturitie, and falleth into the ſea,where it gathereth feathers,and growerth to a foule, bigger then a | 
Mallard, and leſſer then a Gooſe z hauing blacke legs and bill or beake , and feathers blacke 
and white, ſpotted in ſuch maner as is our e-Pic, called in ſomeplaces a Pic-Anner, cage 


+ 


1392 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE 
the people of Lancaſhirecall by no other name then a tree Gopſe 3 which place aforeſaide, and all * 
- thole parts adioining,do ſo much aboungd therewith, that one of the beſt is bought forchree pence: 


for the tryth heerofjf any doubr,may it pleaſe them to repaire/vnto me,andT ſhall ſatisfie them by 
5 nn | | Ti, 


the teltynonic of goodwitneſles, 2 [|| | 
Morcouer,it ſhould ſeaae that thereis another fortheerof zthe Hiſtorie of which is true, and of 
mine owne knowledge: fortrauelling vpon the ſhores of our|Engliſh coaſt berweene Dover and 
Rumney, I founde the trunkeof an olde rotten tree, which (with ſome helpe thatI procured by 
fiſhermens wiues that were there attending thejr husbandes xeturne from the ſea) we drewe out 
of the water vpon dry Jande: on this/rotten tice I founde [growing many thouſandes of long 
crimſon bladders,in ſhapelike vato puddings newly filled befqre they be ſodden, which were verie 
cleere ad \hiHing,at the neather end whereof did grow a {hellfiſh,taſhioned ſomwhat like a ſmall 
Muskle,but much whiter, reſembling aſhell fiſh that groweth vpon the rocks abour Garnſey and 
_ Garſey, called a Lympit: many of theſe ſhels Tbrought with me to London,which after I had ope- 
ned,l founde in them living things withour forme or ſhape 3,0 others which were neerer cometo 
ripenes,l found liuingthings that werevery naked, in ſhape like a Birde z in others, the Birds coue- 
ied with ſoft downe, the ſhell halfe opeh,and the Birde readie to fallout, which no doubt were the 
foules called Barnakles./I dare nor abſalutely auouch euery circumſtance of the firſt part of this 
Hiſtorie concerning the tree that beareth thoſe buds aforeſaide, but will leaue it to a further conſi- 
deration: howbcit that which I have ſeene with mine cies, and handled with mine handes, I dare 
confidently auouch,and boldly pur downe for veritic. Nowe iFanywill obie&, that this erce which 
I ſawe might be one of thoſe before mentioned , which either by the waues of the ſea, or ſome vio. 
lent winde,had beeng overturned,as many other trees arezorthar any trees falling into thoſe ſeas 
abour che Orchades, will of themſclueg beare the like foules ; by reaſon of thoſeſeas and waters, 
theſe being ſo probable conieRures, and likely to be crue, I may notwithout preiudice gainfſaie, or 
indcuorto confute, : | | | | | 
B + % Theplace. ; | | 
The bordes and rotten plankes whereon are found theſe ſhels wherein is bred the Barnakle,are 
taken vp in a ſmall land okiing to Lancaſhire, halfe a mile fromthe maine land, called the Pile 
of Foulders. | | 4 | % | | 


They ſpawne as it were in March and Aprill ; the Geeſeare formed in MaicandIune , andcome 
to fuloeſle of feathers inthe moneth after. And thus haujng| through Gods affiſtance, diſcourſed 
ſomewhat atlarge of Grafles, Herbes, Shrubs, Trees, Mofles, and certaine excreſcences of the 


carth, with other things moe-incidentto the Hiſtorie thereof, we conclude and \ende our preſent 


PE Rk this woonder of Eng] and, For which Gods name beeuer honored and praiſed. 


 Theend of the third and laſt Booke 
k _ of the Hiſtorie of - 
! Plants. 


EBOC OQOTERKE 
|\DESCRIPTARYVM, 

A Arptin 1160 

| Acynos 549 

Bacu | pagina 123 Adiantum 983 
eAbres 1181.1182 Adiantum candidum hid, 

Abiga ' 422 Adiantum nigrum 975 983 
Abrotanum 949 Adiantum aureum 1171 
Abrotamum mas & faemina © ibid, Adonis flos, erſq, variet as 310 
Abrotanum bumile - 048 Ador G2 
Abrotanum inodorum ibid. Adoreum © ibid, 
GED campettre ibid. Agaricus vel Agaricum 1184 
bſonthium rufticum 938 eMfpileps 1167 
Abſmthium tenuifoliuum, ſen Roma- eEygilops Narbonenſis | 68 
Yum 939 efgilys BEromoides 70* 
Abſmnthinm latifalium ſine Ponticum egipiras 1142 
P42 947-938 eAgitts | | 495 
eAbſmihium tenuifolium Ponticum ef gonychon 487 
Galeni 937 efthiops 634 
Abſathinm marinum 941 efiitu , 495 
eAbſintlium maririum album 940 Agvifolium Tx55-1756 
Abſonthium marinum latifoliumnbid. Ageratum 524 
Abſinthium arboreſcens 943 Aglzophotis "BY. 
Abſtathium Ag yptium © ibid, Agmu caſt us 1201 
Abſinthium modorum 945 Avtimonia 575 
Abſmthium marinum, Abrotani F4 Aerimonia fylueſtrs | * qt 
mine facie 944 Aptiocaſlanon | © 906 
Acanthias 987 Agvioricanum | 542 
eAcanthis ſatinus 986 eMinga 422 
Acanthus ſylneſtris 987 Alabaſtri Roſarum ſi we caljees 1081 
eAcamhbium album 988 Alaternm - P273 
Acanthium Illyricum purpurels ibid. eAlaternns Pliny 2272 
Acacia 1150 Alaternu humilior © ibid, 
Acacia Dioſcoridis 1149 Albarus 130} 
Acariaaltera ibidiytoo Albinum | Fr9 
Acacia Pontita ' tbid. Albutum * - y 
Agarna "997 Albueus 104k”, is 
Acarna Theepbraſti i012 Alta” . Q7þ woods 
Arcarna Walerands Donrez” | ibid, Alcea pereprina 791 
Acer b z00 Alberveſicaria' 792 
Acer maior | | ibid. Alcibiadion 658 
Acer minor " ubid. Alchimilla 82 
Acetabulum 924 Aletlorolophor” "012913 
Acetoſa tuberoſa "g21 eAlpapaluttres 674 
eAchillea  wnqe905 Alrmonia 1031 
Achillea Sideritis thid. Altfma 1-2799.360.524 
Accipitrina 39 6 Alharia 5O 
Acimus "727 Alum PLOT Br 140 
Aconitum "819 Altumluefire | T41 
Aconitum Batrachioides 808 Allium vrſoum ibid.1 42 
eAconitum hyemale *  '* 1 xg Alltam », inum ihid. 
Aconitum ſalntiferum "$20 Allium ceruimum ibid. 
Aconitum luterm Pontics $21.822 Altium alpinnm latifolium thid. 
Aconitum bacciferum "829 Alliwninonbulboſum 650 
Acorna 997 Ain © axis Maes, 2+ 
Acoru paluſtris 1.46 Abnwnigra IV2 %% 1 2V6 
lenteoſar nn +2004 Alot mycronato folio ' 499 
Acutella | -*, 1342" Aopecuros © 82:370 


INDEX LATINVS COPIO- 
+ DA IL SSTTM WS. STEEREFEEEN MT. 
I. GERARDI 


Amelie niarins- 


 Aaaca 1 


Aline 49H. | 
Allie maior aninor ci” minima 458 
Alline marina {3K 1d, 
eAlline petrea | 489 
Alfie folys Veronice cam caterts 
ſhee. ibid, 
Alfne fontana A9O 
eAlſine flumarilis +: 
Alline paluſtris - 491 
Alfie folhs Triſſagines 493 
Alliae cornicutata C lurhy bid. 
eMlſne Hederacea 4 493 
Alſme Hedernla altera ibid, 
Al/me fyluatica | 85 
eAlthaa fl 739 
eAltheg frotex Clury 788 
Althea trbore(cens | bid. 
 Altbes paluſtris 787 
eAlthea Ibiſc1ts + | 787 
«Althea lntea S 790 
eAHlwm Gallica | GGE1 
Alypun, monty Cets 408 
Alyſſos Pliny ' 966 
Alyſſum Pe 380 
Alyſum Galen [4 YY8 
Alyſſum Germanicum thid. 
eAmaracus | '539 
eAmaradlcis 279 
Amantilla Valentiana 918 
Ambroſia 536.950:951 
Amaranthus | 59255 
Amaranth trizolor 16 
Amaranthus roromens | 


HAmaranthus pannicula fparſa ted, 
Amaranthin uterus _—_— Trags 


F2T. 52% 
Amaranthus Galent "92 2 
Amedanus | ; 


Amon 

iAmmi unl1 76 
Ammi C. venkc and 
Amonumn P liny 


Apmpelos ag AOvIG 
Amvg dalus ' 
Mlipodatvs 


Amleum frumentum "3%E 
Anaba/is WG. 
Anacardiun 
Amnag allrs 


Anpoallis mas farming i 
atugallic lniex Fay 
Anagalls annarree » | I0- 
Anas allis aquatics minar "jbid. 
biogas quotes ps 
£2:d.: | 

A 


* 
ah 
age + ABT A on Fn RT Sl” ER 
Gs ere Gees, Ce — —————— RR, v% 
- F 


or ib, 
at | . 
 Anchoman 683 
Anchuſa 657 
AnchuſaeAlcibiadion 656 
Anchuſalmea ibid. 
eAndroſace Mathioli \| 43F 
Androſace annua ſpuria  whid, 
Androſemum _ 434435 
Anemone tuberoſaradice © 702% 
Anemone coccined pon ed Wy] hid. 
Anemone Bolbocaſtani radice 303 
Anemone latifolia Clusy  #bid, 
eAnemone maxima Chalcedonica rf 
lyant hos © b 
eAnemoze geranifolia 204 
eAnemone (Mathials  uhid, 
e Anemone trifolja 307 
Anemone papaneraces = «61 
Anemonum varictates 306.307 
eAnethum & eAnetum $878 
Anethum tortwoſum & luſtre Bgg 
Angelica 847 
Angelica fatina 846 
Angelica ſylueitris 847 
Amſuns | O 
Anones * I141-1142 
Anon flore albs : T1141 
" Anonis non ſpinoſa purpures 1142 
Anon lutea eb; 
oe Anoniymos 1286 
Anſerina 841 
| eAnteuphorbium 1014 
Ambemis 616 
Anthericos 87 
Amnthora 820 
Anthos x081 
Anthr 281 
Antby lis 20.497 
= lemifolia ? pts 
eAnthyllis leguminoſa  - 1060 
eAntbylls Valentina Cluny 452 
Amntipathes 2281 
Antirrhinum 47 9. einſq,varieta- 
tes 8.479 
 Avntirrhinum mini Li p41 
Antophylli T3251 
Antter a 820 
eAparine 963:964 
Aparina maior Pliny 963 
Aphaca 2053+ 
eApbace 


Apbricanu flet 6112 an & Peri 
1bich 


flos Plmy 


| 


eviftune foe muckifilies 86 
Ohmpuiocaris 7 — anda 


 %, 


| 8621867 eArands 
Pp 1863 eArande Cypria 
M 866,867 eArando donax 
"Koi gl2\i59T Armmde ſeriptoris 
| x218 Armido Saccharma 
| 730 Arands [ndica 
734 Arundo Lithoſpermos 
| bed, Aﬀfarina ( Mathyoli 
'a | 36 eAſaram | 
eAquilegia N_ 35 Afclepias 
Aquiteia 36 ÞAſclepias es abs 
eA, qwileia rabra 35 ÞAſclepias florenigro 
eAgmiing | py 6 _ Aſclepias Virginiana 
Araly {4 þ 07 _ Aſealymbros | | 
eAraghidna | 359 | Aſeyron && Aſcyroides 
eArathus j Io 2, A654 Ajpalathum 
Aractuns Id! | I 3 59 DAſparagin 
Arbarx, wvite | 1157 jou ſartiterts 
Arbay| Goa, fine Indices 1331 | Aſbaragus paluſtris 
'Arbot Thurifers I 2.47 Alpar, Ag peir its 
Arbot CAorobalanorum 1 $307 Aſparagne ſþ lnetiris 953-955 
a 1 | 1220 ÞAſparagus /; Fug iris (pincſus Clusy 
41 | 1342-1343 a 5 954 
Arbor [nds 1 2.40 .an Sycomor ib, Aferuls & Ajſbergula o4orata 966 
" j 1310.1311 av wn Ting ibid, 
665 Ahh 86.87 
Areci (ine Faufel | 1337 4 by minor ' 44 
eA! rgemone ! or ÞAfphodelus burews © 89 
eArgemonia | 1d. Aſpbodelus paluttris bid. 
Argemo:e capitalo ternls &e. 300 eAſphodelus Lancaitria ibid, 
=- rgactina {| 41 PAſphodelus bulboſme 89 
Aria Tbeepbrafti xd 46 Aſphodelns by acinthinus 90 
eM Pas) | | 7 Afpbodelus famina ib:d. 
wid, Afpleninm | 978. 979 
folty Aflpleninm ſylueftre vel maguis 979 
foli Aﬀrella 958 
+ ” lenſes Mathioh od Abtter marina 33 
After. Atticus 392439342 
Aſter Italorum 392 
hia ada gen As Aſter montan tu th1d 
febcbi rotrnda & famina ibid, After birſutus 1d, 
eArmeniacum Atterion 293 
Armeria 479 431. cing Vari  Aﬀeriſcon 
478. 479 :| Atlragalus | ag 1059 
Armeysa 44 Iatifelia * Attragalus Syriacus 1058 
ma ſuane rubens Aſtragalus Luſtanicus Clury hid, 
Armerius fios primes Dodowei Aftrantia 1 849 
eArmgyius flos texting Aftrantia nigra \.,.8a$ 
e Army acia 186. Athanaſia © 526 
Armoy aria | Atrattyles | 1008,1009 
drm ure pratenfe mas Atriplex | 257 
ki Arrplex ſatine alba 256 
eArmoey aria ſlneftris Atriple x prrpuren ibid. 
bs ||: Arrplex fſylueftres 257 
; Atriplex marina.  #bid, 
} Atriplex farids | 258 
Anena veſca | 68 
Anenavinda ibid, 
Antena fatws | 69 
Anqrnus | 2286 
Aurelia - $20 


popes vrſi 7 640, im wuerictanes 
hid. 642 
 Aaricals 


| Anriculawrſ5 2.Clury 


| 641 
' eAnriculavyſprubeſcens dk 
|| Auricnla vrfi minima ibid. 
[ Atriculamures gh F514 
Bong ns wr 
| T Atbot 648 
| pa Dioſcoridis 391. 
| 'Bacchark Monſpelienſi 11 647 
'| Bacchion 665 
|| Balan Myrepfica : fue glans vn- 
| nentaria [ 1214, 
Balauitia | £ 1262 
Balſamina EN 291 
Balſamina mas . 290 
Balſamina famina ibid.291 
Balſamina encumerind 291 
Balſamina amygdaloides ibid, 
Balſameila ibid, 
Balſaminum ih;d. 
Balſamita mas vel maior 523-524 
Balſamita farmina F2J 
' Balſamum 1345 
Balſami fruttus "2344 
Barba hirci 596.886 
Barbarea 188 
Bardana 665 
Bardana maior of miklor © 66 4 
Bafilicum gariophy [arr 54 
Bati | $5. 
Batrachion 
Batrachium album 8o ; 
Batrachiams Apuley 808.811 
Bechinm 667 
Bellis maior _ 509 
Bellis hortenſis varietas 510 
Bellis minor oc12 
Bellis cernlea fine olobular. 511.512 
|| Bellis minor ſylueſtris ibid. 
| 'Bellis media ſylueftris ibid. 
| Bellis cerulea eApnulea FIl 
|| Bellis cernlea Monſpeliaca 512 
' Beta 257 252 
'| Betonica 5775.79 
|| Betonica flore albo $77 
\ Brtonica aquatic 579 
' Betula fine Betwlls I295 
Betulus 1296 
Bifoltom 327 
|| Bipenuls 888 
| Bipinella 837.888 
| Biſaria 68} 
|| Biſtacion 1248 
'| Biltorta 32} 
'  Biftortamaior 322 
|| Biftorta minor thid. 
| Biftorta [atifolia bid. 
+ || Blattaria 674 
| Blattaria Pliny 623 
Blatraria flore purpureo ibid. 
Bluum 253 
Bolbocaſtanon 906 
Bolboc aft ani altera icon ibid. 
1386 


1 
|| Bolets 
. {| 


VN DD E” X, 


Porago al 65 
Fer berrenſ of os wks MY, 
Boragy flore albo | ibid. 
Birago ſemper virent' ibid. 
; ai 950.951 
DBrafſica 249 
Braffic#l . 232 
Braſſica Vers ſarina I 
Braſſica ſatina criſþ4 
Brifficarubrea . thid, 
Breſeatapitata alba ibid, 
Braſſicatapitata rabrs ' "245 
Braſſica patla #14. 
Braſſica floridd 246 
Braſſica Tophoſa oy jb:4i 
Prafſica Sabanda * "4 247 
Braſſica Sabanda criſps ibid. 
Braſſica marina Anglica 248 
Preſfſica ſelmoides ' ibid.cxc. 
Braſſica Cypria 249 
Braſſica canind 264.755 
Britannica Pliny. 325 
Britannice Conche anatifere I391 
Priz.a monecoccos 68 
Bromos fterilis © 69 
Eromos altera ibid. 
Brumaria 182 
Brutd 1197 41 Sabteatiers ibid. 
Bryonia 720 
Bryonia alba thid. 
Bryonia nigra 721.722 
Bryonia nigra ſylneflris | 721 
Buboninn "2 Os 2 4. 
PBucinus vel Bucmnum 9024 


Bugloſſa + Bugleſſa domeſtics 65 5 


Bruyloſſa vulgaris ibid. 

Buslsſſa ſvlueſtris th1d. 
Bug loſſum luteum thid, 
Bus lum 506 
Buguls i614, 
Bug:la flore albs © #614. 
Pelbru eſerlemng 105 
Bulbu vomorius 106 
Bulbnus Ericyborius ibid. 


Biilbis bembicinus comentitins 107 


Btbrs agreſits 320 
Brunits 181 
Bunias fj Lueftrii DOR) itbid, 
Bunium 906 
Buphthal m199 607 
PBuphthalmum verum thid, 
ZBuphthalmum album ibid. an ſit 


Conſiligo, Seſamoides, Hellebora- 
fri & ” Chryſanthemum 607.608 
Buplenrum 435 
Buplewrum anguitifolum CMonſde. 
 bienſe 16:d. 
Buplenrumlatifolium Monſpel. ibid, 


Bur ſapaitorss 214-215 
Briſa pastoria minima 214 
Bautomus | 41 
 Byne 64 
Buxus 1226 
Buixus humilis 1h1d. 


Wo, 

Achryz | | $59 

Cattuns {| 3-93 
Calumintha Iv 43% YG F 
Calamintha montana onfriwd F56 
Calamintha montana pre /fanttor 6 pars 

roſtts o 

os. Perwnianns ſrinlfur 


" ""TO# 


— pag. 5 
Calams [2 here L 'Obrli 133 


Catarns Saccharatus \ "gy 
Calammny aromations & Ms is 7 


Calreolus Marie [In Fyg 
Calteolns Sacerdotts 1:2 ood 
Cialendial4 | | 60 


C alexdul. ? wirlt iff lord cnn 6090 


Calendiela ma: - i muy pany 
"1d. 


Calendula mwltiſ! 4 -»biewera C od 


Calendula {wmpl'c: flore 122” Got 
Calendnl1 maior petyins| GOS 
Calendnla Al! 6o J 
Calendul:1 artenſis 1614, 
Caticularis ; 2 $3 
Callionymuns © J3J2 
Callrriehwm 983.9%5 
Caltha . 603 
Calthapoetarums hid, 
Caltha Aphricana Gre 
Caltha paluſtris 67k 
Caltha paluſtyis major © 6709 
Calthi paluſtris minor (= whid,, 
Caltha paluitris mi: liplex' G7t 
Camelmng 213.27 4 
Campana arnenſis 556 
Campana cerulca Ts 
Campanelli 714 
C ampanul 1 266 
Campannla perſicifc/:a "#67 
we "vp lreteſcen: mramidus 
/ be 
Campanula roturdifolia " #hid, 
Comparula lutea hnifelia ib:4. 
Campazula minor alba 2683 
Campanula miner purperes ib14, 
Cathrys &58 
Candela regia 670 
Canella , "T7748 
Canelle folrum & bacillus ibid. 
Cania F7t 
 Cants cerebrum 429 
Canma herba 264. 
Canmunm or amen WER > 
Canirubius 749- 1058 
Cannabina herb $74 
Cannabis $72 
Cantabis ſpurie td. 
Cannacoris "ns H 
Cantabrica 473-478 
Capillaris , © * 1987.98 
C.upillors Venerts verns 982.98 x 
Capilizes Venerts Syriacus \ 
Aaaaa 2 Capnos 


Capnos 939 
Capparis 749 
Cappari folio atwto 748 
Capparis rotunduore folio obed. 
Capparts fabago 750 
( apparu legwmineſa ibid. 

.26 


188 

Cardopatruens | 996 
Caraniu | . 992 
. Cardnus Marte vellatlew 989 
Carduus Lencographis tbid. 


Cardurs - "oy 7 axes 993 94 
Cards globoſus =y 


Cardums y 7 7 Wi 


3-99 : 
FA niger ”" 998 
Caranuuu ſtellarus | 100} 
Cardumus ſolſtitialis | bid. 
Carduus Veneru | 1096 
Cardurs beneditins _ | 1099 
Cardai ſylueſtres |- JOT3 
Carduus ferox | 2010 
(arduuy viarum | xotr 
(ardunc muſeatus— hid. 
Cardum lanceat ns | | #bid. 
Cardurs echnatuns | ..1014 
Careum | $79 
Carex | .410 
Carum 1 » 6jd, 
Carica 1328 
Carlma 995 
Carlinaprior 996 


Carlma altera 


-3N; 
Carrep £20 
Carr , 


5 pum longum 
=7 id eft Cedrna abies 
ina abies | 


Gedl Lycia | 1187. 
C ed inineres vel humiles 
C ny. Phanicge vel Punica 


4 
—_— 


| Chamegeniſta Anglica 


Ceraſa 1323 
Ceraſs "7 1d. 
Ceraſua vulgaris, | 1319 
Ceraſiu precox five Belgica ibid, 
Ceraſus ſerotina 1320 
Ceraſus vno pediculo plura thid, 
Ceraſus Hiſpanica & Gaſconca thid, 
Ceraſu multiflora frufixa edes 1.3.21 


Ceraſus mulniflora pancrores frutiu 
edens thid. 


wy Anim migra & racemoſa 


' Il22 

Celifru racemoſe rubra oO; 
Ceraſus nigra 1323 
Ceratia filiguna 1241, an Acrides 
S. loban.BaptifF, thid. 
Coratonia hid. 
Ceraunia 414 
Cerefolinm | $83 
Cerefolium vulgare 882 

Cerefolium magnum hid. 
Ceremus Forummeyey ſprnoſus L Obely 
pAg- 1015 
Cermthe maior | 41 
Cerimbe minor © 14. 
Cerofolium 883 
Cerriuu 1163 
Cerru maiore elende 1163 
Cerrus minore glande ibid, 
Cermicaria | 366 
Cernicaria maior 11d. 
Ceſtrum Morionts 42 
Chamaceraſus | 1113.1323 
Chamaciſſum 705 
 Chameac:/ti 1102 
Chamecypariſſ#4 952 
Chamadaphne 748.1219 
s F31-534 
drys maior & minor 530 
5 latifolia 16:4, 


 Chamedrys s flmettris cc ſparia 44 


Pg» 5? 
Chamefilix marina eAnglice 9 $ l 
1173 


Chamegeniſta Pannonica id, 


| Chamerk anguſtifolia & tenurfeln 
$398 gc 4 
as fine ſolx pumila 


F3 
1205 
Chamelea | 1215-1216 
Chamelea, Araburn Tricaccas 1215 


_ Chamelea Rn, fine Mexe- 


reon I216 

C bextelrogems ' 1228 
Chameleon © 996. 998 

6 Chamelton albus 1169 


Chameleon albus Dioſcoridss 995 


| Chamel+ron niger 998 

id. Chameleon mger Salmenticenſi ibid, 
134 Chamelence | 667 
1233 | Chamelinum perpuſilums — 447 
\\n24  Chamemelum' 616. 615 
| ad | Chamemelum nudum odoratum ibid. 


616 


Mm”, © OR I GR it i. wo 22 4 x negy ein, ASS a er es Fr eee i 
FR —— — 
—— CCECESCESECSRCRIE — = — = 


E XN 
tiphes __ - Cmara maxima 991 © Corblearia rotundifolia | 324 
Chamamor us 1090 » Cmare ſilueſtris » 2992 © Ceocblearia Britanmce - #bid. 
Chamenerium 388 : Canare ſpinoſa -thid. : Cocci oriemales 1365 
Chamepence 1110 7 Corcinnalis 933 (Coteus infeftoria, vel Corcum mnfec- 
Chamepeiite i bumils pins. 1178 | Cinmnamomum 1349 + © rorium 1160. 
Chamapericlmenum 14113 - Corea Lutetiand -280 #4 enidins 1215.121S 
Chamepytts | 433 ' Circea -281 _Corogyprias. wn tt - 1293 
Chamepirys vermiculats 420 Ciſſampelos 261:713 :Coggyoria Theophraſti ©». -6i4, 
| _ Chameprtyomas | 421 \ Crrocacinm 1215 Copgyerie Pliny \ = rabid. 
Chamepitys famin ibid.  Citromalum 1280 Culoca/ia | 9-45 oO 
_Chamepity; Anttriaca © 422-423 Ciruluso Km 767 : Calus ruſtic r009 
Chamaplatanus 1237 Ciralusrmmor \- thid, Colutea 116.1118 
Chameplium 198 "Cites 1099 Colutea ſcorpioider 1 3116 
. Chamerbododendros Alpigena 1221 -Cr/big mas angefifolns 1093  Colmea ſcorproides bumites” 11.1 
Chamerhododendros montana ibid. | Ciſtus mas dentaiis ihid, +CGalmtea ſeorpade? montanaCluſ/aih. 
Chamaerrhiphes 1335 Ciſtuomarcurs Hypociſiide ibid. Colutea minima fine coronilia\11 1 $ 
Chameſfice 407 *Ciſtus mas teupifolitus ibid. © Calntea fue polyg —— 
Chamexylon Fly Ciſtua farming 1094 /# | . bid, 
Charantia 291 Ciſtuus fermina Mathinli thid, Colchicum | w:-290 
Cherephillum 883 Cift ues folio Halims 1095  Colchicum Avg cum piurpurets- 127 
Chelidontum 669.911 'Ciſtus foo thymi uhid, Calchicum Pannonicum' bid, 
Cheldontum minus | "abid. Ciſtus folio lanandule ibid, Colchicum minus 128 
. Chelidonium mains 911 Ciftas bumilis tennifolius ibid, Colchicum Ih ricum 4129 
Chenopodium 259 Ciftumhamils Anuſtriacn Cluſcrog6 Colchicum parunum - montanum li 
Chiliodynamss 1129 Ciſtus bumiles ſerpilh folio 1097 reum | ib:d. 
Chironiam 436 Cilmmexaticus L'Obely sbid. Colchicym famininum \Germant- 
Cbonarilla 227 Citi adulterinias tid. cum | 130 
Chondrilla cerulea 224 Ciftia aun | 1098 Colocynthis \ 569.768 
Chondrilla cerulea latifolia ibid, Ciftizs annum longifolne L'Obeli ib. Colocynthis prriformis | - abid, 
Chondrilla lutea 225 Ciſtralednn1.Cuſi 1103 Colubrina 323-683 
Chondrilla Hiſtanica ibid, | Ciftuuledon pepnites fronds thid, Colnmbaria 582 
Chonarilla inneea 226 Ciftuledmy Cluſe | 1104 Colas louis 627 
Chondrilla marine L'/Obely ibid. C:ſtueledon 6:C | tbrd. Colymbade 586 
S. Chriftopbor: berba 829 Ciftus ledon cum mpocifs L'Obely Culymbades 1207 
Chryſanthemun 603.606 . peg. 1105 Coma 596 
Chryſanthemum Peruvianum 614 Cifſtmsledon myrt eines ibid. Coma aurea _  $20:532 + 
Chry ſambemun latifolii, G04 bog Cifins ledum Silefparum 1106 Conche Pritannice Anatifere 1291 
C bepſonchewams ſegerumycr Valenti. Cſs [cds Roſmarin folio ibid. Condurdum | 1 
. ibid, Ciftme ledum Ilatbials 1107 Conila | $83 
Chatcine, $21.5322 Cijtms ledums alpinum Cluſis ibid. Cones 1174 
Chryſocome Galent 1522 Crrrago Fo Confiligo - 826 
Chryſolachanon 257 Clanicola'? 7o8 Confiligo Ruelly ibrd. 
Chryſogonon © | 840 Claza Herewlls 674 Cunſolida media 506 
Cicer 1047 Clarns 1352 Confalida minor | _$08.512 
Cicer ſatinmum tbr, Clan Venerss | 674 Conſolila Saracenica 247 
Cicer arietinum | thid, Clematis Batica 739 Conſolida mediauninerayiorum 599 
Cicer nigrum ibid. Clematis altera © 1thid, Conſolids maior flore prrpures 660 
Cicer candidum ibid. Clematis vavietates' , 740.742 Conſalida maior flore albo- ibid. 
Cicer ſylneftre 1048.1049 Clematis rrens | | | 741 Conſolida regalts 923. £17 variet as 
Cicer ſylueſtre latifolium 1048 Clematis Pannonica 742 - 922.923 
Cicera ' 1054 Clematis Pannonica many ibid, C Lv regalis > 922 
C icerbita 232 Cleonicum | 545 Confolida regalis [hueftris 9232 
Cichorion - | 227 Clinepodinm | | $45:549 Connolunlus -- 690.714 
Cichorinm ' 221 Chmenon [talorum 435 Conmolunliy marinus © 690 
Cichorium ſatiuum 220 Chmenum ' 579.1054 Conolun/n minimu ſpicefoling 717 
Cichornem ſatinum latifolium bid, Cneens | 1007 Connolunlu minor 714 
Cichoriuns ſylueſtre 222 Cnecw ſatinus ibid. Connolantuzs albus | ibid. 
Cichoriuunm lt erm ibid, Cnecus ſupine | 1009 Connolunium cernleuns hid, 
Cicwta : 904.903 Cneoron | | $216.1218 On | 391 
Cicuta latifolia feetidifſims go; Cneoron album Theoph. 1216-1219 Cmyze maiar | 1d, 
Cremtarialatifolia go4 Cneoron dar | {1 1218 Coma minime 1hid, 
Cicutaria tennifolia \gogs Cucw - 1007 Cor /ndicum | "yy : 
Cicutaria paluſtris | «bid, Ciew flueſtris | thid. 1009, Corallina 1 380. ein varieras 1:79 | 
Cinars 993 Caccalu | 1174 Corallina Argbca thid. 


| | 
Corallina mime | (1 


1379 
Curaling montand | 1 x3 80. 
Corals = ED 5| - 
Coralloides * va wp She 

- Coralliuns | 1 8? 
Ca: allmm rubrum 


| p3 8x 

Coraliuum nigrum cue Ampa $46, 
Corallium album 1382 
| whid. 


Corn rm 16 Treeckrofs Z $7 | 


Cornus ſplueftris © bid, 
Corona rmperialis 53) I54 
Corenaampeniahi deplici oor 153 
Coronaregia 278. 7 
Corona terre 705 
Corona ſolis + 614 
Corona fratrum | 990 
Coronopus prima, ſecundut, terting, 
page 344345 

Coronopies Raely 1346 
Corruda '955 

| Cortices roſarum 1oS1 
Cortaſa CMathioli - RGgg 
Cortnſe verior [con. | ad. | 
Corplues 1250.1251 
Corylaa ſylueſtris 1250 
Cow jon 
Coſta hortorum aid . 
Coſtug minor hor tenſis | ehid 
Coſtus niger | 829. 
Cotinus j 207 
Cotinus Coriaria Pliny 1293 
Cotonaria 1 F19 
Cotula fatida 1617 
Cotwla lutea | whid, 

' Colyledon 424 
Cotyledon alrera Duns [412 
Crajſuda mator Hiſhanica #614. 
Craſſala fabaria 1416 
Crateog onon | & | 
C rat e0gouen album > rubrum | 44 
Crateogonon Emphroſyne | 85 
Cretanum 1 


1427 
Crithmum ſpinoſum | 44 
Crithmum Chryſanthemum | ibid. 
Crocodilion 998 
Crocus } 


Cururbit plueſtris, 


Cucurbity ja ſue ſtris fungiformnis G1 
Culta,S 4 — Quoreey i15 


Cumin, go 
Crmmin: ' 1 [atinum Dinſcoridie UT 
C # ueſtre | g0o/ 
Cumnmun jo ig_ & regs 

3 |. 8 


C -ynoſorc hy " 
Cynoſorc% 
C | 


Y Cyriſtns 


| 
| 


Cpern PERL wen 6. 
| 25.0 us & eſenlentns 8 | 
erm rotundiu > t 29 
1210, An by " ibid. 
Cytinug 1 1 '* * 1999. 1262 
| % 1024442: 1125 
 Cqeiſees fſliquoſus” | ov a2022 
"Ctifns birſuras "1 bi, 
Chrifies incames os wn fn 1127 
. Cyniſmrpinnatus (1 | © #bid, 
Cyeifascornamus 3124 
C wa adult erinun fin Abſſn frun- 
cans | "tbid, 
Cyriſus ſemper virens TI2 
Cyri/i ſylneſtres ihrl 
or” Marcels Ii29 
| fo » 
4 vas eus | 821 
1b oncogene | 360 
Damaſon:m notham © 559 
Daphne | 1223 
Dancus | 873 
Danucus filueſtris | | $68 
Danens Cretenſis ver _ 874 
Delphani _ | 923 
Dens caniniy herbarierum| 155 
Dens canin, flare albo, angnſtiori- 
b1es folys | | ttt. 
Dens leonts | | 228 
Den: leonis Fichori: wATi0g ibid. 
'Dentaria 835 
Dentaria bulbifers 833 
Dentaria coralto:de radice, ſine Den- 
taria eneaphyllas 1." 633 
Dentaria he prapbyllos Clach 834 
Demtaria =" los C. busy ibid. 
Dentaria maior LL 1387 
Dimtaria minor | thid. 
Dentillaria Rendelery 1070 
Dillamnum 652 
Dittamnum Creticum ibid. 
Digitia exerts _ 674 
4+ Digitals | | "047 
\B Digitalis wvarictas |. 646 
Digualis ferrogines | 647 
Dionyfias | ICIS» 
Nioſpiros | 82 
Dioſporon 487 
Dipſacus 1006 
Dipſactu ſatinus | 1605 
Dipſacus ſplueflrs | ihid» 
Dalichus ' T041.1043 
Darcadion | | © 683 
Doronicum 622* 
Doronicum | mart frtnrn 620 
Doronicum | Pina | tbid. 
Deronicum radice repente | 621 
Daronicum brachiata radice ibid, 
Darycnium | 2128 
Doryenium Moree ibid. 
Draba | * 207 


| Dorjovium Hiſpanicum 1128 
|| Dracoberba 193 
'| Draco ſylueſtris 484 
|| Dracoarbor 1339 
|| Draconis frutigs  #bid. 
'| Dracons ſanguts 1340 
|| Dracontium 683 
| Dracontion Pliury 323 
'| Dracontinm mares 682 
'| Dracontimm minus ibid. 
'| Dracontium mains Mathiols 683 
'| Dracunculus ibid. 
| Dracanculus Dodonet 323 
| Dracunculus aquaticus 683 
'| Dracunculas polyphy llos 161d. 
| | Dryopreris 974 
21 | Dryopterss nigra 975 
| Dudcichinam 29 
'| Dalcamars 279 
Bulus,c Ebulum 1238 
Echinaſtrum 795 
Echium | 658 

| Elaphoboſcum $71 

| Elatine FOl 
'| Elatine alter ibid, 
|| Eleagnus 1228 

|| Eleagnus Cords ibid. 

|| Elephantoſis 665 
|| Elleborine Alpina 803 
p_ 607 

| Elochryſon 520 

| Fboflaum $62,867 

| Ehchnium 625 

| Epctinions ibid, 

'| Emeros 1157 

| Eminion, 68 

|| Empetron 429-455 
| Endinia criſpa 221 

|| Eneapbyllon 27 
ſn: 29 *s 
Enulas 649 
Epbedra 95 8 

| Epbemeron 30 
| Ephemerum Mathiols. 395 

| Epilinum 462 

; | Epilobion 388 
| Epimatorana 539 

, || Epinnedinm 389 
q Fpimelis I 266 

| Eprpa tes 89 ; 

' Epthymum 462 

|| Epie mum Grecorum 459 

|| Eprebymbrum 62 

| | 66 
953 


Faba Towns 


Faba inuerſa 


FN DEX 


Equiſetum ſyluaticum | 957 
Eranthemum [4-0 
Erica 1200 
Erica vulgaris, fue Pumils 1196 
Erica prumula alba ibid. 
Erica maior , flore pore Claus 
pae- | 2197 
| Erica maior,flore albo . o#hid, 
Erica cruciata "bid, 
Erica pyramidalis _ wbid, 
Erica tenmfolta | 1198 
Erica tenmifolta caliculata ibid. 
Erica baccifera latifolia, | 1199 
Erica bacerfera tengo folia ibid, 
Erigerun 217 
Erigerum tomentoſum 11d. 
Er:geron may inwn 219 
Eriocephalua 990 
Eriſis MN 
Erithanon 1099 
Eruca ſatiua I91 
Eruca ſyluettres hid. 
Eruca flneſtris anguſtifolis 192 
Erncaperegrma 216 
Eraca canmabrica ibid. 
Ernnm ſatimum I054 
£ rpnge © el Erynginum 1000, 1004 
Eryng tum bornſſicum 1003 
Erynoium montauun | 1002 
Eryngium planum,vel Alpinis 100%, 


Ermnginem eerulewn © IOOL 
Eryngium pumilis Cluſ, 1002.,1003 
Ermnguem ſpuriam 1.Dodonei 1001 


E ryng tum marimum | 999.1000 
Eryngium CMediterraneum 999 
Eryſumum | 214 
Eryſimum Dioſcoridis 198 
Eryſumum ſjlueſtre 1d, 
Ernbrodanum 962 
Efuls mater Germanice 404 
Efala minor ibid. 
Emonymius 1286 
Enonymus Theophraſfti | I bt 
Enorymus latifelra 114, 
Emnonymas Pannonxica 1295 
Enpatoria To 
E upatorinm #614, 
Expatoriom Meſa 524 
Eupatorium cannabinum 574 
Eupatorium adultermum | 1d. 
E, uy Anuicenne aps" 


Euphr 74 


Enphraſie cernlta Tab. Ment. / 


Exupbraſia alters | 35 
Enpborbium 1016.1014 
Euphroſyne 537-85 
Enphroſynum 654 
Exupera 5831 


Aba © 
Faba ſvills 


Fabarid : 416 
Faba AFgyptia ibid, 
 Faba hortenſis . 2036 
Faba ſjlueſtris t#hid.1027 
Fabe Grecorum | ibid. 
 Faba freſa, vel Fraila ibid. 
Fagr-ttiticum 83 
Fago-triticum h1d. 
Fagus 1255 
Far 62 
Far halicaſtrum 63 
Far fugiurs 66 
Farranum sbra 
Faſelns 1041 
Faſelus Hircinus 1025 
Faſeolus 1041 
Febrifuga 527 
Fegepyrum 82 
Fel terre © 436.437 
Ferrum equinum 1056. 1057 
Ferwla 8 98.899 
Ferulago £98 
 Ferulanigra 899 
Feſtuca 67.1163 
Feſtuca tales 67 
Feſtuca altera 69 
Ficus b 322, 1327 
Fierce fatina - +. ap 
Fiens Pharaonis 1327 
Ficus eAgyptia | ahid. 
Ficus Indics 1529,1330.1331 
Filago | $17 
Fuago minor ibid, 
Filago bumilis | 519 
Filiapendula 902.900 . 
Fulipends/1 montana | ib; 
Filienduls anguſtifalis * * * gor 
Filipendula cicure facie | ibid. 
__— 4quaricd 'JoO3 
' 970 
A ms 969. 970 
Flix foemina ibid. 
Flix paluſtris,vel quatili 971 
Filix latifolia ibid. 
Filix Q rzerna 
Svolr ry 97% As 


Filiculs fontana mas fermmina 094 


Filicula petrea mas & faming 98r 
F:ſtmlarra | 


913 
Flammycla Iows; ſurretta 741 
Flos amor 253 
Flor regina 923 
Flos Tigridis 107 
Flog Cues 20 3-481 
Flos Adonis | - 310 
Flos hore [2 
Flos - OR ; 1% 


Flos Cels 2 


Flores Armery | 1480 | 
Flos aureus S ad 
Flos ſolis [614 
Flos folis maior & minor 1613 
Flos ſolis minor mai & farmina || 617 
Flos Roſe go081|* 
Flos Cyanus 1594 
Flos Iuncs | . 40 
Flos frumentoruns | ibid. 
Flos Apbricanus 16117 
Flos es HO maicr pete 
Flos « Aprions minor _ 
19 
Flos "2 (0 mator ſpl flare 
pag | 611 
Faenum 2 
Fanumgrecum 1026,1027 
Fanumgrecum [jlucſtre 1068 
Feniculus marinus | 428 
Faniculum | 877 
Feniculum vulgare | ibid, 
Faeniculum dulce | ibid, 
Feniculum tortuoſum ' 893 
Folium Indicum vel Induanm |1351- 
Fontal:s Ji <4 
Fraga 45. 
Frags ſubalba | #1 
Fragaria 844 
m__ veſca ſine ferilis. i 845 
Franguls | 1.1286 
Fraxmella | | 1065 
Fratinus | {128 
Fraxinus bubula fine magna [129 
; Fraxinus ſylueftris | ibid. 
Fraxinus vulgaris | bid. 
Fraxinus montand ibid. 
Frittillaria varicg ata 122 
Frutillus x23 
Frudtus ficus Indice 1329 
Fruftus vary peregrini 1 3 64 Vnar- 
cim genera fruftuum pert rinorh 
ibid. FRE 
Frumentum +} © +6 
Frumentm Afiaticum | 75 
Frumentum T urcicum ibid.77 
Fruments Indici ſpice | thin 
Frumenti Indici varietates | 75.76 
Furus berba {| 657 
Fucus agreſtts | 1009 
Facus marmus © |-T:3 $0 
Faligo- !| 1179 
Fumaria | 930 
Fumatie varietates 927.928 
Fumaria tennifolta \ #988 
Fuamarialatifolia mmor  ' |, 929 
| Fumaria alba latifolia -}| "hid. 
Fungi | 21386. 
Fungi arborei [| . | bid. 
Fungi liternarum li. T3385 
Fungi vi pore mt flew | 1384 
Fungi lethates 4d.1 385 
Fe gs orbicalarss + |} 2385 
m__ virilis tus "arrefts . #hid; 


Geni/ þ 


| "7 
Gallarwiy y derſarym figure Il 66. 
1x64 


Gall ik _—_ 26 
Galliceh 627 
Gallinng 968.967 
Gall urietates 968 
Galbuly: 1186 
Garoſm es 0 AT MII 0 olens Pene & L'O- 

bely|| 28 5 
Geming 628 
G eneſth HY 1132 
G renicul ris 918 
Geniſtk [| | 130.1132 
G emſt, F:ſpanica 1131 
Gemft, tenufolte obid, 


Gent inoſa | 1140 
Genift If -inoſa maior & minor 11.38 


Gent/! if imoſa flere albo 1129 
 Genift fbinoſa hurxilis hid. 
Genifſt 4 cnleata 1140 
_ aculeata minor , ſine nep« 
Thi brafti | hid. 

Gent : rin{{oria 1136 

' Geny 4 P rintloria vel infeftoria 
pagh| . 1134 
Gem o f epinbilh I I 35 
Geniſh e's globulata hid. 


F la ek (Sa maiar & minor 


Ps ime 
10] 52 
Gerti a 4 maior | =; 

” Genral ta maior 2.Cluſii "14, 
Gentig 4 minor (ruciata EY ibid. 
Genth ta Penner mmor 351 

' Gen ” 4 Concaua | 353 
Gently ella Alpina 11.Cluſa 354 
Gentig elle alpine vernd 1491 
Gerah * lum 796 
Geray T7 PE = TRE 793 
Geraz $hucs alter wm «bid, 
Gerah jam Robertianum "Un #24 
Ger ay [ mm Dioſcoridis primum 795 
Ge er aver twbryoſum ver bulboſum | 
Ger yo wm moſcbatum (| |a96 
Ger thinm batrachioides _. 797 
G i; I» 120099 batrechioides album ibid, _ 
Gera mm Creticam 12 $ 

Getkbinm Malacoides ** 5 53þ | 
nn vVicdgceuns ' Yoo” 


I 
iL 
F 
z 


pr. | | | 799 
Geranium ſang utmarium thid, 
Geranium moſchatwm inodarum $00 
Geranium inodorum ajbum| ibid. 
Gemm alpinym = 645-343 
Genm Pliny ihd. 
Guilarum 457 
Gingidium 885 
Gingidinm latifolium ibid. 
Ging idum Hiſpanicum ibid. 
Gladiolus | | 96 
Gladiolts paluſtris Cordj 27 
Gladiolus Narbonenſis & Traliews 95 
Gladiolns ſegetalis | 24.0 
Glans | | 1158 
Terre plandes 1 9% 7.1058 
Glans wnguentaria 1214 
Glandis ca ah | 1158 
Glans lous 1154 
Glans Sardiana | tbid. 
Glans palmurum | 1134 
Glaſtum |- [— B94 
Glaſtum ſatinumm £ | 294 
Glanx Dioſcoridis 1061.1062 

laucium | | 275-295 
Glanx exigna mar itima | 448 

Globuleria | 512 
Glyeyrrhiza | | 1: F430 
<A E chinats Dieſeoridis 
| 1119 
G pegs. enfdmk | ibid. 
Gheyrrhize ſucces | 1120 
Gheyrrbiz.on 995 
Gnaphalion | | 519 
Gnaphalium Anglicum Fs 
Gnaphalinm vulgare thid. 


G naphalinm Hieronymi Bocehy 27 
Gnaphalizm marinum | , 6 


Gnaph varietates | bid. 
G _T um Alpinum | F17 
Gorgonium | 487 
Goſſi opium ' 753 


Gramen pretenſe main minus 2 
Gramen mInimun rubrum & album. 


3 

G "cn iy mins derinfeut ibid. 
Gramen tunceum ibid, 

Gramen ſegetale < 
Gramen harundinaceum ibid. 
Gramen agrorum | th:d. 
Gramen ſulcatum & prey m ibid.25 
Gramen miliaceum 6 
Gramev maize quopians hid. 
Gramen Sorghinum 7 
Gramen barwntoraceum panmicula- 
Prem | #614 
 Gramen panniculatum -:Þ 
| we "1 * x10 mag an Gran wt 


ibid. 


G Graves reno ac 


| 


1 


« 
CPE coax EEE SS I ON LOTT rr III WISETO A CATE E LI IELIS 92S IRS Oy 
Ee y yymeoy yy peo omeymtn=mmmmnns — em ed As 
== A — —  —_——_—_——  ——— — 


| $4 
Gramen ſtriatum | bis 
Gramen Mane — [+ B$ 
Gramen tomentoſum © 37 
Gramen 4culeatum Pliny ibid, 
Gramen leucanthemum 43 
Gramen marinum 483 
Gramen polyambernum . thid, 
. Gramen Parnaſſi mails & minus 
. 691 
Gratiola latifol:4 466 
Gromphena Pliny | 603 
Groſſularia 1 1143 
 Groſſies 2328 
 Cuaiacum Patauinum 2310 
- | Oraina 793 
Gruinaliss | 295 
H 
H Alicacabum ſolumum 271 
Halicacabus  #bid, 
 Halicacabus peregrinus _ thid. 
 Halimuss 420 
Harenaria . .347 
| Harmala | 1072 
 Hairwido 34-35 
| Harungo vall.ctoria 32-3; 
| H grundo Cypria - abi 
 Harwunde Saccharing 35 
| Harmnido florida 36 


| eqperaider, 


|| Grammincenwaquaticans . tbid, 
Gramen aquaticum 12 
Gr um ſpicatum  thid, 
Gramen | ſluniatile 12 
Gramen fluniatile (picatian - 19 
Gramen geniculatum we 
Gramen geniculatug —— 
Gramen paniceum 5 
Gramen panicenm par umm ibid. 
Gramen echinatum 26 
Gramen exile birſutum. ib1d, 
Grames bir ſutum nemoroſum | 17 
ramen cyperinum nemoroſun i614. 
ramen marinum ſpicatum: | 18 
Gramen marinum ſpicatum a 
page 118 
Gramen inneennm marinum i614, 
Gramenpalnſtre cyperoides. 19 
Gramen cyperoides parumums th1d, 


Gramen aquaticum cyperoides wied- 
| $4148 ; 20 


Cramer eyperoides Picatums. ibid, 


G ramen ſpluaticum minus _ ibid, 
Gramen tnceum ſrluaticum hid, 
Gramen harundmaceum mails & 


7, 21 
Gramen caninum |. 32 
Gratwen caninum nodoſum #bid. 
Gramen caninum marinum 23 


Gramen caninum marinum alterum 
- ibid. 
Gramen caninum ſupinum 


Hedera attollens vel fog 1944, 
Hedera behex vel fteridus mY 11d, 
Hedera corymboſa | _ , ihid 
Hedera arborea +}: 1 
Hedera muralis Wa þ 
Hederaterreftris 705 . an Chame- 
Ciſſus veterums | ibid. 706 
Hedera Crlicia . | "712 
Hedera bumuls | | Jos 
Hederalis 751 
Hedernla aquatica 681 
Hedypnots 221.2 + 
i Pliny 22 
edyſarum Io57 
Hal 471011 AIMS |, 2056 
Heayſarum ghegrrizatum hid. 
Helentum 649 
Heliamhe 1103 
Helianthemum | * _..\ ibid, 
Heliamthemum e Anglicans luteum 
pag. - 1100 
Edcchww Avnglicum album 16. 
Helianthemum lutewm Germanic un 
ibid. 
Helanthemum S & 247 WE r101r. 
Heliamhemum anguitifolum ibid. - 
Helice |, DIOY 
Heliocallis ® 1102 
Helleborailer 49 
Helleboraiter maximus 826 
Helleborattrum 608.825 
Helleborn niger fermlaceus 607 © 
Helleborrs nrger verms S825 
Helleborks albus 356.357 
Helleborus albus precox | 356 
Helleborine 358.359 
Helleborme flore albo 58 
Helleborine anguſtifolia quinta Clary 
ibid. 
Heliochryſon 520 
Helicebr)ſos ſyneſtris 522 
Heliotropum - 266 
Heligtropium mains minus 2 64 
Heliotroprum ſup toms Clury & L'O- 
belt e208 
Heliotropinm rectum 264 
Heliotroptur triceccum 265 
Helxme 261 
Helxme ciſſampelos 713.714 
- Hemerocallis | 91 
Hemerocallis Valentins 137.151 
'Hemerocallis Chalcidonics 152 
Hepatica, , .1376 
Hepatica terreitris 1375 
. Hepatica altera ibid. 
re perirae 21375 
Hepatica aquatica 681 
Hepatica alba ibid 692 
Hepatica trifolia 1032 
Hepatica anrea i614, 
Hepatorium | 57 
Hepatorinm canmabinum hid 


Hepſema 
 Heptaphylion 
Herba ſacra = 
Herba Gerardi 348.349 
Herba ſalax | 63 
Herba Hungaricsa , :\. 786 
S. lacobi | 219 
Herba Simeonts | 786 
Herbs Opſago 220 
Herba ſacra vel ſantla 286 
Herbs Liburnica 3or 
Herba forts | 347 
Herba Parts 328.329 
Herba Doria L'Obely "350 
Herbacattaria | 55 
Herba pedicularis + 
Herbacoxendicum 424 
Herba Siciliana | 435 
Herba /imians 439 
Herba ſtudroſorum 444 
Herbapulicaris 471 
_ margarita - Fr2 
erva 17:51 
Herba _— p : v4 
Herba D Maris 1 
Herba Indaica 565 
Herba /£eyptia 566 
Herba cafta 83x 
Herba benedifta 843 
Herba alba © 944 
Herba ſalutaris 1153 
Herba Trmitatis 10323 
Herbutum 217 
Herenlania res 58r 
+ ms claus 674 
erniaria 
Heyniols wet 
Hermaphbroditicaorchis 16: 
Hibers —© WrxT7 
Hierabotane | Nis 2 
Hierts 
Hieribulbry wel Heerobalbuy ik 
Hrieractum | 237 
Hieracium mains mjnus Dieſco- 
rides 232 
Heeracinm falcatum L'Obely 235 
Hieracnom nigrum | 233 
Hieracinm lep:rinum | tbid, 
Hieracuum luiſolium th:d. 
Hieratimm montanum | 237 
Hieracium Aphacoides 224 
Hieracium int (7b acemm harfoluon 
1hid.226 | 
Hieracinm primuin Clary + 2 2 7 
Hieracinm longtes radi atum 2 74 h 
Hieracinm aſperum 
 Hieracium 5 .Clusy \ubideve.2 3 3 
ippomanes - +: +4: 298 
Hipolapathum ſatiuwn 203 
Heppolapathrom ; | 6:4, 
ppogloſſum | -76t 
Bbbbb | Hippeg/oſom 


Hyporloſ loſſmmnimas & faniina | 7 
Heippogloſſum Mathiols Eo 


| I elmum 
cloum aoreite 

6 be 
Herts tritic uns 
Herenlus 
Hirundinaria maior 
Holchus 
Holoitewm 
Holoſternm Mathiols 
Holoftewm Sa/amanticum 
 Holeſfteumparunm " 

Holofteum petrauns + 


Horminum þlueitre folys pres 
peg. 1-11-08 


\1226 


nu _ ſpecies 


3. - 
a" M 


Humi- baxrs 
Hyacinthia 97. 
pag. 97.98.99.100.1 
Hyacinthus Anglcus 
Hyacimthus ftellatus Fuchſ# | 
Fhacinthus Germanicus 


PY- | 
Hyacinthus comoſus 
Hyacimthus botryoides 
Mo Neotioormns B 


Mk, ſylueftris Cords | 

Hyacmthbus exiguus Tragt 

Hy acimbus autumnal: maior 

Hydvolapathum magnum 

Hyarolapathum minus 

Hydropeper 

Hidb oſclmuns . 

Hyrophthalmon 

Hyofrwris 

Hyofirs- maſcula 

Hyoſcers 

Hyoſcyamus 3 

py—_ Perunuianus 17h; b 
286. 


prey nvnanr a bs 
Haſminum 7.46. ein varietates 745, 
6 


273 


Jaſmimum Ie ric anmum 


Tberu Cardamantica 


Ihiga 

Ibiſens | 
[mperatoria 
Hex | 159.1161 
Ilex Coccigera veltoceifera 


Hex glandifera 
Illecebra 


Ioguings 


Tf 
nſana mala | 
Intybum fins 
Imybum erraticum ibid. 
Intybum [j lueftye 222.223 
Intybum ſylueftre latifolium , ibid. 


T2361 
415.416 
393 


ot 


274 
' 221.222 


| Inule ruitics | 


Ira 
Iris vulgaris 
Iris paluftris lutea 
Iris Florentina 47 
Iris Dalmatic ana4ior of minor 48 
Iris bifiora 49 
Iris riolacea ibid. 
Iris P annonica 861d. 
Iris lutea rate I 
Iris Chalc edomca | ih 
Iris fylueſtris Byz.antina 52 
"5g 93. cinſq, varietates 
932-93 
9 
19 


2 
ibid. 
485 


ibid, 


| - maximus Upricns cernlea bacea 
WEE 3 6. 


Fs 69. an Chomcleonm 'miger hit 


Laces cum ſus) bacills 


Lacer 


Lychrma [hi 


7 rovenn a Aperik 
Lattnca ſatina 
Laftuca iſe 

; amy mage aaltera 


| 242 
Saficns agnind lanfabe ibid. 
Lachryma abietis,vel abitgna 1181 
pence Iuniperi 1139 


Laden $ 
i 1623-1024 
Lon memen 


ibid. 

568 
7 pvp jerarts | $67.568 
Laminm Pannonicun ibid. 
Lampſana 199 
| 4 236 
343 
314 
311 
$614. 
314 
321 
1 
904 
1180 
1183 
i614. 


Lappa inuerſa 
> 3.9 minor 


- ach ramus 
Larix cum gence ſus 
Laſer | 
Laſerpitiun 


854 
$5 3.854 
495 
Laibyr 


pr ar » 
Lavandala flere cernles 467 
Lauandyla flore albo 11467 
Lanandula bortenſis mininths 468 
Lager mains Dioſcoridis © 201 
| Laner Crateue | ibid. 
Laxer,Lan«crium 1006 
Lamrertina : 506 
Laxreola 1216;x 219 
Lanureola florens 1219 
| Lawreola cum fonts ' | | ibid 
Lawrie 457 
Lamrus 2223 
Lanrus mas T2223 
Lany ns femina 1d. 
Lamnrus ſyluettris 1225 
Lamnrus T inus p 122 


Lamrus T inn Lafantea” 1 -obt 


Lawyus Alexandrina & Ras; WL 
Lanrus roſes \1 226 
Latiri baccs 12223 
Leftipes '"I47 
$6". 11108 
Ledon ' #6id, 
Lens | [1050 
Lens maior & minor 1049 
Leng aquatules | 680 
Lens paluitris & lacuſtris | ibid, 
Lenzicula '105O 
Lentiſcus 1243\124; 
Lentiſcina reſins | hd 
Leontion | 487 
Leantopetalow ' 182 
Leonts folinm ibid, 
Leontepodium parunm 518 
Leomtopodion #614 
Leontoſtomium 439 
Leontoſt amuns 4 6 
L nm \ 
r_ e/Eginete & L'Obel.1 187 
Lenuc | 529 
| 26 ane 2996 
Lexcambemis \- 616 
Lexcanthemon \  ubid. 
Lencographis 989 
ENCO1m 37S 
Leucoium bulboſum precox \ 120 
Leacoium bulboſum Os th1d. 
Lencoium luteum 371 
Leucoium bulboſum mains 121 
Leucoinm album 372, 
Leucoium purpurenm ibid, 
Lencorum wiolaceum 373 
Lencoium ſylueftre | bid. 
Lewcoium marini flore Candids L'O- 
bely 374 


37 
Lencoium marinum Latifolinds 375 


Leacoimm marinum luteum main 
Cluny & L Obely | 

1c | By 
Libadion 437 
L:ibanotis 858 


Libanetic Theoplyaſth maiar 857 


I”'N. D/E- X. 


Latew quadrifolie ab; 


Libanotis Theophraftiminor 857 
| Libanotts Theopbraſtinigre 8538 Lotwincana | 1022. 
Libanotis Galent ibid. Tot vrbane vel ſatin! 1026 
Lichen, 1376.1378 Latwarbor | Jun 1 209- 
Lichen arborum 1377 Lotus Theophraſti 13210 
Lichen marinus ithid. Lucernula 381 
Ligna lapidea, fine in lapides connerſa Lunaria | 378 
«Inge. 1390 LamariaGreca | t#bid. 
Lignuwm 0114 1303 Laumaria minor | 51.339. 
Lignum dulce 1349 Lumaria maier | . "971 
Lignſticum 855 Lnupicrepinies 1385; 1386 
Liguftrum v7 9 714  Lapmus | © 1 2043 
Lignitrum nigrum Tls [opinus ſatinne | ibid, 
Lignſtram ys I _ an Cyprus Lupin flore luteo | 1hid, 
614.1210 Luinues flore cernleo | thid, 
Liliafphodelus 91 Lupm ſalittarins - RIP 
n 45-91 + 9%,.tpxx oh £:4:.0052 egfd 
Lihtaſtrum  thid. Lnutcola + | 398 
Liltum non bulboſum -90 Ly@bnis | 385 
Lilm-narciſſie i pad 123 Lychnis Chalcedeniew' $:=4.] 360. 
Liltum | 147 Lychniscoronariarubru 281 
Lilium album | 146 Lychnu coronaria vel ſatina ibid. 
Lultum album BJe.entinannibid. 147 Lychnis ſylueſtris ++ + 482; 385 
Lilimm aureum 148 Lychnis ſylueſtris rubeloflore © 482 
Lilinm rubrum tid, m_—_ marina eAnglica  - \ ibid. 
Lilium cruentum latifolium 149 ts ſylueftris hd — , Jugd3 
Lilum Byz.ant inns 15h. ken ſlueſtri prima Gage ibid. 
Luliam Saracenicum » #1 Lychnss hirta minima | _ 
Luinm ſylueſtre bid. Lychnuc flneſtris mcana abi 
LOO bid. Lychaus 1% alba « 3*4 
Lilinm Perſicuns 152 Lychnis caulculu "_ Clusy 
Lilinm conuallium 331-332 Mn. 385 
Limodoron 1099 215k 
Limonia |, po Fran Hiſtanicum | ibid. 
Limonium 330-332-333 Lycottonon - $23 
Lumoninm Geſnert © 323 NEE lore Debi 8224 
Limonium paruum 332 823 BY 
Limme/inm 467 Lycoflonon cermleum parmens bid; 
Linaria 440.444. Lycoltovi Aconitun 824 
Linaria purpurea odorata . 449 Lycopſ Anghica | 658 
Linaria Valentis| tid. Lychnoides ſe getum | 926 
Linaria aurea 442.522 Lycopertinm | 275 
Linaria paſerine 443 Lycepodion 1374 
Linaria purpea alters 441 Cycoftaphyles 21237 
Lingua canis 659 Lyſimachia 388 
Lirgua bubula 654 Lyſmachinum #1d- 
' Ling ua vulneraria 327 Lyſimachialutea 386 
Limuzvs 5 Lyſtmachia purpurea ſpicars ibid. 
ow pratenſe C oras 27 Lyſamachia fliquoſa | ibid. 
inum ſatin Lyſimachia campeitris 3387 
Linum ſylueflre floribus albis Ins —_ ſhluatica | hid. 
Linum ſylueftre tennrfolium hid. 
Linoſyris Nuperorum 442 M 
Lithoſpermum 87 
Lithoſbermum mains ff minus ihid. |, —amy Grſres 121t 
Lolium 926 Aſacia 495 
Loknm rubrum 71 AMact 1353-2354 
Lolumm album ibid, CAMadon | 720 
Loliim murinnum ihid. PZAatorana | 539 
Lonchitts aſpere * 978.979 AMaiorana maior 528 
Lonchitis Marambe ibid. Matorana maior eAtiglics wubid- 
Lotus 1029 AMavoranatennifolia x53 9.8 Maio- 
Lots trifolia corniculats 1028 rava tr S.1mpſychu 5279 
1029 Malibatbrum | r351 
Bbbbb 2 Mata 


 Maluwarantia. 


AMalua hortenſis 


Adatua roſea ſrmplex prep 


AMalua purpurea multi 


Aatum Cotoneums 


Males tarbonartd 


AMatus carbonarid longo oy Go | 


 Mabhuregalts 

AMaliu reginalts 

"CMalmus ſyluneſtris ntbens 
| Malus ſyluettris alba 
CHMalus ſyleeitris minor 
Alalus duracina _ 


1280.1278 
Males Irmonia 


Malus Aſſyria 
CIMaulus Cotonea 
Aalucs canma 
CHMandragoras 
eManne gramen | 


LAanne gr amints ſpecies 2 f 


AMarathrum 


Maratri llow e & ar 


l Marie herba 


L ND”! EX. 
Mermubiaftrans | $66 
Mertagon album Byzantinum 147 
Afartagon rmperiale IF1 
Afarym 0.5 44+ 545 
Marum Syriacuns 6 3 
Mattiche | 1244 
Mater Herculania 674 
Meatticalis | FS1 
Afatricaria IS, 26.527 
Matricaria duplici fore +526 

. Mariſaluia | 627 
Mechoacan 72; . an fit Bryonie ſþe- 

cies aut Kha album 724 
Mecan Ceratites 295 
HMechoacar P ervintanuum 723 
Medica [| 1030 
Medi Dreſearidi $3 
Mel frugum .79 
AMelampodion + 826 
M-lampyrum | 21 
Melampyrum 4 "228 $4 
Melampyrum luteum | 84 
Melanthiam || 924-926 
Melanthium frbeeftre-j { - (14-924 
Melambium Damaſcenum 925 
Mcbes 77 
Aelefia 1082 
Melilorus | - -, L035 
Melilotus Syriata odora 1033 
Meliletus ltaltrs i Patanins ibid. 

| Melilotics Ger munica 103 
Melilprics coronata hid 
Meliphyllon || , 560 
Meliſſa | 558.560 
Meliſſa Turcics 558 
Mel:ſſa Molucta lenis & ſpinoſay 5 9 
Metrſſophyllon | + 560 
Mel trena | 562 
Melitris 560 
Ld 774-772 
5+ ro Ee ibid. 

| Melo Hiſpanicis hid. 
Melotarduus echinatve Foog & 

L'Obely | 1013 
AMelepepon 772 
AMelortum | 279 
Meloſpinum | 278 
HMemecylum | cJ311 
HMemiren Serdjhomia 669 
AMentha & nr $3 
Mentha ſatina babrs 1s 552 
HMentha cruciata ibid.55 3 
Mentha Sarrarenica 553 
AMentha Romana _” 
Mentha Gree . 520 
Mentha corymbifera _ 7 
HMentha cardiaca 553 
Mentha anguft ifolia  "tbid, 

 Mentha Felina. 554 
_— Cattariaaltera , #hid. 
AM, aquatica $5 
Mentha ſiſymbria 1 
pair [1 


Mercaridlu fylueftris ( 264 
Meſpilns {+15 1-8BGg, 1266 | 
Meſprivem. 1266 
Mewn 895 
AMexzereon 1216 
Adtumm 73 
Alulium ſlnettre 26 
JArlium nigrum obid. 
Mulinm Indicur 77 
Althum lnaticum bg 
Aillefolrum 679.914 
Alillefolium ſlueftre 902 
Mellefolinm terreftre vulgare 91.4 - 
Millefobum flor rubro abea, 
Mille folinm luteum 915.916 
Millefolium nobile #bid. 
Millefolium ftratiates 916 
; v5" am-rmjng abid, 
Aullemorbi 580 
Militers 914 
Mibtarts Aizaides 677 
Hltarts aquatica bd. 
AMimmulus herbs 913 
Mirabilia Peruniana 273 
Airobalani Chebule, Bellerice, Em- 
blice, Indice 1316 
Mubridatium 535 
Moloche 79t 
549 
| | 902 
. = 968 ; 
Molluge mont ana 967 
", APY 145 
Moty aricum 143 
Moby D1 Coridewns 143 
Meh Hiern ibid. 
Moly H, ericuns 144 
ibid. 
1070 
Melt, | FA Clury & L'Obely 
LE. | | 1346.1347 
Monephylle | 330 
Afontiulnmmns 1297 
Aforion | 281 
Aoroſycos | 1327 
Aorum | ; 1325 
Morum Rybi | xog1 
Mor | 1325 
Morys alba thid. 
Aorus ls 3927 
Mula fare | 979. 
| T1157 
' 26 
 #hid. 
346 
_ xi9g 
333 
1332 
noo. 
481.482 


Mnſens 


AMuſcns 1369.1376 
Mouſcus quernus hid. 
= PP _ wh 1374 
Crs terreſires aris 1370 
—_ terreſtris ſcoparins | ibid, 
CHMuſe us capillars 1371. 2374 
HManſcus capiliaris minor _. 16 
Alun ſc us ramoſte ' 2372 
; Muſes ramoſis floridues |  ihid. 
Muſcus filicinus ibid. 
Muſciu cornenlatus . #bid, 
JMnſcus dentienlatins 1373 
Muſe ua denticulatus minor ibid. 
ny clauatie , fine Lycopodinns 
1374 
Mew ex cranio humano | id, 
Muſe us marinus 13 794 380 
IMnſcus corallinns » #bid, 
HMuſtum \-.-73P 
rum 213.214 
Myoſuros | 346 
Myrica | 1195.1200 
Myrieply laws " 679 
CMyrrba,c Myrrhus \» $83 
Atyrrhida Pliny | 7296 
Ayrtus acuta - 759 
HMyreus ſylueſtris \ 561d, 
Aris agria _ |. 760 
Myrius arbor 1226.1227 
CAMrins Boetica latifolia, vel Myr- 
16 lawrea 1227 


MAyrius exotica, Tarentind ibid, 
Ayrine candida, nigra, Su, 
ibid. 


Ariza Brabantica 2228. 
_— Thome Pennei Angli 
[1097 
—-z Myxaria 1315 
N 
New $24 
Napellus Moy/is 829 
Napellus verus cernulens | 823 
Nap | 28x 
Napium | 199 
Narciſſus | I14 
 Narerſſivarie ſpecies 108. 109. Ho 
011.112.1123. 
Narciſſus cerulens Bocchy 98 
Narciſſus medio purpurets | 108 
wwe wnedio pro pur ene pr 
109 
Nareis ws lntens '. TIO 
Narciſſua ſerotinus minor ibid. 
Narciſſue piſanus  thid. 
Naveiſſus tories albus ' 'I'T2 
Navciſſne inncifoluus precox 112 
Narciſſus Per ſicus ' $23 
Narciſſus autumnalis mighr ibid. 
Narciſſus lutens polyanthos 116 
_ Coulbeuringalnnney 137 
' 921 
Nenorafics 688. oder 8 


FN bn 


Nardus Cretica 918 | 
Nardss Intica 921 | Oo 
Nardm Celtica Fl | 
Nardus Celtica repens p19 Cellus Damaſcenus 
Nardus aur 922 Ocellus Barbaricus 4s 
Nardus Narbonenſis 921 Ocrimum | 547 
Naftos Clury 34 Ocrimum | 161d. 
Naſturtium I95 Ocrimum medium citratum 1614, 
Naſturtium Hibernum 188 Ocrimum minus garicybyllatums ibid. 
Naſturtizm hortenſe 4 Orimum (jlueftre | 548 
Naſturtium Hi[þamcum Ocular is $37 
Naſfturtinm petreum L'Obely -thid. Ocy $52 
Naſturtium [ndicum 196 Ocymaſtrum multiflorum _obid. 
Natturth [ndvci flores & ſemina Ocymaſtrun alterum thid. 
N. aſteertiumn hlueftre 197 Ocymoides «61d, 
Naſturtium aquaticum 200.201 Ocymordes repens = #646, 
Naſturttum aquaticnm mites 203 Odomites 4 4-1 2s By 
Naſturtium tettorum © 206 Ocrnanthe - -- 906 
Nepa Theophraſti 1140 Oenantheaquatica' | | 902 
Necbelon F 665 Otea ſatina 1206 1027 
Nerion 1220 Oled ſilueſtris, & Olea <Arhiogica | 
Nerium /iue Oleander ibid. ey 861d. 
Nerium flore albo 1220 Oleees [4-220 BEL 
Ni ophoy on 711 Olectellu | rad. 
Vida: ants 176 Oleaſfter 307 
Nigella 926 Ohma | bg 151d. 
Nigella Romana ibid. Olbimella _—. 7, 
Nigella flore albo multiples 97'5 | \ 867.902 
Nigellaſtrum 926 257.366 
Nuces cupreſſi 1186 "257 
Nages fagi T255 260 
Nucespinee 1174 . obid. 
Nuces vomice T362 866 
Naces purgantes * ibid. i158 
Nactlet 727 1166 
 Nacula Indica 1338 542 
Nacula terreſtrus 906 | 2062. 1064 
Nummularia 505 Omnobrychu flore purputes 10623 
Nummolaria minor ibid, Onobrichis 2.Clusy | 1063 
| Nux auellana arbor 1250 Onobricbus 3r Cluoy, flore —_ 
Nux veſicaria 1249 p4 
Nux aucllana pumila Byz.antina Onobrrebiss montana 4. Cluvy I 044 
1251 Onoelcia 657 
Nux Pontics thid. Onons 1142 
Nux parua ibid. Onoſma 658 
Nux Heracleotics tid. Omnoporder | 1010 
Nux Preneſtina ibid. | Onopteris mas, famine 975 
Nux auellana  tbid. Opalt grata | 439 
Nax Iuglans 1252 -Opbiogloſſon | © $237-229 
Nux regra fl ib:4,- Ophbris 327 
Nux Perfica ibid. Opbris bifolia,cy wifake 326 
Nux Indica arbot 1338 þ- ar ery | 527 
Nax Indica = thid, 1237 
Nux Myriſtica & Macs 1353 15% |1330.1233 
354 # Orbicularts radix | 695 
Nux moſchata ibid, Oreoſelmum 863 
Nux um ibid., Orchis "#7. 
Nymphea © 674 Orchuma 159 
Nymphes pars Ma. Orchu Delphinia ibid 
Nymphes varietas 672 Orchu Saurodes x6r 
Nymphca alba minor 673 Ovchumelittia _ we 
Nymphea Iutea mmor ibid, Orchu myodes : ne br 
Nymphaa lutea miningd Orchu modes lures = 164 


6 
| y Orchis 


Orchi; myodes minor 
Orchis ornubophara 
Orchis ornuthophora folio 


pag + 
Orecbrs 
Orchis ſtrat eumatica 


Orchic ſtrateumatica minor | 


Orchu andrachnits 


Origanum Anglicum 
anum Cr 41icum 
Orneogloſſam 
Orn:thogalum | 
Ornithogalum P annonicum 
Ornithogalam luteum 


att 


Orobu receptus Herbarieru f 


Ormnala 

Ory2z4 

Oſonnds 

Oſmunda regalis 
rollon 


Ofyris 

Ofyru alba 

Ofyris purpuro ceruled 
Ofyres Grecornm 
Oftrya,vel Oſtrys 
Othonna ' 

Oxal:s 

Oxalis tuberoſa 
Oxalts tenuifola 
Oxralts Romans 
 Oxals criſpa | 
Oxalis mmor, minima 
Oxy4 


Oxyacantbis 


Oxys 10 31.cins varietas | , 


Oxytiphyllum Scribony Lergi 


= 
o/Eonia 


Peoria mas & farming VE 


P 40nia foemina multiplex ' 


[bx femina polyanthes fir | 
Bid 


wo famina alera # vel 


rouns Jl h 


4 candida | | » 


| 
ee Þ Galeni 1 144 | 


1ND E x. 
hid, 

695 

TI53-1154 


1333-1334 P 


a. Palmapinu, fue Palms conifers 


paluſtris 175 


bi &s == 554: bid, 
bid, | Palmula | 


{1 


id. | Paludapium | [4 
| Annex (hordalaide 
2  Panax Heraclenys mains 
L | Panax Colons (| 
bid.  Panaces | {| 
j Panaces == eqs 


o | Pancratium| | 

t | Pancratium Clurty 

9 | Pancratinm mavimum 

| 627 Pancratium marinum luteum ibid. 


Panicum 


| | 7 
| Panicum ſlbeſtre, & paluſtre | 


| hid. | Panicum ndicum , & Panicum ce- 


ralewn | | 78 
_—_— mes & Panicum fylue- 
re j 


[. | Par 


Papawerculun | 
Papaney | | 
Papaney paluſtre 


9. Papauers Corn:ati varietates 
ibid, Papaver ſutinum albzum 


Papauer ſatruaum P19 1008 O1 
Papantr Kigr wm polyaurhon "1A. 


bid. Papayert carerb varietates 296, 


297.298 |! | 
Papauer Khaat | 299 
Papaner erratic ibid. 
Papaner finidum Þ1 
Poaparer ſpume um 
Papyrus N eloticd 
Parictaria | 
Paronychia © y 
Paronychia latifolia 
Paronychia vulgars 
Paronychia rutaceo folio 
Paronychia laciniata 
Parthesis | 
Parthenium 
Parthtnion | 
Paſſuls mont ang. 

Paſtinaca l} 
Paſtinaca Latifolea ſaring 
aſtinara aquatic 
Paſtinaca latifolra ſjlueſtris 
Paſtinaca marini 
Paoſtinuca [ating tenuifolia 


Paſtmmaca hlueftris tenmifolia 873 


Pepo maximus rotundus | 
Pepo maxinnu compreſſus 
Pepo maximus clpearus 
Pepe Indirus minor rot undus 
Pepo Indicua angwloſie 
Pepo Indies famngiformus 
Pepones ſneſtres 
Peponella | 
Perdicinns 
Pergalinm 
P erfolrat © | 
Perfoliats Orlg avis 
Perfoliara filquoſe 
Periclymenum 
Periclymenum perfoliatum 
Periclmquum fans aut reflem 
P4e- i ; + 
Pericymenum veflum Sab ndicuns 
PC: 01 xyr's 
Perichmenam rel Germanicun 
ibid, 
Pervelymenums redtums Cum frets 
carwules I'112 
Periclymenuns reum enm fruttu 
_ Higro | ' 
Periploca 
Periploca repens | 
Perpenſa 
Perſica,tel Perſica mala 
Per/ica precox | 
Perſice Varietates 
Perſicaria | 
Perſicaria maculeſa 
P erſicaria fiigueſe 
Per 
P 46 50pm & Perſonatia 
Pexleoninus | 
Pes gallinacens E 
Pes anſerinus 259 
Pes leports | -YO3J« 1024 
Petaſnes, | 1668 
Petaſuet florens m__ 
Petaſints folia | 
Petrefnduls = 889 
Petroſelmum | 861,865 
Petroſelinum IMacedonicum vhid. 
da wy Macedene. Fmch. $64 
| 6 0914 


Prucedamum , ſmae Pencedanes $6, 


897 
Peucedanum main hid, 
Pezice 1386 
Phalanginm 44-45 
Phalangium ramoſum ; 44 
Phalangium Crete | 
Phalaris | > $0. 
Phalaris pratenſes ibid. 
Phaſelus | T1041 
Phaſeolus 1041.1042 

Phaſeolus albus & miger 1038 
Phaſeolus Braſilianus 1040 
Phaſeoli Brafiliani ad viuum ibid, 
Phaſeols Braſiliani 1 2. genera 1041 


Phaſeolorum 1 2.genera ibid. 
Phaſeolt «Americi purgantes my 


I Eg yptiacins : 
9 
= 665 
Phe += 888 
Philanthropos 575-964 
Philipenaula 902 
Philipendula aquatica ibid, 
Phillyrea 1208. 1210.1213 
Phillyrea anguſtifolia 1209 
Phillyrea lattore folio ih1d, 
Phillyrea ſerrata 2.Clu 1210 
Phillyrea > Z ms Meacaleb 
pag. * T1211 
Philyca 1213 
Phiſtacion 1248 
, 143 
495 
7 I 
976,977 
976 
262 
Phyllon Thelygonon 263.264 
Phyllon Arrhenogonon thid. 
Phyteuma © $18 
Picea 1172.1173 
Piloſella _ $14 
Piloſella maior Fr3 
Prloſella repens ibid. 
Piloſella mmor /atifolia 514 
Pilsſelta flore caruleo 11d, 
Pilkele eopreſſ 1186 
Prirpinella 888.889 
Pimpinella Sexifraga 887 
Pimpinella mator 888 
 Pimpinella hortenſis 889 
Pempinella ſylueſtris 1h1d, 
Pimpinella ſangmiſorba #6id, 
Pimpmella ſjrnoſa Camerary 11.48 
Pinaſtellum 897 
Pinaſter 1177 
Pinguiculs 644:645 
Pins 1174 
Prmes [atina,ſiue domeſtica 


In73 
«074 6 


—_— 


Fd, to E7 x. 


1175-1177 
614.1178 
hed. 


Pinus maritima maior 1 176.1 177 


Pinus CMatedonum mas 1178 
Pinus [den Theophr iſt th:d. 
Pi 1356 


iper 
Pyper Indicum,c+ Calecurbium 2.9 3 


Piper aquaticum 561 
Piper Hiſpanicum 293 
Piper agreſte T1202 
Piper e/Ethiopicum 155.1356 
Pyper migrnm , album & longum 


ar $ ITF 
Piper longum mains &f mini ibtd. 


Piper Mathiols 1356 
Piperitzs, . 293 
Piſſaſphalton T1271 
Piffacts 1248 
P:ſtucion ibid. 
Piſtacinm Ge rmanicum 1249 
Piſum 1047 
Piſum mai, fue Romanum 1045 
1047 
Piſum mins ibid, 
Piſum cordat im 271 
Pifum mbellatum 1045 
Piſurm excorticatum ibid, 
Prfum ſylneſtre 1046 
Piſam flueſtre perenne ibid, 
Piſum Grecorum 1054 
Pitnitaria 398 
Puys 1173 
. Pityacampe | bid, - 
Putyuſa 404 
Pixli 1180 
Pix arida vel fees ibid. - 
Placida Querexa 1157 
Plantago | 340 
Plantago aquatica «338 
Ali humilis ca. ibid 
Plantago latifolia | obid. 
Plantag o meana thid, 
Plantago latifolia minor 339 
Plantago arg v/t1folia minoy ibid. 
Plantagoroſea ſpicata 340 
Plamagoroſea exonca ibid. 
Plantago quinquenernuia &e. 340 
Plantago Hiſpanienſis 343 
Plantago anguſtifolia albida ibid, 
Platanaria 41 
Platanus - 1237.1303 
PR Ie fine pra hyemalia 
p4ge 137 
Platomela Ns pra eſtina ibid. 
Plumbago , | 361 
Plumbago — 1069.1070 
+: 1gmm% mg 
rn wana ſue trifolmm PP.) 5 | 
"peg. | 1129 
Polenta 65 
Policaria 391 


Polinns | yi y29 
Poly montani varietates 528529 
Polyacantha F roo4 
Polyamthemum || voy 


Polyanthemum aquatients GBL 


Polygala F 451 
Polygala repens | 499 
Polygale warictates | ibtt, 450 
Polygala _ 0 —_—_ [9% 
Poligalon / 

Polycarpuns 

Polyeritum 

Polyg onatum 756. 758 
Polygonatum minua 756 
Polyg onatum 1. Cluzhy rod. 
Polygonatum ramoſum 1h1d. 
Polygonatum acurum Cluty 757 
Polygonatum anpifotw bid. 
Polygonum 453 
Polygonum ms vnlgare | | 4571:453 
Polyg onus mas minis 11d. 
Polygonum montanumn | | 1bid. 
Polygonwm ſclinoides 453 
Polypoarum | 972 
Polypotrum quercinum  " 974 
Polyrrichum 983, 985-1374 
Pobytrichon Apnuley | 11d, 
Poly ſpermon Cafſans 257 
Pomum 1275 
Pomum anrewm 275 
P omen ſþinoſrums 278 
Pomum Hieroſolyniit anus 291 
Pomum mira ile 161d. 
Ponum cdonum T1262 
Pommm Aſſyrium 128r 
OP | 1275 

opulago 671 
Populus alba rhen:r4h 4 
Popmlna nigra 6 nt 4 
Populus ca 1303 
Populus tremult, fine montana ibid. 
1303 

| Populus Americana 14302 
Porcellia 236 
Porrum 138 
Porrum tow/ile . 179 
: Portulaca 419 
Portulaca domeſtica 418 
Portul1ca may ma 420 
Portulaca ſylneſlris | 416.418 
Potamogeiton lutifolinm 675 


Potamogeiton anguſbifolium ibid, 


Potentilla 841 
Potentilla maior 886 
Poterion L'Obely __ - © 1148 
Pothos | 936 
Primnla veris | $72.6359 
Primula veris major © 635 
Primula vert flore pleno © 636 
Primmla pratenſis modora lutea.67 5 
Primmla hortenſis Anglics 636 
Primula verts flore gemmato _ thid..- 
Primula veris minor ibid, 
Primula flore virids 637 


*  Pulicarisa 


Prunella [Obety 

Prumellaflore albo 

Pranm 

Prumu domeſtica 

Prunus mrobalanis 

| Prumia Amygaalina 

' Pruta Damaſcena 
 Prums ſylueſtris 

Prunus (lueftyi, florens 

Pruama Damaſcena 

 Pruna Heiſþanica | 

Pruna Hungarica ſine [none ad, 


Pruna Gallca thid. 
P ſeudoacorius 46 
P {eudoaſphodelus lut ens . 89 
P [eudobuntum 158 

Pſendoc ap/icum Dodonc 289 
Pſendocytiſs | $137 
Pſendecytiſia primis & ſecundi 


| 1126 
Pleoterifie bir futus 1127 
| Pſendodittammms G51.652 
Pſendohelleborus ' $26 
P ſeadohermodatlyIns 131 
P[cudomelanthium 92 2 q 
Pſendonarciſſus multiplex | 
Pſendonarciſſus Anglici \ + Hh # 
micus þ14, 
Pſeudomyr/ine 
' Pſendorhabarbarum 1968 
Pſendoſpartum Hiſpanicum 1137 
4" of When ro" apbyllou 


Plendeſprtam album aphy len tid. 


Pſora | | | 586 
P(5 llizem YM 471 
P {3 lum ſemper virens L' elh ib1d. 
Prarmica 483 3-454 
Prermica Auſtriacs | bid. 
Ptarmeca duphict fiore 
Preridion 

Prtiſana 

Pulegium 

Pulegium regium 

Puleg tum mas 
Puleginnm angrſtifolum 
Pulegium ſylueſire 


Pulmonia 
ukaaded 
Pulmonalts 
Pulmonaria maculoſa 
Pulmonaria folis Echy 
Pulmonaria anguſtifolia 2. 
Pulmonaria Gallorum S 
Pultilla 
Pulſaulle vulgaris 
Pul/atillarutra 
, Pulſatilla flore albs 
Pyraſter 


1228 


| N D. E X; 
hrum 618 
> ther foorog 484.6 B 
Pyrola [| 330 
Pyromelo 


1614. 


Pyris Lana bl vrband 
| 1267 
ibid 


Pyro prevox-. | 
Pyrus | lacobea | 
Pyrus regalas ( 
Pyrus | Palatina;. 
Pyrus eydonia | ibid, 
Pyrus Epiſe » or «bid. 
Pyris ſuperb 4 fue Catberina 1269 
Pyrus | byemalis; thid. 
Pyrus ſylneſtrit 1271.1272 
Pyred ſrangolyveris maicr (f minor 
1270 
1271 
12272 
11d. 
683 
1151 


1268 
ibid. 


Ma.) ſplueſtrid mmjme 
Pyrus praieniaria 
Pyriw:corums | 

Py thonon | 
Pyoxatanths 


'Q 
Qt = abated fine fuſ- 


Cam 1029 
O wereula | 535 
tan miner 531 
Q mere us i 157-1167 
Ouerens vulgaris 1156 
Quercus __—_ cum  glande & 
mieſco ſuo || bid. 
Quencis bumilis 1157 
Onercus marine 1378 
Ouinnueneruts 342 
QOninqueneruia roſea 341-342. 
Q minque folrunn 82 
Q uinque foltrum mains 
winguefolium vulgare 4d, 
O ningquete linm [yluaticum 837 
neue ſolu Tormentille facie 


$:8 
F711 Ry Vo 


I160 yv 
|R 


| Acenpoas 
{ Radicula ſatins 
Radix marica & ngronics 
Radix namtic4 
Radix ſpirnas ſantti 7 
Radix caua 9 34 ein dinerſe ſpectes | 


931.932.933- «rſt Capnos che- | 
lionia || 


934 

Radiolus || 

R anunculus paluſtris F $1 14 

Ranwnculus fimmens 814 815 
——_ Platyphylles fine _— 


Ranuntulus  Conflantinopolit 
Byzantinta fine Aſiaticns -. 
Rrunculus Tn, 


Pe: 


| 1 077L- 
Pyrum 1269 


 Raphangs ſylueftris 


Renencules Ti a 8x 2.81 i 
Ranenculus albuy muttiflorys $12. 
Ranwnculus ninexs potyanthos hid, 
Kanunculus maximus Anglicw 810 
Ranunculus maximui multiplex wid. 
Ranynentrs aquaticus 681 
Ranunculus cerulens 797 
bom pratenſis & bortemſ | 
804.805 
4 0. furreflis canliculu 804 
Ranuwiculus arworium 805 
Ratncaks Alpinies albus ibid, 
Ranuriculu Ilyricwus 806 
Rannculus bulboſus ibid, 
Ranunculus auritomus 807 
Ranunculus nemoroſus ibid, 
Kanunculus batrachioides 80$ 
Ranwnculus gramineus L'Obely wi, 
Ranunceulus artiemnatlis Clury 80g 
Rannnconlus Luſitanicus Cl: lasy hid, 
Ranuncilis gliboſus ibid. 810 
Ranunculu Alpinis ibid, 
Raperum * 182 
Rapum | 178 
. Rapum mains  minus\ 177.180 
 Rapumpeniſte 11:0 
” Rapmmn porcinuns .. 698 
Kapum ſylueſire 179.180 
Rapiſtrum arnorum eb1, 
Rapiſtru 4quatioum 
Repecaulis | 
Rapunculus nemoroſus 
Repwnculum alopecuron 
Rophanus ſartans 
Raphannys orbiculatus 
\ Raphanms pyriformis 7 
185.1 86 
Rephanys aquatieze 185 


[gb raſticanuy ant magni 
I ” 
Rep 7; MR þ lutitris officinarum hi 


Raproitiam minus 

| Rapuntium PAruum 

Redauiz | : 

Remora aratrs 

£1 

Reſma cedring 

Reſina liquids 

Refma abiegna' 

Reſina larigna vel laricea 

Reſina lenniſcing | 

Rha 

Rhabarbarum - barbayicun 

Rha ponticum | 

Rha copitatur L'Obely | 

Rhab.rbarum monachorum 
1068 | | 

Rhabarbarum florens | 

| Khabarbarum morn 

Rhamnus 

 Rhamnns tertins Clurh 

| Rhamnus ſoluginns | 

Rheon | | 

[Os A | 


ofa Cinnamomea pleno fore | | 
ſa ſylue Tris edora 


Roſe Hiericontea mator 
oſa ning ſiccata 


5 
befoarmns Coronarium, vel Roſma- 
1109.1110 
num flucitre, vel Reſmari- 
| ww ſlueſtris  uhid. 
« & Rubeia +... 962 


961 
a ſlueſtris has 
ubia marina 


Sagopenmm | 


Sagittaria maior & minor 


= anguſhfolis | 


1068 
thed. 


bs * . 1070.1072 


p 
Rae ſrlueitris evencelens 
{4am 


King montana 


1070 
1071 


. "PER —y 
- © =- - 


Gen wy I193 
Sy ny thid, 
Sabina baccifer  thid, 
Sabina alters ibid. 
Sabina genuins baccifera, atrocerif 
lea = 1194 
898.3899 

336 
337 
58 
388 
723 


1235 


619 
923 
 1203.1205 
1202 
ibid, 
. 120 
Salix caprea "_- bid. 
Salix caprea latifolia 
Salix roſea Anglica 
Salix humilzs 
Salix perticalis 
Salicss tertia ſpecies 
Salix pumila bid, 
Salix viminalts ibid, 
Salix Gallita, Sabina & Amerina ih, 
Salfs Roſa 
Salnia 
Saluia agreſtis 
Saluia Romana $24-552- 553 
Saluia maior 623 
Saluia minor ibid. 
Salua l ndic 4 bid, 
Saluia Alpina 161d, 
Saluia vite 983 
Sambugue © 1234-1235 
Sambucus laciniatis folis ibid, 
Sambncui racemoſa vel cernina hid. 
Sambucus nelies vel montane 


f.- 0y aquatica ye. 
Md 4 


12337 


1204 
I 20x 
1h:d. 
ibid. 


_—_— aquatilis fno- paleifet 
1... AJ 

roſea tid, 

Sambucus roſea flore bid, 

Sambucts bumuts —_— 238 


Sarcocolla herba 
Saſſafras arbor 

Satwreia 

Satureia hortenſis | 
Satureia horten/is afting 
Satareia $antts Tuljant 


Sans alba 
Saxifraga aurea 
Saxifraga mmor 
Saxifraga eAnglicans 
Saxifraga rubra 


| Saxifrage lutea 


Saxifraga maior 

Saxifranga Dioſcoridus 

Scabioſa 

Scabroſa mor val; TAYLE | : 58 2 
Scabroſa campettris free ſe ſegerum 


8 

Selbaia rubra Auitriacs bid. 
Scabioſa montana 584 
Scabuſa meer Hier 585 
SCAmmonium 728 
716 
16:4, 
718 
7 

284 


Chord i Scardy- 


Scolopendria 
| Scolymw \ woe a 
Scopa regia . 
Scordinm © 
| Scorarum Mains & minus 


Scorpicades lepunineſe 
Scorpioides myoſotu repens 
Scorpius Theopbrails 


Scrophularid 


Screphularia maior 
Scrophularia altera 
 Seythica berba 

| Secale 


Securidaca 


Sedaum | 419. 


Sedum maius 


Sedum minus hematoides | 


Sedum minus officinarum 
Sedum aquatile © 


S emperuinm tertium Dieſe ar. 


Semperutuum ſylueftre 
| Send 

Sena Oriewtalic 
Sena [ralica 

Sem 

Sentis canind 
Seprtifolinm - 

Serapias candido flore 


Serapias minor flore nitente | 


» Serap14s paluFtric latifolia 
[Few 0am leptophy ls 


er apias mont 
op gariophyllata 


| Seſfamim 


| Sefti Peloponn 893 
| Seſthpratenſe iſe Monhchenfm 892 
| Sefſeh Creticum $94 
| Sefeli CA uſſilienſe ibid. 
f.  Seſeli Peloponnenſe was 904 
| en & 2232 


Serapias caſtrata 


| Sata velſrnletampen 
Sermilla [-7 


7  Seruilam ib1 
| Seſampides _ || 397 
| Seſamoides Sildhtehties wats ” 


> Seſamoides Salamantic. pr uum 
| Seſamiides mains Scaligert” bid. 


Seſamiles minne a$72 ; 
2 


| Seſamiides magni Cords © 


S eſamoides prage Mathioli” 397 
Scſama 1 
6445686 


Seſeh pratenſe 891.892 


= WIE 


435 


| _ q' 2353 

| Siderith [1 914 

Tx Sideritis Herculona ' 569 
12 Sideritis 3. _. 794 
o | Sidum | 1262 
bid. Silaus Pleny | 902 
x | Silene Theepraih $2 
Siler montannn officineras 8 92 

6. Siler me alterum ibid, 


35 


1027 

61 

1027 
ibid. 1241 
ibid, 


3/9" 293 


| - 200.201: 862 
_ al 201 
| ibid, 
164721042, 1161 
to berrenfh Carrey 
rhe Perumens 
p oped Sera Liens 
Smilhx aſpera Germanica 
Sy {ents maiar | Fo 


| | 690 
Seldarells ibid. an \ Braff BY wir, 
Seldme lia marina : ik ibid, 
Soldanclla mont me 7 hid. 
Sobidhgo IJIK (6%, vl ' 66x 
Solrdag o minor | 
; rn 
Solarmums © 


p >= en A T1, 


Sonchs aſþer 
Sonchu lens ibid. cins| varietates © 
Þ4g- 230.231 
Sonchus arboreſsens ibid. 
Sonchus ſplnatica "ibid. 
Sophia PSI 910 


a | 1137 
fer | $3 
Sphacelng 


ocephalu . 990 
| h 468 

Spica hortuland 1,469 

Fpricata 1 MPI 

alba 989.990 

pina peregrine 

pine ſol:inialts 1004 

achia 260 
Spenachenm oli ibid, 
Chica agrorum ventt | 
4 he | roflenys 
pina acida 1144/1145 
Spina hirci 21148 
Spina birci minor 1147 

Spina e/£g yptiaca Ii5O 

pina buxes  4nIFr 

Spina cernatis or ſalntaris 1153 

pina infettoria & Spinacern 115 4 

pordylium 56 

ſporgia 4c BIO3 

Jpongia marina alba - | #bitd, 

pongta marina fland | abid. 

Fpongrole 1386 

Srachys 563.564 

Sracbys Fuchſis ® | id. 

Frachy: fpuria \ 564 

Srattice 473 

F raphylinus 870.873 

$ raphylode wdron Pliny 1249 

Srataria 897 

Stella Jeguminoſa 1060 

relleria  347.802.966.1004 

rebaria Herath Augery \ 

; ternutamentora | 484 
Feabe 1 $91 
Srbe Dieſcoridis 586 
| Frebe -_. Mikes maicr & minor 590 

bales S amarntice 591: 
Fr ac 69.470 
Creech as multfide (H 
$:@chas folto ſerrato 2-470 
Fr arc has eurinA | F21 
Frramoria 278 
F tramontum peiregrinum 1277 
Frramonizm ffinoſuns 1hid, 
$tratiotes aqratrlis 1.677 
$ ratiotes Potamios +", » obid. 
ftrobil 1s | 2274 


i < 


hingreris - 11/979 
Sirmthium Aldroandi i o5t 
fra arbor " ww Bygi 


uber latifolium 
© 


_ 


- 
>. 
»+- 


il ener | 
o tw tum retre * We 201 | 
% 4 , ""b 


parry | 


UND EX 


Symphytum FA 661 


S tm petraum 507 
111m maculoſum a 
tum ſlueftre b 


Splpbonkis | 283 
Syring 4 | 1214 
Syringa alba 1213 
Syringa cerulea tid, 

T | 
| » Fommtm . 1295 
T amariſcus Narbonenſis 1194 

FamuriſcusGermanica ibid, 
Tamarix © " TI95 
T anus | - 722 
Tanacetum | 525.526 


Tanacetum acutum album 434 
T anacetum criſpum Anglicum 61d. 


Taracetum non odorum $29 
Tanacetum minus ibid. 
Tanacetum Þ erunianum G11 
T anacetam ſylueftre 2 : 
T apſus barbatus 629 
T apſus barbats flore albo 5614, 
Taxus 21187.1188 
Teda ſine pſeudopinus 1177-11 ; 
Telephinny + 416 
Telephmm floribus purpurets 417 
Telephium ſemper virens #bid. 
Terebinthina 2246 
Terebmhus bid. 124 
Terebunbu latifolia bad. 
Terre malum 381 -695 698 
Terre raprm 

Tefticulus bircinus 

Teſticulns ſphegodes 

Tefticulus vulpmus 

Tefticulus vulpinus major * 

T eſtromlus odoratus 

Tefticulus leporinu: 

Teucrrinum 

Tewcrium paluſtre 

Teucrium latifoliund 

T ecrium P annonienns | | 
Teucriuns Potticum 532 
Tetcrium. Alpinum Ciſti flore hid. 
ThalTrum =, 910.1068 


Thali'irum 7:44 & min 106 


Thahketrum 11% BTÞ,206 \ 
Thapſon | 962 
Thipf | 876 
ta vitlparis 4 
Thupſia Latifoli1Clury by 
Fur ſoonifots | 876 


Sylue mater 744 


. 
. » 0 * 4% * | 
» £#+% * RS . . 
*s 
_ . 
—_— = 
: Nets ; - wo 


Lt 


| Green" \ = | | 205 
| AI147 WH tid, 
 elypeatum Ledey hid. 
Thlaſpi Th Eng — tbed. 
207 

rs. InCanum | "208 
Thlaſps Pannonicum Clatip thid, 


Thisf 


Thlaſpi Narbonenſe L'Obelt.” 209 


T hlaſpivmbellatim Naybonenſe ibid. 
Thlaſpi minus C TS 210 
Thlaſpi ſupinum lutewn ibid. 
Thlaſhi fruticoſum 211 
T hlaſpr fraticoſum mins 11d. 
T blaſhi ſpinoſum ' | 2112 
—_ bu] 378 
$818 

+ 0,000 $16 
Thora/, ler hag ibid. 
Thora montts Bali 3+ 827 
Thora Sabaudica '  ubrd, 
7 buia | (0 : 187 
Tas Wet 7, 
T buris 4, oY folitem -L'Obety, 
1247 

1187 

451 | 

45 - 

a 

217. 2's 18 

1217 
p 867 

elm Pliny hid, 
Tiba | 1299 
Tila mas 1298 
! f 1h:d. 

- $22 

11:6 

Tuhbymalu W 404 
Tupmdegmab "481.407 
malus belioſcegits\  * gor 

Ti ue myrtifoling | "402 
mals myrſunitts ih1d. 


Tuh us cupreſſinns - ithrd, 
Tit mals pine”) oO  thid. 
Tithymalus myr ſinitis alter 40 ? 


Tit males Characias Monſpelien- 
fs | thid. 


+) pe 2 


I. dA Aptos tr rt MED ABR Ae; 4.9-> 0s. - 


A Li 
4 
T 
: 
- 
S. 
X 
o 
7% 4 
F} 
[3 
£ 
= 
*2 
* 
'Y 
# 
ay 
? 
F 
' 
2 
a2 
4 
þ 
v2 
{6 
n- 
$7 
2 
F 4 
"» 
\ 
* 
ny 
[hg 
& 
FS 
F 
2- 
$1 
n 
k5 
by, 
x4 
FR. 
5 
£#- 
FH 
& 
i J 
#4 
ko 
” 
j 


Trag opogon 596, ci 
Pag- 

T rag opog on minus 

Tragopyron 

Tragon Aathiols 


ro171 


Then ann fore oh j 7 | Þ 


Trifoluem bit ummoſim ſine 4 
enum 


Trifolium acutum 


Ni feks Caftoris vel mot - 


Trifolium odoratum 1025. | how! | 


Triorchis oEginete 
Tripolium vulgare 
_—_— guar inuns | 

$31 
Ns 58. einſq, ad] 59 


Triticum trimeſtre & anoyleum 63 
Triticum temulentun \ W417 


| Triticum muvitun' obid. 
* Trixago | 


Trixago paluttris — 
Twber terre 
Twubera terre 


 Talipa 120. were 1 116. | 


117.118. 119. 


T mlipa precox tota lates 
T p—_ _—_— Ry 


20 > 2 x7 


k k bs . 


» whe } 


INT | 


V etonica | o_m 
Vetonica alters 
[etonica altilis 


| Bb 
Vetopicaſplueſtru velogreh 479 


| _ 
1052.1053 


Vaccinium ' 7or 
Vaccmia EREES - 


5 | Vacriniorum varietates 1.229. o—_ 


go" —— on with 
1230 | | 
yr enum velmyrmns 1227 
agquatilis 


Viola lutea matiblex | | 
Pieda matronalts fro parparee pa. 


376 


J Verbaſcum Mathioli 
in | Probate fleothe 


erbeeae Lychmitis Mathiob 632 
[7 ibid. 


Veronica bake 


Veronica vera or maior 
Veronica refla mas 


Veronice | 
ference plres cer 


16 6 
M $ b 
4 A : . - 
. 
ec uy ' 
, £ 
7 - n oy 
, ' 
1 : 
- ; 
4 4 ; 4 


Hows Laviful 
mus vernacula ſine Italics 
ſ on [1 
licus Veners 
licus Veneru minor 
\mbrilicus terre 
Ymbilicus marinus 
4 
wentaria 


Jolubilis maior 
olnbilis minor 
olubilss nigre, 


Index Ie 10 Herbarum, hoc opere conte nta-/ 
__ Pharmacopolarum officine, 


A | 

Balzemer \'x174 

A Abillota 2161 
Abrong ' 271 
pwn . | 949 
agi . 273 

| \bGocbiom: 938 
Abſinthium Ponticum ibid. 
bſinthium marinum | g4r 
inthium Romanum. " 939 


tilon . 790 
atia 1150 
tola WIE |: 


Prom Gloaticum 
(ug! m Z 

"k mT oris 
1x moſchata 
s Vencris 


795s wo 


pf: 4 


G 


Ry 
MTY [37 


46:12d09q" 


bfnthium Santonicum » 944 


PNDEX 


Volucr um mains 744 
Dreeolaris 261 
Prinalis 444 
Vries , 571 
Urtica iner1,C mortud 568 
Vitice Rom, alter Vriicamas Fl 
Vriica famina, vel /rtica maier ibid. 
Vriica minor 570 
Priicernbra 1brd. 
Vriica ſylueftris 571 
Uſtilago ſecalina 70 
Vſtilago anenacea ibid. 
Pas 727 
Vaa lypina 268.1277 
Vue vulpts tbid. 
Via T aminia 398.722 
Vita barbata 726 
Vaa paſſa thid. 
Vna Zibebe tbid.727 
F'ua marina 959:960 


Foe & Arabes vtuntur, 


Adiantum 
Agaricum 
Agaricus 

Agnus caſtus 
Agrifolium 
Agrimonia 

puay Theueri 

Alaia Suſiani 


Aion Vriinum 


” at Be #0 ere Nas ob roots Koh 


Alumencatinum +1429 
Amgranthus teu | Elgo71 
19 OE 


12355-5756 


EI,” | 


ron wy 17+ > 


© Ye MF. a _— 


pA 


on. ey 2 te NT et <a Vol ee 
- - ” 


B 


Baa, 


Polagdor 
lauſtium 
elma 

It** 


'iah 


IN: D! EX 


Branca konina 871. 


A Balſeni | - 1.1345 
_— | Ts Balſarjina | 292 Braflicamarina | 690 
ita | | 2 Brunella os 
Anthos 42 | | $24 | 5 
_ S$S:Anthonij herba [2 oP Balſamum , 1345 Bruſcus #2 759 
a_ | 9 | So la ( pe - pros domeſtica | _ 
iſus SPOIgcu [4 . þ 3PP$ | 
1c [844 _ ' Barbacapri / |... 886 Bugloſla Hiſpanica 657 
Apolliaaris minor vlticana 270 Baiba-Aron ; 685 Bugula | 506 
Aquifolia ||221Gr Barbarca \. 388 Huna n | 1.365 
Aqua vitz l 734 Barbatica | | 473 - cM " 5M 1354 
Aquilegia | || 936 Barbotine 7 942 Z rla paltoris LG ke 223 
Aquileia \| ibid. Barcaman | "835 Rurgilpina | "39 
Aquili "* fi ibid. Bardana 665 Buzidan Arabum | 1 70 
dos [2359 Baſilicum 1 $47 Buzicden | ibid. 
Arare 113327 Bartara <p FB0 | © l | 
Arania uith | 280 Battara Hiffanorum | tbid, C 
Arblutilon || 7go Barttara Virginiana \\ J92 Adegi Indi 1351 
x3 Baucia $71 | | 
Arbutum io B Becabyngs | pd Cafelale' 120 
Arconas \[F1 © Woh Caiocus 8 60 
Archeucas Þl1 ibid, Bedeguac [} 6p Caidiis | i "k 
. Arditrigi | | 750, Bedoard YT 989 Cais mains 1349 
| Betbaſe in | | w 
Areca | 2337, | 354 Caius | x 360 
Arcica. - \\x317 Bebenalbum. || -,$50.467-552 Gatafur | 1353 
Aretiqui | ibid, Beticn rubcum | ibid. Catamentum 557 
Argentina - | $4x . Behen, rubrum Salamanticum Gatamentum montanum ibid. 
Arilli \qa7 | © Pa8- 6 432 Calamus | 56 
Ariſtolochia aut Ariſtologis lon- Bellawdona | 270 Qalamintha montanna . . 557 
: ii bi 698 Bellota Y. I16 Calabrina | '979 
Armenia Bellan | +1345 CalcarEquitis | 924 
Armeniacum Ber Serapionis& Arabum Py Calcatrippa ' 1004 
Arreſta bouis * 1215 Calendula | 603 
Artemiſia Berberys | 1145 Caltha | +671 
Arthreticz herbe Beretinus fr uctus 1363.1364 Cameaa | 1349 
Articoca . ; Berula: 14 " 44345 | Camelina PR he 214 
Articocajus | | Belara HEN 0 12 FORTE p na | 780 
Aſabaſafra | Beta || | | | ©}, 35> Camp naLazula, & Lazura 715 
Aſarabacca Berle, | |} 2357+. cy 1257 
Arthanita | Betrelt |. | ibid. Cancamum 1350 
Arumfel Beronica $78 Candclaria 630 
Aſarum Berzhn * 921 Canella 1242.1348 
Aſpe Beza || | | 1205 Cannabis | 572 
ella Biada [+ 1-441 ' 63 CanumCeraſa I113 
plenium Bibo | 1360 Capillus .cnoateT 83 
Aſla fextida Bifoliam 327 Capillus Veneris --.,'/-//. bid, 
Aſtranrtia Biondclla 888:3880 Capparis pre; OT 
Athanaſia Bipenoula ibid. Capragina | 1; :3068 
Auzna caſſa Bilacyram 835. CaprifgJium | 101744 
Aurantium Biflin _— ' 276r CapotGallinaccum.--' ', 14062 
ium gel Biſmalua | "7% Cardiaca,.,... ,..! 1]: 1/569 
leporis itz} Biftorta veraque , 322 arpefium. ? | TT 759 
Auricula Iude | +7 17 Bolbongc | 96 -/, ima 11114356 
Axungia vitri Bombagiz 7.008 Card beneditu ' (1411/4. 1/1OOD 
Azatolo Dombax . a 519-753 > Hoages 
Azedarach © Bana Hircin T1025 Ga opatium | - 11996 
Azcdaracth oy Bonifacia | : arduus Mariz £119 
&:7:14 Eon Hearicu rduusfullonum .. 2006 


duvus ſtellatus.. 1 
oo —————_ | are 


=” 


Carpobalſamum | 


FN D'E'X 
paſolida maior * 66: Diapenſia 
olida Saraceniiea 08:51 Dicoccos oy 
minor 0 Digita! is ; 
Conſolida media NB Digirt citrini oYt 2 
= peak.” 1777 B96 
lli herba 55 Dipeadi®000-lla63 256 
Ginaltng | © Diptamum *© ined Icy 
culutn ferulz * Dolzotini 118273 of wo. 


equina 
a20da murina 
Foal lale 


rum 

_ Cylidonium 
fy 2uria 
Ce mmorbia 


Chamepitys 
_Chanach adip 
} andama ,..... 
gue 
Charhumfel 
hartamum Indum 
Charumfel 
naſuth 
ela cancri 
Chel:donia 
LNCermes 
Cheruillum =©* 
011! | 
inenfe lignum 
phorians 


: ita 

Cl COTA 
Cicutaria 

C indbir's 

C Innamomum 
Citocacium 
LAtrones 
 Citrulus 


ur 
 Citrulus cucumis. . 
tis peruinca .. 


| Coccus baphicus 
Cocculus Indi 
Lolocaſia 


orfandrum £ > Dore "oh 
oriziola - 18 Doronicum 3 


bna terrz 
Corona regia 


. Corrigiola 


Corrument 


Cartex granatorum. 


Cot 
Cotula foetida 
m 
-oul coul 
ACCA | 
Craſſula | 


Crafſula minor 


Craſſulamaior 
2 Lanny 


| Crocus horrenſis 
Crocus Saracenicus . 


Cruciata 
Cubebz 


Cuciophora, 
icumer 


Cucumer afininus 


bita 
curida 


Cpu glandis 
cuta 
Ovurde 
Cyclamen 
onum 
CyPonites 
Cyminum 
Cynogloſſum 
Cyperus 
Cypreſſus 
Cyprefli nuces 


D 
'Þ AQylas 


Darchini 

irdana 
Darſeni 
Daucus 


$ Cretenſis 


Draco _ 


 Draconis ſanguis ©5* + 


Dracunculus hortenſis 4683 
Dracontea 1107 #4. 


| Pragoncellum 193 


Droſarum | -yo82 
Dulcitida | | 831 
Dulcamara | 279 


E 
Ghelo 
Elzprinon 
Eleri | 
cat _ 
4000 
pr 


la campana 
End 


Eupatorium 
Eopmorkun Meſuz 


F 


Favs | 
A Faba Lupina 


Fabaria 
Fabulonia 


Fagaras . 
Fagorricum 


Farblauff 


Fartara 
Farfugium 

Fana % Malaqua 
Faufel 

Febrifuga 

Fel Terrz 

Ferola 
Ferulacoli 
Ferraria 


* Ficaria minor 


Filago humilis 


Filfel 


Filipendula 


Filicaſtrum 
Filix aquatica | 
Fiſtici 224 
Flos Trollius | | 126 
Flosregius Lops 
Fles Conſtantinopolitanus | 
Flos Micancalus || 3" 
Flos Cuculti 203.48! 
Flos-Adonis | 
Flos S.lacobi 

Flos amoris 

Flos aureus 

Flos Solis 
Flos caryophilleus 
Fluida 

Feeniculum 
Feniculum porcinum 
Fenum-grzcum 
Forficula Cancri 
Frafinella 

Fraxinella 

Fricta 

Frondiflora 

Fufel 

Fuga Dzmonum 
Fulfel 

Fulful 

Fumus terrz 


G 


Alla 

Galbanum 
Galcga 
Gallitricum 
Gallicriſta 
Gemma populi 
Gentiana 
Garderacantha 
Gariport 
Geneſta 
Gefleminum 
Gethyon. 
Gcranium moſcatum 
Gianziban 
Giarga 
Gibenech 
Gingidium Viſnaga . 
Gith . || 921 
Githquod in ſegete naſcit r | ib, 
Githago 114 
Giul Catamer lale [11.32] 
Giula 7 ITY | 
Gladiolug 1/8 
Glandes Terrz 
Gloria filia 
Gniacardus 
Gortim 
Gralega 
Grana Paradiſi | 
Granum Nil Auicennz | |- 
Granum Indicum | 
Granum gnidium 
Granum yiride 


| Guart 


NOD) BE 


Granum Innes 2 [+5 
Graria Dei | 467.7974103 
Groſſularia -. 1143 
Gruinalis 795 
Guaiacum 1319 
Guadum 394 
| t-! 134 
Guardglobo II 
"= S8 Ths + tbid. 
1148 
1357-1358 


 Granum Nil 4 


Gummi Tragacanthi 
Guzarata 


H 


Abal Nil 

Hachal 
Handacocha 
Hanga. 
Harmet 
Haſſabelderire 
Haſmiſen 
Hebulben 
Hedera ſpinoſa 


-  Helleborus albus 


-> we! pm niger | 
enne 


| Hepatica 
. Herbacantha | 


Herbaneſa | 
Herba benediaa 
Herbalconis 


| Herbaparalyſis 
8 Herbagalleca | 
' Herbadoria 


Herba Paris 


x30z Herbaviolaria 
| Herba'S, Anthonij 


HerbaCarti 4 


 Herba ſtella 


Herbalaſſulata 


 HerbgTunica| 
5 HerbaTurcica 
Herba pinnula. 


Herba Simeonis 


 Herba'S.Petri 37 


bi” 
HerbaSan&z Cunigundz 774 
[| 8 


 Herbatum 


HermodaQylus | 
Higueto fruQus 
Hippia 


 Hirundinaria | Lf 


ypoquiſtidos S 


; Oo 


] —M | 


Jouis barba 
louis flos 


Iris Florentina | 


Jua Artherica 


 Juamoſcata 


Iucca 
Jucca perana 


Kali articulatum 


Koko 
Kermes 
Keſſuth 


 Kik 


Kikaijon 
Kirran 


Acca 

Lachetta 
Lacuca 
Lacucella 
Ladegi Indi 
Lanaria 


Lancea Chriſti | 


Lanhan 


| Lanngo 


Lantana 
Lapatipm 
Lapdanum 
Lappa maior 


Lappa minor * 
Lappainuerſa 


Lauandula 
Tavaneſe 


at 


194 
1160 
462 
: 400 
ivid. 
1180 


I 0.1349 
35 ibid. 


243 
| 233 
1351 
630 
327 
1339 
733 
2395 
311 
"4108 


i” 


ibid, 
. 468 
1068 
Ibid 
1219 
| Wyo 


1 


v5 


1214 
: ES 147 
liam inter ſpinas 744 
hum. conuallium . 332 
Hlach 1214 
mMOones 1280 
ing. _ G55 
i rpentis 327 
j 1912 Pagans 761 
gua ceruina 970.977 
Lit 70a auis 1289 
Lipgua "__ ibid. 
Liquiritia 1120 
angina 979 
Yan 1247 
ch 1350 
aria 378 
2ari2 maior 971 
Ly naria minor 329 
Luph criſpum 683 
oy. 685 
1043 
738 
1031 
M 
. 495 
I211.1212 
1354 
95 
1208.1213 
en LP 
3 rn 
ibid. 
lajorana 539 
ala inſana 274 
| he 
4 
782.786 
789 
falum granatum 1263 
plaria 987 
Mandragoras 281 | 
tihor 6 
M4; antade nueſtra Sehora þro 
la 1339 
Ma abium - $62. 
Ma , 1 | \TIF2 
lartagon 147252 
a ic [1 2068 
vr (334.1 4 | Fa | 


7on | 


LNG D 


Materfilon 590 
Matricaria $37 
Marriſylua | 
Maza 


Mechoacan 
Melica Wis 77 
Melega & Melegua 77 
Mclanzana ' s ibid, 
Mon ngena 274 
Mel rofarum 1082 
_ Melampyrum 84.214 
Mclilotus i035 
Meliſſa 560 
Melo 771 
Melones moſchatellini 772 
Memiren 669 
Mel Anacardinum 1360 
Meroides 634 
Menta | 553 
Menta aquatica $55 
Menta Sarracenica $53 
Mercurialis 626 
Metopium 899 
Meum 667.895 
Mezereon 21215.1216 
Mileguetra vel Milegerts 1358 
Milium foler 4%7 
Milmandrum ay © 
Milium folis 487 
Miliom ſaburrum 77 
Millefolium 916 
Mirabilia Peruniana || 273 
Molle five Molly 1347 
Montapium | $86 
Morella 26 
Morſus Diaboli 236.587 
Morſus gallinz 493 
Morſus ranz 671 
Mora Bati TO91 
Mora Baſh | tbid, 
Morum Celfi > TYS 
Morus Cell ibid. 
Moſa 2281 
Moſe 1333 
Muclle 1347 
Mumia 1171 
Murta | 2337 
Muſa 1281.1333 
Muſa maum .  tbid. 
Muſcgri | 105 
Muſchoromi 106 
—_ ibid. 
Muſcus | 137 
Multibona 864 
Myrtidanum 1227 
Myrtlli 1231 
Myrtus | 1227 
Myrtus Brabaotics | 1228 
= N 
NZ lus 
apium 199 
dacduaruſiica 688.843.918 
Narel | 2339 


Naſturtium 195 
Naſturtium aquaticum 201 


Nigella 4 926 
Nigellaſtrum 1bid. 
Nihor 1339 
Nil 7rs 
Nil Auicennz 7r5 
Nil granum ibid. 
Nozella 95 
Nuces cypreſli 1186 
Nuces pinez 1174 
Nux methel 278.136 
Nux vomica | ibid. 
Nux auellana "of T25t 
Nux veſicaria 1249 
Nux moſchata 1954 
Nux Bandenlſis ibid, 
O 

Cellus 473 
Ocimum 547 
Ocimum ga ariophbyllatum ibid, 
Oculus Chriſt 628 
Oculi populi 1303 
Olcander 1220 
Oleum de cherua 400 
—_ 867.902 
pobalſamum 1344-1345 
Opopanax , 85x 
—_ | 298 
1237 

-- ned © 547 
Orobus Hiſpanicum $42 
IoO51.105F 

977 

P 
Þx* 1337 
Palan 1333 
Palla 1354 
Palalia | 695 
Palma Chriſti 170 
Panax $59 
Pam T1357 
Panis cuculi 1031 
Panis porcinus | 695 
Panis ſan&i lohannis T241 
Papauer 296 
Papaver rubrum 299 
Papauer nigrum 926 
Pa 81.732 
Paralyſus herba ? Lok 
Paritaria 26T 
| 1343 
74 
wad + > 1 F 
Z 
215 


Ddddd x 


_ 'Patacquina 
Pata leonis F 
Parientia 
 Pauane vel Pauame 
Pedua 
Pentaphyllon 
Paſtoris pera 
Perfoliaca 
Perforata. 
Perpenſa 
Periicaria 


Peruinca,yel Peruinqua | | 


Perficum 
Perum 

Perun 

 Pes anferinus 
Pes afininus 
Pes vituli 

Pes columbez 
Pes leonis 

Pes pulli 

Pes lupi 

Pes Alcxandtinus 
Petrapium 
Pertrzfindula 
Petroſclinum 


Petroſclinum Macedoalrbin $66 
Petroſclinum C4 11! ib. 


Peucedanum 
Philipendula 
Phu 

Phyccuma 

Pican 

Pigamum 
Piloſella 
Pimpinella 
Pinan 

Pionia 

Piper 

Piper aquaticum 
Piper Calecuthiam 
Piper Hiſpanum 
Piper montanum 
Piperitis 


Pilum,ſiue Piſum minus 


Pix nauals 
Planrago 
Poaz. 


Podagrarialini 
Polyhydion 
Polypodium 
Poma Amoris 
Pomatum 
Pomum granatum 
Pomum Adami 
Pomum mirabile 
Pomum aureum 
| Pomum fpinoſum 
Porrum 
 Portulaca 
Porentilla 

: Praffum 

Prafſtium fatidum - 


Li 
| 1293 
216-1219 


_ 897 
902 


- | 9218 
£ ibid, 
1343 
' |ny068 


$14 
| 889 


j 1337 


$z21 
361 


188 
1047 


'|\xx80 


349 


7 
Podagraria Germanica _ 


849 
462 
9723 
275 


| 12756 
{| 42362 


n 


I'N DEX; 


667 Primula veris | 


Protomedia 
Prouenca 

Prunella 

Prunum 
Phadleacienciion | 


| Pſyllium 


Pul | | | 
Pulegium montanum 
Pulmonaria | 
Pulſatilla 
Pyrethrum 

_ 


Q 
LT 
Querfaa | 


Quertt 


nſtting 


R 


abicata ſatiua 

Radix caua 
Radix dulcis | * 
Ranz morſus 
Raphanus | 
Raphanus ſylueſtris 
Rapoeavlis | - 
Raputn D, Anthonij 
Rapum geniſtz 
Rauc £2 
Raued ſeni 
Raved-Sceni | 
Regina prati | 
Regium | 
Relina pini 


Rezannale & Rezennale 


Rhabarbarum 
Rhaponticum AT 
Regaliza 
Rheubarbarum 
Rhoites 

Reſtabouis 

Remenia | 
Ribes,h. ce. Vua vrſi 
Rincum marignum 


Robertiana 


Roberti herba 
Robettianum 
Rogg! | 
Roraftrum 
Rorella | 
Roſa yltramarina 
Roſa col | 
Roſa incarnata 
Roſa Mariana 
Roſella 


- Ros folis 


Roſmarinus 
Roſtrum porcinum 
Roſtrumcicotiz 
Ro6ftrum gruis 
Rubia tinctorum 


1343 
457 


663.1378 
309 


619 
339 


$3k 
1349 


ibid. 


839 


Ruberra 
Ruſcus | 
Ruta capraria: | 


pwn hocteaſis: 


O 
Abdarifa | 
ccolaa quebir 


Seccoles ceguer 


Safarhe-Bamon 
Saggina | 
Sal Alkali 
Salequa 
Salicornia 

Salix equina 
Saluſandria 


Saluia 


Saluia Boſci 


Saluia agreſiis 


Saluia Romana 


Sambucus 


S$ambucus aquatica 
Sampctra 
Sanamunda 


794 
759 


2068 
2073 


\ 791 


1358 


| bid, 


41 
71 


429 
2241 


429 
958 
926 
624 
336 
536 
$53 


T235 
| 1237 
© 428 


$43 


Sana Sana Indorum 285.286 


Sandal 
Sandarax 
Sandaraca 
Sanguinus 
Sanguis draconis 


Sanguiſorba 


Sanitula 
Santalum 


Santolina 
Saponaria ' 


Sarcocolla 
Sarracena 


' $arracenica officinarum 
S$arurcia,yel potius Saturegiags [ 
_ S$aryrion 
Saſſafras 


Sauina 
Savimera 
Saxifraga 


Scala cceli 


Scabioſa | 
S$cammonea 


Scanaris 


Scarlea 
Scatellum 
Scatum coli 


| Sceyien _ 


Scolopendria 


'Scordium 


Scorodonia 
S$corzonera 


 Scotinus 


Scrophularia | 


Scrophularia minor 
 Secacyl | 
 Sebelten 


1 1389 
1189 


ibid. 
x182 
314 
889 
80 


11389 


853 


360.558 


301 


 rTo068 


524 


424 
424 
"71 
977 
5 3 
536 

$99 

21293 

580 
669 


372 
1315 


id. Sedum minus officinarum 414 


Selliga | 
Serncn ſancum 


( 


923 


is 942 
Semen 


Santolinum 941 
n Zenz 943 
nZedoariz ibid. 
contra lumbricos ibid. 
11 24 
 Septifolium jb 
Serapinum 
| ' $9$+579'S bs: 
683 
457: 
377 
871 
ibid, 
892. 893 
868 
252 
igillum Salomonis 958 
Ee B. Mariz 1773S 
Siler montanum  . 892 
Sing . 190 
Sip ; 1343 
Silla 895 
Soda | _ 429 
Solanum lethale 269 
Solatrum 268 
Solbaſtrella 889 
Soldanella 690 
Solidago 661 
idago SAITACENICA 347 
Sophia g10 
Sorghum 77 
Spagas 1179 
S _— 893 
\ 4+ 
oi oy foetida 3 ow 
Speculum Veneris 356 
= a G2 
Speragus 954 
Spergula odorara ' 966 
Speick | 921 
Spica 469 
Spicata 675 
Spica Celtica 1374 
Spina alba 996 
Spina Borda 995 
pinachea 260 
Spinacheum olus ibid, 
njuinera I145 
Sponſafolis 221 
$quilla | 137 
S$quinantum 7 ; 
Staphiſagria 25s 
$rataria | 897 
Stellaria 347.802.966,1004 
| os 470 
.Stexchas citrina 522 
rax | T1342 
torax Calamita ibid. 
Stramonia 278 
479 
Su 1339 
L292 


[) 


41N D4Y ECT. 


Symphyrum mains* '* 662 
Syringa Ro ben 
y + | | 
TJ Amalaparra 1350.1351 
Tamariſcus 1188.1195 
Tambul 1357 
£- Tangcerum | |... $3e 
Tapſus barbatus 630 
Taraxacon 222 
Tarcon 193 
Tarcon ſylueſtre 44 
Tarfilog....:.... « 5... IO019 
Tarcon rairc Gallo-prouin. 408 
Tartarum [= ..00 
Tartarum yſtum Bs 736 
Tartarum calcinatum _ ibid. 
Tarobolos Catamerlale _. v1 
Tarobolos Catamer 1Þ1 
Tapra £18 
Taurina 1068 
Tembul | I;251 
Tenga 1339 
Tengamaran ibid. 
Terdina - 918 
Terebinthina 1246.1184 
Terebinthina Veneta 1183 
Teſticulus hirci 161 
Teſticulus rulpinus ibid, 
Teſticulus RP. 173 
Thorina 1068 
Thus 1247 
Thymum 459 
Tiguar 335 
Tincaria | 523 
Tipcadi | 106 
Tomentitia 519 
Tormentilla 840 
Tota-bona 259.627 
Tora oflea -08 
Tragacanthz gummi 1148 
Tragopyrum z 
Traftidulce 29 
Tees... 1349 
Tribolo IO25 
Tribulus marinus '676 
Triccan 1339 
' Triferz | 727 
Trifolium 1018 
Trinitatis herba 1032 
Tritico-ſpeltum 65 
Trixago paluſtris 535 
Trollius flos 810 
Tulipa 120 
Tune, Tunas 1330 
Turban 2 20 Turfan ibid; 
Turbich 335 
Turpetum cineritium 876 
Turpetum Griſcum ibid. 
Typha 42 
V 


Valeriana domeſtica - 918 
Veelgutta © | 863 
Verbena For 
Veriquercus , aut vers quezeits 
pag. | IHg7F + 
Vermillon i OT 60 *, 
Vernix | 11.89 
Veruena | 
Vermicularis__. © | .,1.7 444 
Veronicatemina :., gar 50g 
Victoriala ..._.....: | ds br 
Vinca peruinca _ 
Viola... | wn y 4 
Violarum mater .,* Ibid. 
Viola paluſtris , - 678 
Viola mammola | ibid. 
Viorna 739-1305 
Viperina _ _.... | 599 
Virgaaurea * 349 © 
Virga paſtoris _ | 1006 
I_——_ pappus 78x 
Viſcum | T1169 
Viſfeo 116g 
Viſnaga . 885 . 
Vitalonga 13355-1756 
Vitalba | $any ths 
Viticella 291.720 
Vimaria 886 
Vmbilicus Veneris 423 
Vnedo 1266.1311 
Vnifolium | 330 
Vngula caballina 667 
Volubilis 714 
Vrmalis = 444 
Vinca 1369 
Vince 429 
Vſnen ibid. 
Vitilago | | i, \7e 
Vualupina 269.1237 
Vulgago . . 689 
Vuluaria 258 
Vuularia 366.76x 
Wilanck 753 
X 
XylocaraQta I241 
: £8 
CA x 
Yſopus | pt 
Z 
Ahafaran I24 
Zambach 746 
Zaremcada Perſiana 114 
SOo_ ibid. 
2 parilla LAY 
Zazintha o_ nc 
 Zedoaria 820 
Zerumbeth ibid, 
Zizania 71 
Zinziber T5 
Zinziber caninum 293 
Zurumbeth 820 
NOMHI 


Ddddd 3 


_— 


ar Mes? ay Ir ne ON 0 ne NIN 


/ 


'NOMINVM E1 


T OPINION VM! 


H AR MONIA ET 
" | 4 Þ nſenſus, 
| A | Leoaks o# Frangula. tering Petri Plecen, id # Fran 
3 P41. mn) lbiſcus. 
© Bel jd eft Popul abs.  eAlbucwujdeſt ergo abt Atabaſerjd of Mew. 
' eAbbel,d oft Saxinia. | eAltertum Pln:y,id oft Hy TrK eft Lich em, 
eAbrone Seraptonts, i fr pi. 7" PTS id eft | 
I JH B 
fan OP , Pecy- , Jig Parhenns | | 
tg © h | pon any: by Ezxla. Aaras jd eff Paonia. | 
> wgr,1d ef Piſum cordat | Alſenefu,gd ef Abſinthium. ' | Baccaris, i. Conyz.a maior Math, 
bord i eſt Iacvn. © i | | Alneſengdett Priccedanune, * Baccaris officinarum, 1d. /? eAſara- 
A I Germanica,s.S pondylium | Amaraens,ill eſt .Maiorana. * *Bacearte. | 
Acauthmm,id eft Omnoporden, | eAmellus Fs hs. Aſter Atticus. Bamia,il eſt, eAHlibes palufiry , 
Acarna Theephr ſti id eff Sem | Amellus,id Caltha paluttris, _ Baptiſcenla,cd ft Cyan, | 
Acetdbulum 1d eſt Cotfledon,' | Ambubeia,i Left Cichorium hlaeftre, Barba hirciid eft T1 ragopogon. 
Atciririna,td eft Hieracinm. | Ampela: Pli + 11d off Bryonra nigra. Barba lJonts.td e/f Verperuin am. 
Artinaria paluſtris Gefreri, WW acci- Amyrbers i eff Berberis. Barba eAron,td «ft Semper 
niapaluſtris. | | Anapallre Bellony s. Ficus Indica, Barbarea,id eft P[endobunium.” 
Acmus,j1 eff Orymum. { | Anas jd oft, Bruns. Batts Plniygd eft Crithmum. 
Achillea,id oft Mille folium. eAnblitum | brdl, id oft Dentaria Batongd eſt Terebinthus. 
Aconitum baccifcrum, id cit nh bt maior Mathiah., Bazari Chichen,jd eft Linum. 
phcrians. Anblations i down. j. Nin auic, Bazara Cantona,id eſt P{5llines, 
eAconitum Pardalianches Dodanci Anchuſa,id | Bngloſſom lueftre. Becab ungaid eft Anagallis agnatica. 

id eft Doronicum. Andirian Kh N7 £,1d oft Fabago. Fechion eſt T»ſſilego. 
Atrocoriongd eft Crocus vermm. Andration Anerrou, 1. Pencedanum, Bedoara arabibust.Spina alba. 
Acutella,id eft Refta bois, Androſemury Dodonei,td oft _ [7 pig Math, S)luar. id eff | Spina 
Acme paſtoris jd eff Geranium. num [taldrum. 

Acus muſeata.id eft Geranium. $7 tort joſe eft Afeum. _ Bederangie,jd eſt Meliſſa, 

— albuns,id eſt C wil Ve- Pepo oblongua, Belnidere ltahca,jd oft Linaria, 
py at yo 7 "Riſks bones. | © Biiahalalen jd a Aiz,gon, 

adhd album Pliny, i def Ruta Apiaſtellum Apoley j Bryonia nigra, Betonica Panliideſt Veronica. 

mr aria. Apiaſtellum Dodonei;. Mebſſa. Bibar jd eſt Buphthalmon. © 

. Ador oft quoddam frumenti gdnng. | eAptatlrumyi fv Hehkſſa. Biſaria,id eſt Dricunculus. 
 Ageratans id eſt P munor. p rey Picſe.id eſt Periploca, Biſacurum,jd eft Gingidinm. * 
Aon caltnejd eft Viex, WAT is [e/f Hyoſcyamus. Behiatrabagiideſt Polyg onum. 
Agtlenſz,d eft Aueilana. Apronia, id oft Bryonia nigra. Biſmaluayd eft Ihiſcus. 
ts,id + Peonia. | Apri,id eſt 'Piſum rubrum. Biſlmgua,id eſt Hippogloſſum . 
e/Egtlops Pliny, id eſt C errie maior Avrgertinajdeſt Potemilla. | Bombax,id oft Goſſipinm. 

L'Obety. Aria Theopl rafts, 1 id eft Sorbus Al- Botonariajd eſt Aphyllanthes. 
e/Erilops, id eſt, Anena Perth. pina Geſntri. Boutomon,id eft Platanaria. 
eEpopogon Tragigd eft Vimaria. ' ' Arcium.id eff Bardana. Branca vr/inagd eft Acanthus. 

 eApolethronid eſt Tota bona, | e A" entille, d e/t Vimaria. Britannica,id eſt Bijtorta 
e£ſchinomenen Pliny, id eff "iT Art Braſſica caninajd eft Cynocrambe. 
rangere. Art Broeg gia Pliny, id eft Helxine Cif- 
Aizoojdeft Semperninum, | ampelos. 
Ainga id eff Chamepitys, '| Bruſcne,ideſt Ruſers. 
Alaſcletr Auicermed eft 1M edice.. Bulbus agreſtis id eff Colchicum. 
Alaternu Daleſcamph, id oP: Ahh: Buboniumd eft Aiter Atticus, 
rea L'Obely. Buccinum,id et Conſolida regalis. 
Alettorolophos Plini, j. Fiſtularis. © Bugia,jd eft Cortex Berbers. . 
Alleluya,id eff Trifolium acrfom. Botomon Theoph.i.Iris paluttru. 
Alchilel Ser apionis i. Polemoninm. . own eft Sabix, 
| Alcibiadionid eft Echinm. ql! 1 Pro los Math, 
Alcbimelech,id eft Mellotn,. \ Afpleniompy {34a Lonchitss. If C 
Alfarfiſa Anicenne,id eff Medica. Af 
Algoſarel Anitennegdeſt Dang. - C Acalia jd eſt Tuſſlags. 
Alkakengiad oft Hahcacabunm,| Cachrys marinum,s. C 
Almmonia abionap retoſum, 0 nyo nt | 


Cabade,jd oft Polinms. 


Nominum quorundaminte 


al,id eft Agrinonia. Cepea, id eft Ana als | Aquatics. 
my eft Lonchitis, C oalad eft Coankd 
Calchochrum,d oft Fumaria. Cercis Theop, ideſt Arbor {ude. 
Gale age, id ef Crithmam. Ceſis,ia eff Daucus 
83 Calendn'a R Cerue maiorjd eft Ricinus. 
=y Poetarwm,id eft Calendula. Cerawnia,id oft Cy: 
yr" ig Melt Lilune con- Cermearuid oft Trechelinm. 
\ nallinms. Cichorinm werynniyions; id eft He- 
Caliuricum, ideft Pavers ) op — Se 
on Pliny,td oft po ar evdey | , Crreea 1s Agora, 
alicularis gd eft H wc Cintinnalu,jd Veneris. 
Calnegiagd eft os 44g 2 Cicerbita,ideff 6%" 
CT En, Cnicns;id eſt Carthaomin,” 
andelaria,jd cit T apſus barbats. Cwec:m ſuprnum Cordi, id eft Cardu- 
la Regia, id eſt Tapſic barba u benediflu. >. 
| 28. | Cnicus [ylueftris.id eff Atraflytis. + 
Cania Pliny jd 2 I riice.  Citragogdeft Meliſſa 
hs Avicenne , id eft Chehdoni- Cidromelaud oft Malus M edica, 
| $199 Pinus. Cmeraria, id eft lacobea Marina. 
7 hs Pliny jd eft Reptiniraife. Charantia, id eff Balſammamas. 
Cantabric Twrners , id eft- Carye: Cb.marifſustd oft Hedera Terreſtres 
i phyllue. Chamelenced et Taſſilago.,, 
Capilaris, id eſt Capillus I enerie. Chamepence, id eft Koſmarinum ſyl- 
Capnos,id eff Famaria. | wettre. 
Capmtss,td oft Fumaria. # Chamexylon Pliny, id eff Gunafal:um. 
Capnogorgium Duof. 1d eſt Famaria. Chamelea Germanica,d oft Mexe- 
Caprificus Pliny, 1d eft Exnta Tragh, reon, 
Caranfulid eſt Caryophyllos- | Chamedaphne,id eff Lawvecla, 
Cardamum, 1d eft P[endobunium. C bameduphne Plmijd eſt Vince per- 
Cardopatinm, id eft Carlma, HINGE. 
Cardums frllonem, id eft Dipſacue. Chameplnem,id ft Eryfmum. - 
"__ Attmary, id eſt Ceratia fili- Chamarrhiphe:,jd ob Palmites. | 


} Log eſt « Apios. 

Carnabadion Seumeont# Sethii.Carui. 
Cartamus ſlueſtru,id eft Arra 

C arpentarids id eſt Pſendobunium. 
Carpe wm , id eff Cubrbe. 
Carpe/ium Galeni,id eſt Kuſcug. 
Carnabadion Srme ons Sethiy. Cores 
Cardel,id eff Sin ps, 

Crſſebargd off Cortandrum. 
Geſilags Ab. Syl. id eff Feſey 


Caſſurbazed eft Cuſenta, 
Caſtors, id eft Trifolmum paludoſum. 
Caſygnete,id eſt Pimpinella. 

Ca ad eft Ser | 
Calcuraps HMathiols, ideft Corda 
Steſlatins, 


Earef id eft e Atriplex. 

| — fond ns, ul a of Liba- 
Carbſumideſ Abrotanuns, © 
Cattariad ft Nepeta, | 


Cataputia maior, td oft Ricinus, 
Caucon Pliny, id ef# Equiſetum. 
' CandaV/wiprum td eit Alopernros, 


Chameleagnus, id eff AMyrins Bra- 


bantica. 


EP . bamereps Flay, id ef Palma bu- 


mils. | 


"Charnaba, id eſt Ceratia Aligs. 


Charſi 3d eft SITS 

Chaſtara, id eſt Betenica. 

Charhe, id eſt Cucumer. 

Chironia id eft Pryonia nigra. 

Chitmi ideft Althea, © 

Choeradolethrongjd eft Xanthum, 

CG hubeze,; id eſt Aalua. 

Chiliodynamu, id eſt Ben album. 

Chryſolachanon Plmmy,s. Tota bona. 

Chryſanthemum Perunianum, id oft 
Flos Sol. 


 Chryſocome Geſneri,id eff Linaria. 


Chry ſogonon ,d eft Blaitaria. 

Chryſe Athenes , id eft Malus 
Adedica, 

Citrago,,d eft Mebſſa. 

Claunm Venert,id eft Ny 

Clamicula, id eft-Hedera 1<=M 

Clematis Peregrina,id et Flammuld 
Tons. \ 

Clematis Daphnoidef, 
permmea. 

"_ altera Matrbio. id eft Vi. 


id eft /inca 


es Horarh: id eft Ery ſmmwm. 


Colabrina,gd eft Arum eg yprinm. 
Cocrorgd oft Fornicntics, 


'Cordlloides Cords, td 


: Coſtes Hertorum, 


Conſulida media, id tBopully oe) 


Conſol.da minor Mathioli,zd cf Pre- 
mells, » 


Wen minor Ruelh, be eit Bella 


>. þ way.) 


Connarns Arbenti ad off FEY 

Concordia, id eit Agrimonea. T2 
Conilajd eit Myrihe / 
Conſecratrix gd eft Iris neſtras. 


ND 
AMuhnolr, ks Gy 


Corcorus Melothia , an ef Olus Tu- 
darcum, 

Carcorus Marcelli ver. id F? Ang> 
galls mas. 

Coryd.iliszid off Radix Cams, 

Cor Indums, id oft Piſum Cordatues. 

Coviziola Rhaſir, id oft Scamore n, 


Corona fratrum, id ef Carduns Erio- 


cephalus. 

C_ eines 

or eft Cornu Cermi, 
C igiala,gd eft Cemtunmodia, 
Corona monachi, id eff Dens Leone, 
Corona Regie, id eft Pomum 
Coroneola,td eft Lyſimachia. 
Corydalinm, id eft Fumaria; 
Corylus jd eit eAnellana. 
Coſts purine CMathip.id eft Panax 


Chironinm , 
wig Palſamita 
maioy. og 


Coſta Canma, id eft 
Corydal.podium,td Ae /onſol. ll Repali 


Cotinns Dodo. id eſt Coreygria Plony, 


Cot eAniceme id eſt Medica. 

Crepmell., id eff Dentillaria Ronde- 
lery. 

Creta marina jd eſt Crithmung. 

Crinttagd et C Veneris, 

Cubeb as Serapionus jd +5t Rnſeus. 

Cucullirad eft Pinguicula. 


Cucurida, i, Denmtill.ria Kondelety. | 


Cumrmmu mn AE thirgicum, i, Ammi, 
Cumlaso, deft Conyas. 
Cuneg widagy 14 eft Empatorium Arti- 


cerne, 
Cunla Celumelle, id eſt Satyreia. 
Cumnopboren td eſt Nux Indica, 
ns 1 »Amnicenne, 1d ef} Saponaria. 
Curcuma 1d ef Cyperns Indus, 
Cureas Clurh 1d eſt Rivinm, 
Cubor gd eit Coriandrwam.. 


Cyanus 


- - 


_s O__ a —_ Sarwar 
. egy . pe 
—_ DJ o 
= SAGA ood renee error nec ewnr ee ere anc en 
—_ — _ 
* a4< = jo # 
» g 


ot OY) FI 2 v4 eee, 1 
ve 4 = EI 


: 3 
: fl 
- 4 7 

ba Li 
© 12 


Ce i. 
Cynanthemis jd eft Cotula Fin 
Cynoſpaſiue gdeſt Peoma. ? 
Cyneſorchiu, id eſt. Sat 


Cynecepbale Apulei jdeft urs 


ephalus,id eſt «An WI 64.6] 
0 Ther 


athens Tragiideſt Oxyolalebat 
Cynosbatos Ruelly, id of 94240 
Cynosbatos Dale ſcampi is 


Cyprustd eft Lign 'L olh. 
Gprua Ded. yy * 


Ne Amedrios,id Fo Chamedrys. 
Danebal:hil, id eft Enya um. 
" Darachjdeſt Palma, , | 
Daracht moms, id ef Muſa. | I 
Datire, id ei Stramonia. 4 | 
Debomgi, id eſt Anthems, | |, 
Debonigi, ideſ} Chamomilia. | 
Defted eff o hs 
a paar eſt Con ig s. 
nſia, id eſt Sanignla. 4 
vs jy Arab,id eft 4p sf 
Degitia Veneris,ide Sei gl 
Di, ideft Glaſtum, 
Dilijd eft Iſatre. 
Diocala Apulei, id oft Chamomeluw 
Dioſpiron, id eſt Meultum ſolis. | 
Dioſpiros Pliny,id eft 
Dieſanthos Theop.s. Super 4 Fuchs. 
Dochon, id eft Panicum. - 


% | 


Dalcbua Theopbr. id oft Thaſtolw 
th. l 


Draco berg Tarcon. | 

aco ſhlueſtris,id eſt Prarmick. | 
CD , id eft Haliabbi Aniſum. 
Droſion Cordigd eft  Alchimilte. | 
Drypis Guillandini,j, Tragon Mat. 

Drypis Theop. i. Eryngium Marini. 
Depend Tragi , id et Preridii 


Das Arab. id oft Platanus.. | 
Dulcamaragd eſt Amara Dudes. 
Dulciſidayid eft Peonis. || 
Dulcichinum Guillandini.id eff Cype- 
rus dulcts Tragi. L:i--| 
Cp 


E 


' 


PF onnpater Cobbler: | 


picides Dodon. 
Fares Dedan. 5. 


ma deb. 


Leberuns 0. 


Tp 
id eft Ziziphia 


Elkiageber,id 
Em-petron Da id eff Kali, 
h,id eſt Crithmii, 


petron, ide T 6s VIE T area, 


Empetronjd Hermiaria. | 


| Geſneri , id of Ones 


| mew Cara & |] 


Exim oy eff 1 Chamenerie 
L'Obe ly. 


Epimetron, det Epimedums. 
entiorum, i. da 
elety, id eſt Hermiaria. 
| oft Flos Adomes, 

E ringinms V. 


Eringium Guilland. id "Ed (in 
Stellatua., il 


Verbena. 
Toon lack Twſſilags.. k 


F, le T 
Fafun Tecern - Se Threat 


Envir 
Exapery, id 


| x of id it FCalths paluris 


Farannm, id eft Tuſſilago. 

F, andegeni, id eſt Origanum. 

Fel Terre,id eſt Cenmtanreum. 
Feniculus Ppreinus, i. Peucedanum. 
Ferulatol:,jd eft Thapfia. 
Ferrarta,j, Agrimonta.. 
Ferraria L'Obelh, i. 
Feſtuca P 
mn 


ria. 
id 1 Amnena Sterilts. 
ia eſt Clematis Pe- 


RE wolf ef Ofenndu Regalis. 
Filix «eh 4, = amr” Regalis 
Filtx For: egalis. 


eth,. eAcarna Theo. 


Hemen, i.S 


Pen Atr 
” = ORR 


G | 
Aledragon Pliny, i. Dipſacns, 
Garoſmmus, ide, ide Arriplex Olida. 

Galbtricum, id eſt Hormmum, 

Gelſeminum Indicxen, id eſt Mivebi- 

| lia Pernuiana, | 

Geniturazid eff jy | 

Genicularis,d P) 

Genecanthe, dot Bryoamgr 


| Genmi.Caryephyllata. | 


Giezars. Daxcn. 
Giezar Aridr asj. Belbanen, 
G ith j. Nigella. | 
Gubago Plan ft Lolli”; 


 Glancium, id eſt Papaner Cornutuns, 
G ladiolus «A, ono neds id ef Tuncus 
 . Fleridus, 


Globularis, 5, Aphyllenthes. 
Gleſſo ſogrephe eAuiceme, weft Fu- 


Fo Fam, 3:0gf eſt Xilow, 
Regtum Meſut, i. Ricinus. 
Gr 4 ling lid eſt Calendula, 
jdeſt Ribes. 


Solent jd eſt na Criſp. 


Hab al Nd Serapionis, id eft Con« 

 wolunlus cerulens. 

Halcaſmeg Aneroq,id eft Faniculns, 

Halgazar Anerboe j. Paſtinaca. - 

Halicacabum Ve hcarizs, id eft Al- 
hakengh | 

Holearabues Peregrinum, 6, Piſurs 
Cordatum. | | 

Hameſiteoss, Chamepitys. 

Hanab. Althaleb, id eſt Solanum. 

Harabaz. Cucurbita. | 

Harbatum,id eſt Pencedandm, 

Harenaria, id eſt Cornu Cerai, 

H. i, id eſt Doronicum. 

Haſmiſen Syriacam, id eſt Conuolun- 

lus Carnlens.. 

Haſtula Re es i. Aſphodelus albas. 

Haſcey. 

Handacocha Plina, 5. Trifoliuns bi- 
tuminoſum, 

Haur «Arab.id «ff Populus alba, 

Hebene, i. Xylaloes officinarum. 

Hereulamia, i. Oerbena. 

Hederalis Ruelly, i. Aſclepias. 

Hedera Spinoſa, i. Smilax Aſpera. 

Hedera Cilicia,i, Smilax Aſpera. 


Helxineg. Parietaria. 


Helicen, i. Hedera Helix. 
pour 


wg Herla 


OY id eff Gomes 


5. Ponta. 
ary —_ id eſt Palma. 
Herbs Impetiginaria , id eſt Chelido- 
| nin mane, 
HerbaVulcaniid eft Rammnculu. 
erba Scelerata, id eft Rannnenlus. 


erbaVlceraria, i. Ranwiculin. 
Herba Canſtica, i, Ranunculns, 


0 Nomimmus 


Herba Dineatifie id eſt _—_— 


| Regal. © 
Herba Stella, 3. Cornu Ceri. 
Herba Cancri, i. Heliotr opinmn, 
H erba Radioli eApulei jd eff Polypo- 
dium. 
Herba Leonts Dodon. id eſt Agmi- 
legia. 
Mt rho S. Anthony, id eff Dertilaria 
| Rondelety. 
Herba Coxendicum, id eft Cotyledon, 
Herba Benedifta, i. Caryophyllata. 
Herba Fortts, id eſt Soltdag o0 Sarace- 
| Mic. * 
Herbs Parah/s. 1 Primula vers. 
erba Clanellata, i.Viola tricelor, 
ee Laſſulata,id eft a ma- 
| for. ® 
Herba Pinnula, id eff Hyoſeyammm. 
Herba Tarcas, Herniaria. © 
Herba Hrmgarica Dodon.i. Alcea. 
Herba Simeonis Dodon. id eff Alcea 
Herba Vrbanayj. Acantbus. © 
Herb« Tinica Gordonh, id ef Ocy- 


maſtrum, 
Herba Tunica Dodon. i eff Caryo- 
| phyllata. 
Herba Gallica Fracaſtorh,,id of Ga- 


lepa. 
Herbs Ratinalis,i. Spondylinms. 
Herba Sardoa, id eit J——_— 
Armorum, 
Herba Sitya, i. Tabare. © 
Herba Sacre eAgrippe, +. Iehſſe. 
quptnge.r" odor. id e5t Cc achi- 


Hermodath Htalorum, i4 FF Iris tns- 
beroſs L'Obely. © | 
Heſperis Clitity, #, Lewcoiuns is 
"um L' Obey. 

Hippia,s. Alfie: 

Ferundinaria,i. Aſc lepias. 
\HortusVeneris, i Corfledow.” 
Horminum'T' Pdhtinrats; ideft Colus 


Hydroſelmns Comirarh, wo «71 
ner Wain, 
kn. 6 MfTe 


Lach 


+ 
C 


p 


rundamil 


Hippogleſſi w Banfings; id eft Las. 
Alex. | 
Hyoſyris Pling, i i. aces wierd, 
nn i, After Attiens. 
Hypecoon Doden id eff Cuminum [yl- 


weitre. 
Hypecoon Clury, i. Alcea Veneta, 


 Hippoſelion, i. Macedonicum. 


I 


| Arm,id eff Arun. 

lackaiahk , i. e Anemone. 

lafione 1.Camparula. 

Jahn, td eff Ez ula. 

Jauatrt,i.Nux Meſcata, 

Ibiga,i.C h. "mepitys. 

Tezar S erepi 91s 4d eſt Paſtinaca, 

Imperarvige, id eft Meum. 

Inala Raftica Scribony Largi, id eft 
Conſalitls maior. 

Inguinalitz. Aſter atticus, 

Intybus,id eſt Cicborinm. 

Jonis Faba,. Hyoſtyamus. 

Tomis Glans s.Cattanea.” 

Tons Flor, i. Lychnis. 

Touts pry Mics 1. Quercus. 

lorgir, id eſt Ernca. © 

Irio, 1. Exyſumnny. 

June jr" ws Celfs. Cyperns, 

Tua Muſecata, id eſt Chamepitys. 

Infatlij. Satrbucns. 

Inſquianme\ i. Hy oſtyammg, 

Ix ops Cardi, i\Chonarila, 


K 


Ameallisid eff Ebulus. 
Kantrrionid off Centanrenm. 
Kanz.gd eff a 3s 
Kapar, id eft.C 
Kanroch jd eff Chel:donimny mainy, 
K Was 4. Ranunentus, 
Keiri, id eſt Lencoium, 
Kemetrijd oft Pris. 
Kemum, s. Curminun, 
Kenne, id eft Liguſtrums. 
Kernuaghy. Ricmus, 
Kernghay. Ricmus. 
Kermes,'i. Coceur infeFtoria. 
Kutb, id eft Milium ſolis. 
Kubera eAmerroy , id off Corian. 
drm." 


Kusbor,i, Corianidrum. 
L 


_ Loves nent =O 


Landata N 


retario. ; 


Levee Cri ei Linua Sep 


nel i, UViburnum , 


Lanaria, i. Radieula. * | 
Lanceclag. ninquenernia. 
.Ferance. 
Lathyris,i. Catapmtia,! on 
Lathyras, i. Piſum frlueftre. * 
Lancer Lanacrum,'i . Dipſacus.- — 
L nr us Alexanarina, d PI $1 

£9 18, 

4K7 149 Roſen, ide Oleander. 
mcg fy hve ori; 4. Lateris T inw, 
Lamrentina Alathiels, id Left Buyhla. 
Leo Colamelis, 3. Aqniteors. ITH 
Leons Ofcrlum,, Aqui rilegrd' ; 
Leomoſtamum Gefneri, 11 eff hor wot 


leg ia. 


Leo Horbe Dodm. id « Aqui 

L epidinom P lines Pipers fp. (61 I 
Leſen Arthanr, id Ly ? Nw leſſum; 
Lewtacantha, id eff Carlma, \ 
Lewcanthemam,id eſt Ch; mome um. 
Libadion Plny, 1detiC entanrenumn. 
Libminm Apulei,i. Boy, ago. 
Limodoron Dodon. i. Ovobinrich,\""" 
Lingna Amis, 1.Fraximies. | 
Lingua Pagan, i. :ppog lofſiim: 
Littago Cordt,s. Phala» | as EC Goh 
Liſen, id eff Plartago. 


| Lotw Vrbani, deft a 


ratum L'Obely. | 
op an Lonchnr is, | 


» +S$@%\ 


Lucrolas,. yore 5 ernentina,” | 
Lwnaria Grac,i Bolbyndc, LEE? 
Lunaria matey Dioſ. i, Alyſon. $ 

L uph Cordij. Dracuncyi#?. 
Luyula, id eſt Trifoliums Actroſim. 
Lycelyin Cor, * «ft ATarns 


aquaricd 
Lycepſis, id eft PBuglof ſum {+ 
Lyceperſicum,i. Poma [Amaris. 


(REF 

M 
ln 
' 


bbla et WPabaig > | 
Mandon ew ad els Bryonia 


alba. 


Mary dari Treo 
A. uber ſn, 1 


Malimibieta 


" ICE <.x-5 


CHMalocoC hag I 
waits ed 05;7agwny k 


"If 


Maluaniſcns, i. Ibiſe uss 
— | 


| Nomina( 


Meru berbs Dedey, det Coibe 
Pl: 


. 


pans Mel nent 
Aatriſaluia, i. Horminuns. | 
Matriſylua, + pany pt 
qa Caput , id ell bde- 


Mela, Dioſcor. id eff Viola ae 
Meduns L'Obely, id eſt irw ” 
Adelechia, i.Corcorias. [ 
Mel: um, id eft He wh 
ger. 
Mel Frugum Diocleſ. id eff Pans 
Cam, il 
ya" oy id eff ones x ins Wd 


Molede #. Nigella. 


laſtermmum.j. Nig i 
Melich Arab. id eit Tree frn- 
Hicans. 


Meleagris Flos,id eff Fricilthe 
Melanthium,. Nigella. it 


AMeloſpinum , 1d cit Pomum 
Memiran Andy. Perſe, i 
Chelid. Þ 


7 xk. 4s x 4 Paints, 


acenice,id et Balſums 

214107. ll 
Aw, id eft Meum. [| 
Hemiren $ erapionts, id efF Chel; 


Methel,jd eſt Stramonia. 


Ce 4 Syriace , id eft Fabago 
Be T7 HAY, | 


Mochus Dodon. id eft Orobu L'O- 


bely, ||| 
Morells, id eff Selanum Hortenſe. 
HMnala Herba Gaze,id eft Ceterach. 
Maultibona, id eft Petroſelinum. 
Mumeizgd eſt Sy COMOrMs. 
Muralia Pliwy, <, | Helximes, 
My 0n,jd eff Doronicum, 
Agri ſþlntitris. Ruſcus, 
Atyrica, t. Ta CM. 


_—_ s. Viola aquatilis. 
what N 
danke eff Memtha, 
Nanechach,id Ammi. 


| Nard Naton Arab.i.Roſa. 


Nardius Cretica, i. Phu magnum, 
Nardusruſtica Pliniygs.C 044. 
__ id eft Naſturrium. 

argel,id eſt Palma. 

gry bins $1ymai 1H Ea0G id eff Pen- 


Nen il eſt Nymphea. 
Neko, eff Nidus amis. ; 
Nepa Gaz, id eft Geniſta ſbineſe, | 
Nerinm,id eft Oleander, 

Nicopbaron Plmy , id eff Smilax 


| Mp wi id eſt Tabaco. 


Ngo id eff Pinder 


— deft N yophes. 

Nil eAnicenne , Melt Connolunls 
Carulems. 

Nola Culinaria,d eff Anemone, \ 

Noh me 6.2884 Clay, id et [mpe- 


riens ber 


Noli me tangeresd.Cucumis "451i 
Nux Metel, i. Stramonia Fuc 


Cul | call eſt Horminum. 
Odentis, af Demillaria Ron- 


delery . | 
\. 1d df Chamamalons, 


Olea pr cine ofy eff Ziziphus alba. 


Oleagnes, id eff Camelea. 
Oleaſtellum jd eft Camelea. 

Olus Indaicum, ideſt Corcoros. 

Ol album Dodev. ideſt V, alerieve 


dhadlien interpretario 


Onoſma, id eft Bu ſlneftre. 
py." We Lol aomcten thr 


Ordebien Nicandri. Tordylien, 
Opbris, i. Bifolinms. 


On apo 
<araoy wo tek Ficws Indice, 
Opſaro, id eff Solanum ommferum, 
urs eſt == 
Ornalayd eft Horminuns , 
Oreoſclinum , id eft Petroſelinum, 
Ornu, id eff Fraxinus Bubula, 
Orontium, id eſt Antirrhinum, 
Oftria Cordi, id eff Ornus Tragi, 
Ofteocollon, id eft Conſolida maigr. 
Oftrumtium, ideſt Imperatoria. 
Ori, id eſt Linayia. 
Otbonna, id eft Flos Africanus, 
Oxyacantha, id eft Berberts. 
Oxyacambus, id eſt Spina alba. 
Oxy: , id eit Trifolium Acetoſum, 
Oxymyr/ſme,id eſt Ruſcus. | 
Oxycocens Cordi, id eft Vaccinia pa- 
luſtri , | 


B p 
Alma Chriſti, id eff Ricinu, 
Palaba, id eft Cyclamen 
Pedereta, id eſt Aranthus. 
Panis Cucati, iagf 7 refolium eAce- 
toſam. 
Pancratium,id eſt S 
Pani porcinu, id 'C [Cc 
Papauer $, id eft Ben album. 
P aronycbia Dieſe. id eft Ruta Mu- 
rarta, | 
Reſori Roelly, id eft Morſus Gal- 


f Java kit id eff Stapbiſagrie. 
Pedmicularia Marcels, id et Sta- 


lacs eſt Rave ſlueſtris, 
Pentadattylon, id of _ WG 
P 4 Geſners,iacſt Pi 

7 chr id eft Lots i 92a 
Perforata, id eſt Hypericon. 
Perdicion, id ef Helxime, 
Perifteron, id eft Scabioſa minima 
Perſonata, id eff Bardana. 

Pexice _ eff Fungus. 

Pes Auis, id eff Condens. 
Pes Leonis,id eſt Alcbimilla. 

Pes Vitudi,id eſt 9 

Pes id 

E_ Ameriee Fro Takars, 
Petiliua Flos, id eft Flos Africants . 
Phareores, id eft Coftus Spurins. 
Phaſganon Ti beoph.id of Gladiolts. 


| Hof Lol 
Ee RRWNErs 0000 ee” 
Hs « 


leterium,id ft » Harmon 
e01,id eſt Sa 
P burion,d . Pedenleris, 


4 'Deodoner,d oft Lignſtrum. 
llon T beopbraſtr, «, Mercurialis . 
antrepos,id eſt Aparme. 
: _ Angwillare, i. Rheſeda. 
Proppinella —_— Camerary,:. Pote- 
L | 
Pit aſtellajd eſt Pencedanum. 
Per aquaticum,td eſt Hydropiper. 
Pier Calecmthinm jd eft Cap cum. 
Piper Indum id eft Capſicum. 
- er Brafilianum, jd eft Capſicum. 
bp rt eſt Vuex. 
Phan ſylneſtris, id efſt Nu V, hat 
varia. 
Piſtana,id ef Sagittaria. 
Planta leoms jd eft Alchimilla. = 
Prgumonanthe L'Cbely, id eff Viola 
Calathiana Dodonei. 
Pollagraria Germanica,id eft Herba 
erards. 
Palytrichum, id eft Capillu Veneris, 
Pahrtrichum Fuchſn, 1d eft Muſcus 
Fapillares. 
Polygonatum, id eff Sigelans —_ 
ons. 
P al \gonoides Dioſcoridis,id eft Vinca 
erMINCA, 
Polyanthemum, i. Ranunculiu aqud- 
niews. 
Pulyg onum,id eft Centumnodra. 
Papulago,id ef Tuſſulago : 
Pogemiilla maior, id et [maria. 
Porthos Cofteis A. quilegia, 
Porthos 7 heophratts, $14 efb eHqmle- 


lu herba, id eft Chamome- 
lam. 

Provomediagd of Pimpinela. 

Pſendorcbu's. Bifolrm, | 

Pfendobuniumid eff Barbarea, 

Manoa, id ef Siuchnoden- 
| dron;" 


Pyrechram ſueſt ed eft Prarmica. 


Pteridion Cord, 4. Dryopterts Tr K 
FP gry þ Wt K 
Fnliceia Gaze, id eſt Conyzac 


| F 
| Adix Narorica,jd eft Iris, 
VCRhamel.id eff Ciftus, 
hlueftris, i. Ditander. 
terre.nd eit Cyclamen, 
gi,id ft Faniculum. 


Nomina « quorundami 


Salma; ts nd eft P; rerhrum. 

Salnia vite yd oft Rata minraria.. ,” 

Salma iſs , id of Scordrum alte- 
rum. 


Salma Rotmuane, 5 Pings maior. 


S 4.1 eft Nigella. | 
Sapp liny, id eft Pulſatilla. 
cn 11,1: Anagalls aqutica 


YG eſt eAmarachus. 
Ser Hercalrs, 14 oft Helleborus 


$S Ls eff PO PPTEeR 
Sanammnnda.d eſt Caryophyliara, - © 
S ph eft F.hv. | 

lans jd eft Caſtanea. 
pany wy, eft Malus Perſica. 
Saxiphap on Dioſ id ett Betoniea, 


Saxrfragtalutea Faenye 1d of Meb- 


UI. | 


S axiſtagia rubra, id eft Platpendela, 


Sagitta,d eit Wes 


Stammonta tennis, td eft Helxine | 


is 9" 

Scandix deft Peften Venerts, 
Scarleagd ett Horminum, 
Scawnix eAnerr.id eft Nigella. 
Sceleryrben id eft Biſtorta. 
Se ſſims G24 84 eft Fagus. 
Schebedenegr,d eft Colmar 
Scheiteregs.d eft Fumaria, 


Scopariayd eft Ofris, 


| mo ooo $OB 


retatio, 
pg) 91 Haltabbig Fumaria. Scolopendrid,s Lingua ceruina, © 
Regma pratigd eft Vimaria. Scorodoniaud eſt ſcordruns +" wm 
Roſa fatuinayd eft Peonia. Scorpio Theephralts i eff Gemifta 
Roſa Innons,id eft Liluem, fprnoſa, 
Roraſtrumjd eft B Scolymos Dio ſeoridie id ef Cinara. 
Rorellagd et Ros yon ' Scilla,id eff Syuilla. © 2H 
Rotula ſolu yd eft Chamemelum. Seuck, Syriaca.td eff Rhee, 
Rhododaphne id eft Oleander. Secacul Aonards, ide Stgulliy S6- 
Khogodendron,d eft | lomonis. 
Rhuſelmum Apulei, "Rename alas, Selago Ply, id þ S _ qo 
Kima Aariad oft Alliaria. Tragi, 
Kmceus marinus jd eft Crithmum, Seliem,d ef Repaws. [ 1 
Rubus cerninus i.Smilax aſpera. Seligomiongd efÞ Peonia, | 
 Roamex deft Lapathum. Selamon,id eft Crocus verTade\ F 
Ruta capraria,id eft Galea; Selliga,jd eft Nardi Celttea, 
Ruta goth fd eff ny Semmalisadeſt Equiſetrm. 
Sedum maius,td eft Semperwinuns. 
er Senefſigiid eſt Viola martta, © © 
| Abb Serpentariagd eft. Dracuntnilw; 
Abeteregi id eft Fumaria. Sertula campania fd eff Meblorize) 
Sbaler gd eſt Surmreia, Serapias mas, raed py" ”_— faming 
Sadeb,id eft Rota, Tragi. 
Sacra herb rl rippe.td eff Saluia, © $ exgar 14 eft Nate eels; even 
Saffargels Wa Malns Cydonta. Sida Theophid eſt badaifeg? 
Sofarber.inivaad eft Sparg anium. Stderitts rerun Mathiolt, (id neg 
Sabtcaria.id eff Ly/macha. Canin Monſpelienſium, 
Salina G jefnert, id eff FR Cel- Siderits, + Marrubuem | 
rica. Scihana Camerary, id oy Andre 
Salfrora, fo Ros folies”” mum Dodonai. 
Saletftrum Pliny,s. Amara dnlris,.0 Stger Individ eff Palms. IF 
Salicaitruny Direſcoridis, 3. Bryonia Sringacarvlea Dodonei, #d oft Lulas 
more. |. Mathiols. IS bs nk 8 
Salix Amerinaid eſt Salix bumils, Sihqua dakciriCo ia liqua;' - © 


Sthicnla Varront id eſt Fa 
—_— Theo Cops 
igillam Marie,i TEL: 

Sm,jd eft Fiexs, | 
Sinasbarium,id eff Mentha 
Smapi Perſicum gg eſt 1 blaſps. 
Siſer 1d eff Siſarmm. 

Silas Plmyid eff Thiſſelium, __ 
Sifon Syriacum ad eff Amp" : 
Sifſcrepreris Plmy.id eff Pin 


"5190 I 


Spina acuta,ideſt O Mob . 
Spine achtagd ROMs aha. 


Sphrejd eff Radix Caud. il 
Spicatag.Potamogeiton. || 


veſicaria, - ji Al 
Statice Baehenpb/tet -4 
" lu marinus L Obely. . 
 Statariejd eſt Pew 


| ny , 
f; ill 


Tens: Indica, id oft let 
Tihalbil Len paluſtris, th 


Tatonla Twrcis,j, Pomun( ww. 
T amis Dodones, id et wit 


TAO; TWny,. h 


Nominum aqhableni interpreratio. 


Tedaarbord ei} Pinus fylueitris. 
Terzola Abciſ Sardi, my eft Eupa- 
Camabinuns. 


forium 

Tetrahit,s, Herba laduca. 

Terdina P aracelſi,s. P bu magnum . 
Terpentaria.s .Betonica aquatica. 
Teliphanos. Doronicum, 

Thina,i. Layix, 


 Thutg. Morug.. 


Thuia Theephyaſti.. Arbor vite. 


wr pd i. Apium hineſtre. | 
atwreia. 

To feb Helter ene, 

T opiarias.;Acanthus. 

Traps <unti64;6, Lauroceraſmy. 

Tragranes, \Fraxinella, 

p 9 fer Wanicurs » 6, Atriplex 


Tremula. Ions Libyca. 

Trifolium fibrinum, id eſt Trifolinm 
paluttre, | 

Trifolinm (ber wha, Medica. 

po fruticans , id oft Polemo- 


Trifoluns aſpbaltites jd eft mb $494 
bitummoſum. 

Tuber terre,i.Cyclamen, 

Turbithj.7 

Turbith Aniceme,.Tripelium, 


Tito Theqpirafis Tafſgs y 


V 


earia peregring, id eft Paſuns 
Ver 
Veelgutta Dodm.i.Petroſelinums. 


. Veratrumg. Helleborua, 


Verarrum Dieſeoriass, i. Aftrantia 
oat endlh, Primmls veris: 


Verdelbel Hahab. i.Ranunculns. 


Verrucaria Mathiol, id oft Hedyp- 
nois L'Obely, 


Vittoriole,i. Hippog loſſum. 
VitualbasB 


"wn [dea;i.V arcinie. 
« fangaings HMathiolh, iClraw 


Virga paitorir,. Dipſacaa. 

© Pighps Craſſmla, | 
Vitalbaj Viorna, 

Vaicellag. Momordica. 


Zilkes albaj.a Eleagn 


Vincetoxicums, Aſclepias, 
Viola nigra,jd eft Viola martia. 
Viola hnwens Viola tricolor, 
V aperarias.Scorzonera. 
Viſnagay. Gngrdinm. 

V mbilicus V eneris $.Cotyledon. 


. Vueds Pliny i. Arbutta. 


Vagnula caballmayj.T »ſſilago. 
Vlticanas.Solanum ſomnifer uns. 


| V ipicum Columelles, Allum. 


Vrinariaj. Dens leon, 


Vſfneas, Muſcns. 


Va lupina Marcellid eſt Sambucus 
aquatica. | 
Vina taminia,i.Bryonia. 


 Vaa lupina Dioſcoridss, id eft Herba 


Parts. 
Vane verſa. Herba Paris. 
Vua vulgud Solemum hortenſe, 


Vunularia,i. Hippog loſſum. 


Vunlaria,i.Laurius Ale xandrina, 


| Punlaria Dodondi, i. Trachelium. 
Vuluaria,s. eAtriplex olida. 


UVnlgago Maceri, s. — Bac- 
Carts. | 
Vikucata Coyayi.Straminia. 


X 


ater s, Alniriem Libanotis, 
aninum,#, Meclantbium, 
Xlong.Goſſipinm. 
AX (Hlocarattay. Crratia filiqua. 


| Jpn. Gladiolns, 


Y 


T ebetiid eſt Anetum., 


Z 


' Ahara RON eſt Anthyh 
I GL Obely. ; 
Zaitong.Olea, | | 
Zarannd,i. Ariftolochia. 
Z 4r 24 4,1, Sar ſa parilla, 
ates, wy e 7 Hedypnos. 
Zerumbethj,Zedoaria. 


Lizamaj Lolinm. 


— caninum j.Ca /icuns. 
4. lninbe. © - 
ns Math. 


Ziziphus alba Camerary, id eſt Oths 
Bobemica, 


( | $16,917 

| avrny Forgot Looke Inthoza 
ol 419] $20 : 

The oilie # cozne 3} 22.14 

1331.1332.1333 

Avders grſf, that is D Dogballocks 


| 327 

| | 609,610,611 

| | \cthioptan applcs | 276 
| 1134 


Agrimontie | IIs 

aſtard and water J grimonie 574 
Aqnus Caſtus 1202 
Aquetree 1 34t 
Alecoſte, that is Coftemary 524 
Aifgod, that is faiſe Bercurie 259 


Aligod, that is gov 02 En= 
'' | ahh Mercuric tbid, 
Aliheate, that is Clownes wound= 

$50.351 


hone, that is Ground Aute 705 
MFlexanders,0z Fitzonders $65.266 
Flexanders fote, that Bio, - 


Alter, oz Þider tree, nid his tis 
| [12$6,1294 
is wilde Ozach 257 


ogy 1031 


Fimonderc 1256 
T312 
ns POTTERY fo 


881.892 


5 pa of WPatars 


13 
nemone,ſfee tVindfower 
nile,oz I nmile ſleeve 
þ- wary Ayer | 
Angelica, andhis kinds  $46.847 
Inthpliis , 0z ſtinking ground Pine 
419 


nthoza $20 
pple, mdhig kinds 127341274. 
1275 


| 'Apple of theearth 698 
| ”y—_ of lone, 02 golden Ppples 


Burcki Fppies,02 of ote's _—_ 


of Jeruſalem 
273-274 


ad Ypyples - 74 
IZ 


Brad and his kinds 257 
| ba > Rs 566.567, 


Blicke Archangel, meets 
'Hozehound, 


| 
{ 
\ 


Raf 


' $79.8L0 
378 


A F F 's , 


tioned in this Hliſtorie. 
water Bucher, 6p Vixbioheed ardhis 
3 


Fcchedtro eva 


— - 698.699 
Ifprramngand big kinds P0228 


-$5.87:.89 
Wt ets 


ike 309/6ikdinteg 15x66 


2lles A 1F{1 

Illpzian Appletres 1 279. 1279. Hy 

Alpzian Plam | ws 
43 


Ven any hiehiady $41,942 
IArtich 1057 


wn > 


4 


Porta, commit -backe 661 
Pr os cy 359, 

89g -* þ 

dmonis 


3F1.3 
Baſtard 895 
Ball Thiſtle - 990 
Balne >. 3 
alme int ; 53>" IS 


Balſamtue tbtd 
Balme @, that is Fetnetlifte, oz 
on Poe! Chai; LO ——_ r347 
nappies} fee I pples of Jeruſa= 
Salſa &, with the fruit and vod 

44.1345 
= GN 
Cri = that is triple Ladie 
167 


169 
+;hatio Spermor: 813 


198 
Barberi buſhehis kinds 1144.1015 


Severe: and his kinds 64. 65.66.67 
c 


rm EY bog 
Sail andbas kind 
Bott!i 
Red cow ?Sadll 
Cow Baſil 
Batchelers buttons 
Batvme and his kinds 559.559. 560 
y 1222. 12273; 
SEES 199 - 
1224. Tz25 
1306,1107 


Demers | 750 


*r304 


ATable of all ſuch Eng iſh nas asf are atrribured 
_ wntothe Herbes, Shrabe, and Trees, 5, men- $tr4 


JI NU "OE 
4+ -., #3 


+4. 2 22201 u7* 


Haruelt We wk ers.» 
Berte,an kinds © 297,258 
Becchtres . - [ IH  TACE 
Bechmaſs = ooo 2255 
Berſcom wee 219 
Z 

Tan "4 "Io 
Bette, 0z See, thatis ge... 
: En nn 


Birds neſt 276.975. 
El OOO +. 336 698 


Biſltozt, and his kindg ! ooo x 
EN NEAR 278.279 


ox —_— _ 

202 ore12?2 
E "Y225.1226 
Bzamble bu ; -2089.1091 
-- Bzabe, 


Eccce 2 


A \ Table of theEng liſh names. 


Wilde Cammomili - 6166618": 
|  Cnmpenend hands 332.325:356 


Choking Pal ym ſpu 
Chiilts wozt CEE 


Arr herbe,that1s black Bel- 
Trbos : \\ $26 
I153.1154 

$29.97 1 


yion,nd john 719.726. 721 
Jndian Bzionie, that is Mechoacan 
1139.1132 


fila fng Gzalle - $35 


648 

Oe Cimanks Srwilel 

; kn Tilley _ 1348,1349 

'7Fx 

Ciltuss bis Kind $1092. 1093.1994.4 

1099.1102 

Ciſtus Ledon . 1102,Ff, 

RING Ira 

ſhzub Trefople 1122-1125 

Citron tree  1278.1279 

Citrull Cucumbers 767,768 

The wilde Citrull is 4 

Ciues,oz Chiues #c. 

| HerangeClarie that i Jupiteradi 

627 

Bnierths,th Chats __ Clanie. 02 Clearep .  tbid, 
3 hi - - rag HY | 628 
Buckrams ; AX" lauer 964.,1019,19022.1023 
Bucke thozne r1gha15s Hozned ozblacke Clauer 1028,1029 
Claner gentle 1019 * 

lt Clauer | 1025 

Clager '.. 1025-1026 


Sunatile oz ſeaClaner 10259, 1030, ſe 
.Wedick fodder 

Cleaners and Goſegraſſe 964” 

Biting Clematis, 743 


665 
Cloudeberries 136$ 
Cloue Gillofer,and hig kinds 472 


Clote burre 


13511352 


699 

on 236.239 

Cocks fotegraſle 25 

| [ | Cocks heads,that is Medow Trefcile 
Champiznſea 1018 


THRIETY Coheed that is red Fitchling 
I 


| 25 | 
EIT 1201.1202 Cockle 926,927 
—_—— is Cotton weede 519 Codded Trefoile 10224929 


rape 1318.1319, eCods 169 
Crane He his kinds 247.249 
erCherries | + 


| 271 = 
red 0 (0098 163.586 oe 
CT and 2,333 

| ry _ 


968 - Gear Conſound, and his kinds 660 
Wtddle Conſound $06, 509 
Conuall L illie,and his kinds 331.332 
that 506, 661 

663 
617 
1212 
1164 

x 163 


pdng 4 
« #69; is wilde 


Cou# , 


onttrwand his inns | qgepoe 
'Cozne flower,oz blew Bottle | 594 
Cozaliandhis 


kiuds ' weep 
Cozall wats 
Cozallinc,oz Cozall moſſe aagting 
Cotton weede, 0 
6 Fi5.519 


Cotton graſſe #1" If 


'Covſlips,and his kinds 634.637 
Conlicys of Jeruſatem, that is Sage 

of Jeruſalem . _ 
MWountaine Cowſlips 640 


Cow Baſill,that 19 redWalerian- £4 


0 ON - 
0 neps,and 

Core combs,and Hens combs, that is 
yelloro Battle  , 0 ' | on 


Cranes bils and hig tinds 993-795 
Of wild Cranes bils diuers ſozts 799 
Craw,that is rape Crowfote | 8: 

his 188.194-195 


450 
Croſſewozt and hig kinds 964 965 
Crow foteandhiginds 347.7950) 
Peilowe Cro , ts pellowe 
Narciſſus 


pion 3 
Crow toes, that is Ypacinthes 97.98 
Crow flowers 

Water Crowfote 
Crow foote Cranes bill 
Double Crow foote 
White double Crow foote 


 ATablcofthe 


Crab graſſe 
Crab tree,that is the wave in2 
I AP CLIG | 
| 622 
797 
791-793 
996 


. - that is wod ſozrell 
Cucumbers 


Daten move 


nant 
white Daffodil o: 
DmeL illie 
Great Dailies © * | 
Litile Daiiegandhis kinds 509. 5 10 
Biew Daiſies, that is ſea Starwoze 
| FI1.51% 
120 
228,229 
1237.1238 
7 
Darnell graſſe 
Date tree with the fruiteand Sa 
therevt | - 1333.1334 
Thedzunken Date tree 1337 
The wilde 62 pine Date tree 1335-1336 
Daucus of Candie 874 
Dead Nettle andhfs kinds 568 


Deale bo22d tree,0z Firtree- 1182 
Dew 


Tiers feede and his kinds 393 
Diers greening weede 1136 


Dill, that is ner 878 
Diptam,oz Dittanp of Tandie 651.652 
Ditteyder,and Dittante 188 
Baſtard Dittante 652.1065 


| Wn 
' I 

ern vin 11.19.20 

ke wo2mwode 


ws 


== 


Egyptian Bu | 
Elder trezand his kinds 1233. 123+ 


| 2336. r275 

| 2 1235 
mn 396.1257 
S "%49 
231,222,227 
thtd, 


259 
999 


| | Shweta} 0.351.352 
Rn 3 


* Toa Deny 


$29 
03 tree Germander $32-533-534 
garlicke Ger- 


ate Germander. 0 


| 16 
Wuibed ſtocke Gilloflowers 120 _ 
Stocke Gillofiowers = 
———_—— 


G f 
Golden Yoth work, 02 Goiden Cud- 
Goiden$0wer of Peru 
Goiden thiſtle | 
Golden thiſtle of Peru 
oldentrefoile 


Gold of pieaſure 

Goidflocks,o: Golden 1374 

Golden oxe cic,icoke Buphthalmum po 
bis kinds 

Golden flower gentle, aud Goldilocks 
$20,531 

Golden weozt of Languedock, loks , 
 "Herba Dorea | 


; Goldweazt 603 
Degenerate French Golds, 09z ſingis 
French olds , loke Flos Atri- 
Canus 611 
Gooſe tree,that ts Barnacle tre 1291 
WBzant Geale,oz tree Geeſs | thid, 
FS es | Gol cad his finds,/Has ty Fry 
7 ol Hempe $72 1138.1149 | 
| py oped we of Re ' G2 ,02 Gooſeberrie buſh 1143 
[164.1 -LIES.11 67 isCicaucers 953.964 
& | is wild Yrach 253 259 - 
22's delight, 02 Gardners _ 1 376 
' 
1119 


| Garlickea _ kinds 140 141 
47 48.49.50.51.53.67 's Garlickeſ3ge $35.536 
dols goiden Flower || || Gaxtund Thowe, fir Chpilts thopts, 

BY rlcke Treatiewort, oGarlicke 6 mottzade Trae _ 
- Wu and io kinds / 210 pin > MINN] he mw 
fags 02 | Garlicke 143 
5alicke Germander, lobe Scordium. | == 159. 160, = 
: *  Utociets, that 1s ock Gilto= | _ ds oncyonar 
i 
aten, 03 Gatex tree 3283 Ser tran owt tha (wherds Serned 4 
Saule 03 ({ſwecte Willow. = + 3238 Srace of God, 07 S. Johns Grafle, 
Getded Saty34or - 273 / lobe S. 433 

ub og 

emzcs Hole n237 | | 41 $67,796797 


| 


A ſesandhis kinds, loke 


_”_ 


Sea Sraps that is Katonwofthe le 
958.959.960 


Graſſe and his kinds 691 
Graſſe and allhis kinds 1.2.3 4.5.6.#c. 


Stinking Ground Pine 
Gumme thilkle, that is Eupbicbiom 


1014.1016 


Growndſwell andhis kinds 217.2 18, 
$7 © os 
H 
JFirie grafſe 16 
Hairie wood graſle tbid.17 
_—_ 1296 


9y 
Hares bao, that fox ons 164 


1055.1056. ro57 


ſe Heath 
Vaukeweedeand his kinds £212.237 
Yawthozne tres 2+ In we 
380 


Graines of Paradiſe z” 
winter Greene 

Greening weede and his kindes Rey 

1tz6 
Gromill and his kinds 486.437 
Gromill reede $2 
Wilde Gromili,loke Anchuſa | 657 
Grounde DSalitgot, that is A——— 
| J© 

Ground furze 1141.1142 
Dea Ground Pine 4:0 
Ground - 


A Table of the Engliſhns names, 


Hedgehogge gralle 
Hedgehogge Uquozice 1 01 
Hedge beis 714 
Hetge hyllope 465.457 
Bellebozeand his kinds 275.258.259 
Dioſcozides hts blacke Helleboze 828 
Bliacke Helleboze 824 826 
Baſtard blacke Helleboze ibid. 
White Helleboze, that us Neeſcwazt 

399 | 

Hetmet flower $23 
Yellow Helmet flower $20 
Hemlocke and his kinds 903.904 995 
Hempe andhts kinds $72.573 
DHempe t 120z 
$73 
$74 
282.283 
285 
2%z 
7 
y} 493 
Hens bill.lwke Onobrychis 1062 
ou fopte, that is hedge Fumitorte 
wrets intents 912 
GDI, , that is Engliſh Yercu- 
259 
Beptre 1088 
Herbe Terrible 408 
Herbe Fecula $59 
Herbe Carpenter 506, 508 
Herbe William $82 


rar Ea ES Ernrneys $48 

49 

Herbe Parts 

Herbe Grace, that is Rue and 2s 
kinds 1070, 107 1.1073 


79 
504.505 
410 


Herbe Yloes 


Herbe Jute 02 ground Pine 471.422 
Yerbe toillow 38 


+= tpn Sen forges OE 


 Hogsofennell 


897 
votes; Hollie and Vuluer with hes 


11551156 

Hoime 03 Holtic Oe ——_ 
Holithocke and hits kinds 782. 7 
ear ape 


CE es 
Hole Roſcandhis kindes- a 


1001,1002, 1003 
ee ng oy One que 
- 930.934 © 


Dimloctsut a Pendle gou 


| Dmail Honekkte, thatioPincks 
- Home woozt, loke Cerinthe 47h 


431 
Honiſackle and his kinds 743-744 1124 
1113 
Hoppcs and hts kinds 737-738 
Heodved willow herbe 236 
Yoke hea!c 508 
Hozehoundand his kinds F61.4562 
wwilde Bozehound | 563.564 
water 02 marriſh Hozehound . 565 
Wlacke oz mking Hozehound 8 565 
On 03 hardbeame tree 1295 
129 
Bozned ſca | 295 
Ho 896 897 
Hozſet | 76x 
Hozſe om. DAD Metwwobns 214 
Hozſcheelc,that ts E 649 
Horſchofe 667 
EEE 1056. 1057 
Hozletaile, that is & and 
his kinds, 955-956.957.958 
Hozle mint” 55 
water Houſlceke | 677 
Great Houlleke 41.412 
<-> 42rd 02 Aygreene and his 
410 
D—_— tcong,0z Hounds h 
Bound berrie tree ny bg 


Hundzed headed thiſtle , loke Cham? 
pion ſea Hottie 


T 

> ant oy mehr Bottle rg 

 Hyaciathes,loke Jacinthes 97 
 Dyſlope, ſee 

ET 

] Fe orcde butter £229 ars 

Ioderdedg HOG Dameery 

Garlicke wo2t | 650 

9N1©0.FC, 

"245-747 

thozns 


| Jmpertall Lflie,0z crowne Jmperiatl 


153-154 


1329.1330 
284 
. IP 


I _ 
13371338 
195.196 


Apes 
1315-14316.1317 
Wopnce bes 
trees 


Creſſes 


Saftnt Johns bzead | 1 249.1241 
| pSnme ef ones (WY +- 


ps cen Made! 6294 Pope: 
Jolephs flower, that is Gotobed at 


. neone 596 
Ireos, that is era of the wh 
Flowerdeluce *' 


1040 7 | 
DPrgers ſorts of Kidney veanes 1 ror 
Kidnep 1060 


QBetch 
ILY "L9G lake Pa'ma.Ch { 


A Tableof the Eng Jliſhnames. 


[| 


Our Ladies 983 
Ladies OT | | . = 
Ladiesgloues | 

Ladies glaſle,fee Venus loking glaſle. 
Ladieg bower| | |! 740.743 
Dur Lattes thiſtle OF: 989 
Ladies laces | | |. wa 5 
L adieg ſmockg 


[| 03 
Rn fcale, that! is wilde Bzionie 


Lodi mantis,” thatis great Danicle 


| Danes lettuce 242 
Lancafhue A hodill 89 
Land Cattrop 1066 

mie buſh , that is white 
147 


= 


Jlopc,thatis Hyſope | ab; M4 
Iſewod,thatis Stonie w@d ,Þ2 WO 
made ſtones || 1399 
| or Fitch | [ 1068 
tal:an wood of life, — called 
Licnum vitr 162 S] 
t4.1an Cedar tree | xnp7 
tation ſea Omons |} 17 
talian Otemcale, loke Ranicum | 79 
talian C alamint |} $56 
Italian Rocke,loke Ppeſeda | 216 
7 tatian Pziuec | 1208 : 
Sow 023 Pnca : 1359 : Lacketre,oz Pulmire:tree 1349 
' Judas tre / 1240 - Larkes tþes.02 Larkes ſpur 924 
{Jute and his kinds 767.708 Larkeg ſpur,apd Larks hele oz Larks 
" Ground Juie = os claw : | | 922.923.4924 
Juniper and his kinds 1 188, 1189 Larves ſpur 02 Larkes heele wolfes 
utube tree 131$ | bane | $22.823 
anos tcares al F81 Larch0:Kartytres 1182.,1184 
uprers ie Fupiters 42 Laſerwopt || $53,354 
|| 627 Lanender cotton 951,952 
| anogy oe nm Darnell | 71 Lavender ſpike 467.458 
My Sea Lauenderx | 3324333 
E | 61 
| 1223 
Irden Karſe "- e Charet 1219 
S.Katherimes flower 926 1 38e139-140 | 
Keviocke - 180 gs 
Kernell wozt | ' $80 1-69 
Kere . || 904 1292 
Kidney tare, loke Phaſclus E i1- 1049.1050 
Kidney beanes and his kinds | 1038 fre? 1 2:44 
1939. 1042 5.4 6-8 & YT coatte - 619.620 
| Kidney beane of oat. | 10) 23 bane of that __ 
* 1641 | 
Lettuce and coog 238,229. 240, 
241; : 
Libiozng | | 417 
Lichwale 14 a 
L 1rnum vie 
Laltic conanthaths MWaie Lillies3 x 4 
233) 


| Langyetefe, 3 wilde Buglolle 655 


_—_— 


L andcleapers ſpurge, ioke E1ula mayor 
02 Quackſalyuers Tur bith 404.405 


tth's 
| mountaine Lalie- 1 


Kedo1pirple 
— wow 47 ey 


+1 


Nuble Liverwozt,that "I Tre- 
10 
SY ooo omons] ww 
L ondon tufcs 480 
Lote tree 1308, 1309 
Louage 855 
Baſtard Louage 892 
Louſeherbe 298 


L ouſe wwzt,that is Staueſaker 299, 
913 


L ouſe powder 

L oſeſtrife,that is Lyſimachia 3 85.3 2 
L owe that ig Lauriell 1219 
L owdfie graſle $27 
Lunqwozt . 630.663.1178 
Sea Lungwont _ | 13577 
Tre Lungwazt thtd, 
Lung flower 355 


Luptines andhis kindes 1042. 1043 
Luſtweo:t, thatis Sundeaw 1466 
B inet (hes) ron 385 #c. 


MM 


Ms Bader andhis kinds 960, I by 
9502 


Madnepe $56 
Galens Madre: t 1 » 
Yaavpare 


M:: 4denhatre and his binds 0417 
982 


C emmon Matdenhaire 985 
c_ MWallow and his kinds 782, 
he Bitte Matlow 785.786 
| CR Malloc , 02 cut MBaltowe 
adarty Wallow | 787.789 
Vellom Ma'low 4 2 90-. 
Uentce Mailow » © 991,792 
Mandzake and his kinds © - 231 
Manna graſſe . | 26 
Mavie andhis kinds 12:99,1300 
FFarqrites herbe + 018 
Marterome and his kinds - 538.529 
wide oz baſtard ap rene aries 
$40,541 | 
Evateo Parierome 57>: 1069 
> hermnag ON 1 :. 617,618 
FAM192INe F39 
Makebate tained 
ar:gold and his kinds"59g.600.603 
Golden Marigofd ; ven? 2: Hor 


606 
G12.613 
670,671 
*"2F1,152 
291 


.- of "tf: 
incke Maſters #7 37, _ 
Mathicke tre, that @ Rentiſke tro 
2244 | 

Herve Maſticke ents 
Baſeve Wali, Goates 

: Maricrome $43 
Þ --—; umn 2183, 


Afar, that is Couchwerde 
138% 


Bacwatedhiokans. BED: 


$24 


nn Sperry, 90s is Paie weed 
= | 


310 
F292 
724 
1064 
1029,1030 
886 


and his kinds 1265,2266 
In th 1014 


dtc and his kinds 1033.1035. 


clons and his kinds 772-773-775 
kinds 259 


2058.1059 


Pile Uetch 
pra bg 448.49. 


Blacke SPribewwnt and white Ap 
tict 5 e& | — 
grafſe 5 
Spleenewazt. 973.579 


$524 553 
555 

556 
1326.4,227 


1014 


| Wai no Chae 144» 


Woily Cluſ; & L Otcli.ſee Bale tre 
-..1346 

Money wort. . 505 
Wamemayt aad his kinds 319.378: 


_ 0% 'of Fndia | 216 y 


_ —— SO.” =_ 


$325 b2,5=951 
—_—_— oy} 2327 
hands 629.630 


"= 7 


625 


codre cine, ers French age 


| A EC 31.632 
Woth OY E 653654 


A Table of the Engliſh names, 
Maudeline and hig kinds $508.509, - | 


Iiubarbe 314 
Great Yunkes hod 823 
KRoundieafed Wunks hwd $18 
Roſe 1034.1086 
ard and his kinds 189.199 
Churles and B owyers Multard 206 
Wedie Muſtard 211 
Towers WYultard 12 
Murreine grafſe, loke HEE 6. \ Open 
- SIS 
god | 863 
Wulhzumg and his kinds 1384. 1385 
Now SPulyzumsthet s is Touchwwode 
13 
Dulce Melons © 77077> 
N 
Nilewo2t $00 
Navel wort 423 
Ladics NNauell = 424 
Kauet Gentle 181 
Nauew and his kinds 180.18: 
Navew Tihozoware + 430 
NeckWwed,ti;at 1s Hempe $73 
Neeling powder 357 


MNenuphar,that is water Lillie 674 


Hep and 14s &inds, ſee Cat mint 553 


Neg rote 03 Nerſewozt and his 


kinds | 356.357 -358.359 
Nett!eand hig kinds 560,569. 370.571 
ettie tres 1399 
ead oz blind Nettle -' 568 
Neuer dying Bozage 653 
Nrcotian,that is Tabaco 285 
Nigetla andhis kinds 924.925.926 
Ficlde 6251ive Fagella © 927 


Nightlhave andhis binds 267,268 
Siezgung 52 deadly Nightſhade jo. 
Bed /212htſhade © © --+)) 

Vipers & J nchaunters Night- 


Err Nightſhade -- ws 


ndtc wheate 


 Boſeviere thet is Yarrow 913 919 


Gone farb/whe for Conflantns 
380 


LD ns go to bedat Moone 595 


Nuts and his kimdes | 1248. 1249, 


4» $ASO.1251.1252.1253 


Nutmegtre 1353- 774 

Jndian Nut 1338 

Spamſh £2ut | 93 

Uomiting andpurging Nuts 136: 

Yoater Nuts 676 
, " % 

O 
ON Chifh that is wiide Clarie 
623 


Oitterloir, that is Snakeweed 723 
pps wes that is fea Lungwe:e 


DE; ard bis kinds | 156.1157 
Toons 4 +»: 6 
Okeof Jeruſalem ones 


Steot Cappavcn, z Ob wow 


| fan De, 03 lcarlet Hotme Obe 
877 


Ollie pulſe called Seſamura 1054.1055 


Barren ſcarlet Obe, 0z holme Oke 
1:60 1161 


Great hotme Oke 
Cozke Dbe 

Dleander, that is Roſe baie 1220 
Olue trep and hig kinds 2206. 127 
Ole ipurge 1215 


1162.1163 


One bernie, that is herbe Peris 329 | 


Onie blade, that is one lcate 330 
Onionandhjis kinds 133. 134 EY 137 
Dmon 02 b11{bed Ip 2d 89 
arſe,that is lars 1265 
Opie,that is Darriheder 1237 


 Dzach, that is Irach and ytI kindes 


256.259 
Stinking Ozach 258 
Xoude Ozach 259 
Oxchanret;that is Þ1kanet 657 
Ochis and his kinds 159.160 
O;enge tree 1279.1:$0. 


D:g2nie, that is wilde Aarierome 
$42 
Goates Dzganie $43 
Dzobanch, that is Bzvmerape 1133 
©zobus,that isbitter Uetrch 1051 
Ozyine an1d hits kjnns 416.417.41'8 
Dazxrce, that is Flowerdeluce 47 
Odger,thatigfmail Withe 1205 
Oſmund the water nan, that is water 
erne - 


970.971 
Indian Otemeale » , -/ 198.99 
Otes andhig kinds 68.69.70 
Ote thiftle 988 
Outtandiſh Roſe 734 
Drecie and his kinds 606 67 
rey that is Wilde B2glofle 65 5 
Great Dreheple | $26_ 
Dreiips f {+ 21099 
Tp | 
PIdcten j 802 
Paddocke ſtoles + 21:86 
Paigies 02 Conflip#and his kindcs 
636,638 
Painted graſe 444 of 
Palme tree, ſoy Date tree, 
Palma Chriſti ji 399 


nep "$55. 356 
,03 Palle bcelottr 244 255 
;thatio Suakeweed 323 
399 
| 294 
Patience that is Docke $9241, 
Paules Betonie | 2 2 JOh-Fo4 

Ffeff x : Peach 


on Sade __——_— 
INS q KR IGUSECDY ANN 
LEONE C " 


A Table of che Eng 


names. 


Peach tree and hig kinds 1257.12 5 647.648 | 

1259 . Hy kinds Lag 1132. | R 
Uo TiCNE , that is dead Jrſmare arg. fi _ [0 
Pearetrvand his kinds 1267, 1268 | Koſemarie | | || mp 

1269 Polereede | 
Wilde Peare tres 1270, -+if y 1272 PollRKi | 
Pecaſon and his kinds : | Era: | 02 

| KEI | the watt | | Bagwopzt, 


1152,1153 
F154.1155 


graſle 
Penie monntatne,oz Wilde Time 5 
Penie ropall and his kinds 545. 5 


: 


OCR SENANACNS 1300, 1303 
Water Pennie we ibid. 299 
295 


ole 250 
| Balſpis oz Framboig , andhis kindeo 
1089.,1091 
Yellow Rattle, oz white Rattle 912 


4 
4 


C | 
& » 
- 
I 
3 
I 


$29.8 | 
13 Ked Rattle,oz Rattie graſſe 913 
4 Ked Cole 187 
13 Reede andhis kinds 32.33434 
1355.1356 ne py 41.42 
Peppcrwoazt,that urre Reed 4. 
Water Bepper that's Brin Irimart 1 eyed Hrs : 
361 5 Great Reede graſſe F 


Tyoznie Reede of Pern 101 
| SWeete Reede, that is Calamus = 


 1283:1284. 1286 maticus 
picklepboxe | Drwrete Reed, oz ſugar Reede = 
| Kedraze,thatis Darnell 7x 
Keſt harrow 1141,114z 


| 12091210 
' I200,1212 


kinds 1079,1080.10L1, 
1032 


Roſe bay,oz Roſebaie tree 1220 
 DWwarffe baie I221,1222 

Roſe eider | 1237 
Roſe willow |, 1204 
Res 5oks, thatis Hundjow 1366 
"1087. 1088 


Pincke nediezthat is mulked 

bill 795+ 
Bine treeand hig kinds 1 173.1 I 
be q—ordaragy wn mo as #7 


p 
313.314.3093 
1068 


603 
his kinds 1070. 1077, = 
Rune, cz Rue matdenhaire 9 

weozt, that 1s Pillode ”— | 


 1263.1264 © 


A Table of the Engliſh 


32 
89 


18 


CIGonend his kinds i23.124.125 
126.127,#C. 

Ucrualli Saffron 126 

Waltard Safron and His kinds 1006, 


1007 
| Wilde baſtard Saffron 1008, 1009 
Sage and his kinds 622.623.624 
Sage roſe and his kinds, 1oke Ciſtus. 
French Sage, loke Verbaſcum Mathi- 


Sage Wullein 

Sage of Jeruſalem 

Sage of Bethlem 

= th 92 Water nuts and his —_ 


Salomons ſealean>his kinds 755. 


756.758 
PLA <a and his kinds, loke Dea 


grape 
Biacke Saltwcozt 
Sailaw,that is Willow 
Demnpter and his kinds 
Sandeuer 429 
 Sandwozt 347 
Sanickie and his kinds 801, $02 
Necſewozt SHanickie $03 
Mountaine oz ſpotted Sanickle 643, 
644.645 
Sarſa Parifia 
Smaxacens Conſownde, 92 A—_ 
Comfrey 0z wqundwaze 347 
Saraſins Birthwoze 698 
Saſſafras, 02 ague tre 1341 
Watts, 0; DHattin flower = his 
77-378 
| ante p64» 
| 170.171.172.173. 
| Sane and his kinds 460.461 
| San and his kinds 1191.1192 
Sawre Sumach 1292 


| Saunders tree | 138$ 
Dance alone, that is Facke _—_ 
| ge 


Dawewco:t 

Engitlh Daxifrage 

Wurnet Darifrage 

white oz golden Darifrage 

Dcabtous and his kinds 
584.535.5396 

Dikzer Dcabious 

Hecale ferne,o2 ſtonie ferne 

Deabwoarrt, that is Elecampane 649 

| +" og his kmds 716,718 


F832, 583, 


Sled that is Fartwoys 


427.4289 


137 
Dea ſpite raſſe .1$ 
Seca Dogs graſle 23 
Seveſten 0z Vlſyzianplumme 1314 
1315 
Deife healeandhis kinds 
Dene buſh 1113-1114 


Baſtard Dene oz Denetro 1116, 


411.412 


Dengrene 677 
Field Denue,that is Muſtarde 190 
Derpents a HP 327 
Derapias ſtenes 


170.173 
Deruice tree - _ 42297.1298 
wilde Deruice tree 1290 
Seſamotdes oz baſtard wad 396, 397 
Seſamur, that is otliepulle 1054 
1055 
892 
Delely of Candie 893.894 
Sountaine Detwall, gm _ 
Celtica 919 
is Tozmentill 240 
$27 
thtd, 
916.91 n: 


Shadow graſlc 
Dhaue qrafe,that WI 
Dhyarcwonze h + : 
Shepheards nezdle 


2” | 
Shepbcaro pure you. FP 
Shere grafle 


1326.13 > 
506.508 
mountaine 391.892 
Silken Sumach 1293 
Dtlner Knapweed and his kinds 590, 


Dicamoze troe 
Sickle weozt 


arden Smilar 
Snakeioedeand io kinds 32403 
Snakes Bugloſſe 659 


Sunakco Garltcke | 142 
SunatleClauer / 1029 
| 096305 ay Ee 433.439 
Sneſcwoz:t 


433.484 
Soldicrs 
andhiskinds 


677 

121 
Sopeweozt andhis kinds 259, 360 
S02de tro? and his kinds 1287.1298 
Doxrell and Hig kinds 318.319.2320, 

21 ; 

Do:rell du Bois 1031 
Dozrowful! tree 1342.1343 
———— — — 


Dowbzeadandhis kinds 694. 655 
DSowthiſtles his kinds 229.230.231 
Dpaniſh bzome, 03 baſe 

b2omes 1136.1137. 
Dparrowes tong, that is Knotgraſſe 


Spearefoza king 


$$ 
Dpearewozt and his kinds $3024 2 


$15 
Dpeare Crowfote 


| 815 
Spereweike Fine 500,502, 


Sqcit come andhiskinds 62 
Sperhauke, tha: is Haukeweede 237 


names. 


507.598 


peep eindenge ' 952.953 


1042 


pp2eS 
" ann, that 1s Baldmonie 984 
95 

Water Dpike 
Dpikenard 
Bough wang we 

Dpinage and kinds 266d 
Dpundletree 1284.1296 


candid 978.979 
SDpurge andhis kinds POPne =. 
Pogo ioke ſtinking Gladin 


, 


675 
9$19.920,921.922 
973 


Soar, cotonats We I21S 
Germaine oliue Dpurge 1216 
Soorge ww 02 mountaine widow 


» S2237:3218 

Spcrgcar | 1219 
mn Oui 137 

42 

Dcogyor o7 touermaze 219 
omg, that is Dogs Culli- 


391:3924393 


Sears of 131-133 
Joſephs 


Dtars of Jeruſalem, tha 
of J thatis 


Stcecados andhis kinds 
oiden 5eeecados 


2t 
470 
Stocke Gillofers andh1o hinds 37z 


373 
Stoneliuerwe:t | 1376 
ws, thatis Houſeleeke 413 


845 | 
| Dtrawberrierres,0y Prbate trp1310. 
RJ, 


of > Tas eto: 1030, 
Saceozic and his kindes 219, 220, 


DWwallowozte# his kinds 750.741.9112 


Swete willow,that 1s Gaule 
med 

Ked Sumach 
Sunne deawe 
Sunflower 


1228 
1 1292 


thi. 1293 


| 1366 
+1102 


Swines Crefſles, that is Rucllius his 
Buckthomne 


Dwines graſſc 
Dtic 


Thiltie and his kindes 985.9 
988 .989.F#c. | 


| as. 
| 106r 


=? 
26. 87 


043 


. 


193 
1005 
408 
git 


/Thille vppon Thiltle, and Diners 
Thitſties 


other wiilde 


White Thozne 

'Thozne bexe 

Thozxne bz@ome and his kinds 
1139 | 

Thozne Ypple,oz of Pern 


10 


Thozne and his kinds 1145.1 1, 


17.1148 
1147 
\I1F1x 
1138. 


276, 


Thozne Grape , that is Go derri 


| ATablke of the - 
| water oz marſh/Trefoiic 


if 


= 
' Uetch oY { | 


1024.1025 
1121,1125 
1025 
IONn 


Shzub/Trefoile 


IH12:5.1127 
I1127,1128 
01 makebate , ”; 
| Ho 
1129, 


213.214 
ke Scorodothlalpi. | 
[4 1018.1arg 


ig herbe Paris. 329 

Tulipe and hig kinds,r:6, 117,118,4c, 
por ex BY WIA x: 
u O 334-335 

berepis Taphith,thutiofon 


Turkie coznezand Turkie wheate | 77 
CT otes $12.913 
1055 

| 123 

E —_ ig ag 179 
urpentine t | and inds gb 


Tway blade, t is double Leafe l 4 
Twi Tikhiy, 62 ſmall withie 1205 
Two pete graſſe gos 


916. 917 


F50,5St 


, That is Maiden haire 


89g 

356 
580,58 
JO52.1053 
1051 

mt 724.725.0727 
| 72% 
þ white Batony7 1s 
kinds 355. 699. 701 
ſke Violets 376377 


ngliſhnames, 


-wWelcome to our houſe 


Widow Wwatle 


| Wodrowell 


Great Water araſle 6.12 
water C ppres graſle 20 
Toater archer and hig kinds 337 
JPater nuts , that is Saligot and tus 
kinds 676 
Wedwind, thet is withywind 714 
07 
welde, that is Diars wee d 29k 
Wheat and his kinds 58.59.50.75.&t.76, 
Thze months wheate 63 
Whinne and his kinds 1138. 1140 
Whicken tree,that is wilde aſhe 1290 
wWhitbiow,oz whitelow graſle 498,500 
Whitwozt,that is Feauerfew «527 
White rote and hig kinds, that is 
Salomons ſeale 758 
Whitten tree, that is water elder 1237 
whozts, 0z whoztie berrics and his 
kinds 1228.1229.1233 
Marriſh Whozts 1367 
11dow wille, is greening wed 1134 

121 
The wiiding tree,ſox Crabe tree, 1 
Sweet Williams 473. 479.4%0 
wiive wWitliams 481 
Willow and his kinds 1202.1 203.1205 
Sweete tpillowthat is Gauie 1228 
willow herbe 385.386. 387.328 
wind roſe ZoL 
wind flower 301.302.3c3.304 
wild inde flower 306,307 
714 

hie 1205 
ER, that is Bindweedand dis 
714 
1296 
394 
8 


wood rulhie graſſe 20 
wWeodWwaren,that is Grenweed 1136 
Weodbind and his kinds 743-744 
Wiew Weodbind, oz ladies bower 743 
1113 

955,966 


1399 
' Weod ſower,0z wood oegrrll, thatly Al- 


 Telnia 1030.1031 
| 966 

dee gariicke ſage $35.536 
NightHade 278.279 

Ne Chickweede,oz Wed Millet 85 
Woltp Jacine | 106 
weolen,that is Mallein 630 
Weolfes bane and his kinds $16818 
wolfes claw | 1374 
Winter Weooifes bane 818.819 
VPellow ZVoolfes bane $21.822 
woikes fiſts | 1386 


_ graſlſe,that is great Stone —_P 


Wogbed, oz wWozmſeedwort . 942 
Engliſh Wozmſed,ioke Camelie 28 


| mn water ——_— 


Irrow 
3 The VPevtree 


(78.973 914.915.916 
1187,1188. 

2196 
1366 
0359 
A 


that i fundeaw 
that is Jncea 


- | Buckes GER Trfolnem paladeſums. 


Apinm riſus. 
Churles Treacleis Allium. _ 
Churchwozt is | _ngcrqggpg 


Clite is Lopp«. 

Clone tong is El:borm niger. 
Cockes fote is Columbine, 
Cocke fote is Chelidona mavor. 
Cow fat is Cow Baſill, 
Criſtaldze is the leſſer Centozie. 
Croneberries, /accinia paluitria. 
Crow berries, Erica bacerfera. 
Crow ſope is @gpewoozt. 
Crow on is Hyacmthus Anglicus. 
| Cropweed is /«ces nigr4, 
Culuerwozt is Columbine, 


| Catherdle and Carl, is Bank vgs | 


D, 


| Dpominetyetiowta yore, 


'A Supplementor A Appendie vnto the general Table, and tothe 


Table of Eng ſhnames : gathered out of ancient written 
wy vel Copie fromthe mouthes of plaine 
and ſimple Countrie people. 
A. D2agons female is Water dzagons. 
D;opwozt is Frlipendula, 
Net is Dill. K 
ntl @ Be | Dverwoztis Dy 
Argentill is [ers Ac on! 11m, 
me gen Percepier E, ogeonon on! 11m 
Allaria,in wzitten Copies Cardiace: Clledocke is E=a/a campana. 
Earthgall is great Centozie. 
B, Cuerferne is wall Ferne. 
Baldwein,that is Gentian, E. 
Belweed,that is /acea gre, 
Biſhops wozts,that is Betomte, 
Birds nelt,thatis wild Parſney. 
| Bigold,that is jy egetums, 
Bolts ulws | Filewozt i is Filago minor. 
Soteloan Hhatis mnapwan,. * Fleadocke is Perafves. 

B2owne begle is Bugle. 
= armacrnke.np W Conſolida minor. _ n 
B2idwozt,that is /Imaria. Faueroleis water Dzagons. 
B2ight is Chelidonia. Freiſer is the herbe that beareth Strawberries 
B:okeleake ts water Dzagons. Strawberrier, 


G. as 
G Alingall meke is feud. 


Herbs martis ig Martagor. | F3 4 
Perteclowze is Chamedryos, | | 

Yertwozt is Fraxms. , LR 37 
Hilwozt is Puliol mountaine | 
Hypiaeuater CONESOOOnnR. _ | 


A A Seplmen wow the generall Table. 


Aceaatbais our wild ono | 
ONS kan a pee 


7 6 

Andlegoſtes is gratie. 
Kings crowne is Mchlorm, 
Iifſe meere A riſe is iltes, : 


L. 


Angwozt is Heleborus albus, 
Little-wale is Gromwell. 


- Lichwozt is Pellitozie of the wall, 
Longwozt is Pellitozie of Opaine. 


Lillie riall is Penmroyall, 
Lodewozt is water Crowfote, 
Lyngwozt is Hellboru albwe, 


M. 


M ansmothrwextio meds. 
Parte bloffomes 1s Conuall Lilles, 


Pawz2ollis white Hozehound. = 


ÞPawthen is Cotula fatian. 
Parcheis Dmallage. 
Þedles is LN 
SHerecrop | 
Pozellis Nightſhade. 
Powlepeale 1s Orobm... 

N. 


Cle is Lo liwm. 

Neſpite is Calamint. 

NolebleedisParrow. | 
Q, 

\ Ruall is D2pin. 
Drants Creciate. | 
Drtong is Lingy« boure. 

Pp. || 


Page Agle is tichwozt. 4 
Palme de dien is Palma Clrifh, 
Papwozt is Þercurie.  _ 
Pedelion is Helleborw niger. 
ſtaffe is T pſi | barbatiw, 


| 
| 


R. 
Ams fote is water Crowfote, 


Kobin ith ales £1 il Wh. 
| A (2k de Fan 


S. 


Cabwozt is Exuls c ( 
Sedocksis bzank v2ſine. 


 Selfeheale was ſomtime called Pimpernell. 


1s Cotyledon aquatita, 
Slepwozte is Lettuce, 
Sftaggerwozt and Stauerwozt is lacobes. 
Stanmarch is Aliſander. 
Standelwelks is Saty2ion. 
D.Paries leede is Houthillle ſeede.. 
Dmerwozt is fri/telochia. | 
Stike pile is Sto2kes bil. 
Stedfalt is P«/ma Chriſti. 


Dwine Carſe is ES. 


* Dwichenis Groundſwell. 


Dowdwozt is Columbine. 
T. 


| T Alewoztis wilde Bozage. 


Tanke is wild Parſnep. 


| - |  Tetterwoztis Celandinethe great. 


TLothwozt is Dhepheards purſe. 
ETutſane is Clymenun /talor wn. 


VV Alwozt is £5:/«« which was ſometime cal- 
ted Fulipendula. 


| | Wild Varaw is Aſarum. 


White Goldes is great Daiſie. 
Wod Parch is @anickle. 
Wiodſower ts Oxz-. 
Woedbz2oney is Fraxiza, 
Wodnep is Ame. 
CWoluiſthiſtle is Chame/cer. 
WW is Vaccinia. 
Wymot is /6+ſc=s. 

Wit is Hyoſcyamm lurems. 


P;onhard Yap 


Zeckes was 75 Bins ea eis that which 
L'Obel calleth ef Fe 


'A TABLE, WHEREIN IS CONTAINED THE 
| Nature, Vertue,and Dangers of all the Herbes, 
Trees aud Plants ,of thewhich are *© 


ſpokenin thispreſent | nia 

| 
| ' To cure malicious vicersof the Almonds in the throte;$6z, n 
| | To take away the hot fvellings of the Almonds 1 10 men | 

O cauſe Þboztment, 54,e.696,n 970,b, 261,4.41"t. 676, 2. | 

Good againſt Abortmentz624,2. Againſt inflanmarionsofthe Almonds,r: 94,2. 

To oke womens naturall Vcridents, 57, b. looke Good againſt old fwellings otthe Almonds inthe Fo, 93 4zH 

 toup wh k 41o,f.587,a.1263 ,1. 


cli ainſt Aches, 12440 
Good or Aches; in the Th. and feere,gd7;c- 
Good againſt or rotake away all Aches proceeding of a colde 
| cauſe,q40,f.1346,d. 
Good for all Aches inthe joints,to16,a.114,e.1026,b.105o,n, 
all manner of Aches in any pare of the bodic, 287,1.616, 
| b. 72240. 
o wirigare the Achc and paine of feeble lims,1339,b., 
To helpe old Aches ia the armes,hips and legs,219,b.433,0.557, 
| ly922,0.1129,9. 
To abarc or helpe Aches of che Gac wes and i0iES, 65 ya. 131,b. 
895,b. 1050,n. 
To remedie the Acheof the Hucklebone, 193.b, 219,d, 1129,4d. 
130 b,c. 
To Cars all manner of Aches,r256,f, 
os: _ noms Aches of the armes andiboulders in ſhort ſpace, 


Toe 96.2 or ſcoure away the Achores, being eieers] in the head, 
| LARS 
Fo you the Y& of generation,1353,d. looke To prouoke bo- 


A ot againſt che ſtinging of Þdders,267,a. 

To heale the diſcaſe ,@a1252,h, 

Againſt cuill Þ ffects of che breaſt,z18,2.460,d, 

Ar evil] Aﬀe x of the bodie,1116,C. 

euill Aﬀe&s of the raines,;3,d 724,b. 
euill AﬀeRts of th: $4:t.663,a 839 , 

To bring downe the Þ Z4,e.141,f,1 459,2.527,4- 
- $63,b.603,a.617,0.652,4.720,9.763 $62,b.846,b.897 b.962 ? 
1065,4.1072,4.1108,d 4178 þ,1194, 239,b. 

Toexpell the Afrerburthen in moſt Seeds manner,147,f, 

To breede troubleſome Yeues,132 4,2. | 

|To cauſe +a Agues,772,2.1324,2, 

Againſt peſizlent Agues, 603,28, 

bebe zin{tlong lingring Aſues,463,2.738,þ. 
[Tov cure Canteens Ague Ars b.433,f460ug. 

A remedic againit an old quartaine Apuc,170,4.463,4. 2 Y 

Tocure the Ague in childcen,61 of. 705A, 

: ENGINE cold A | 

= Fy 


proceeding of fle 

Toru oor Apr poccmg gwen 
To mitigace the ficric hear of Agues;702,a. look: Hear, 
Todriue away the cold (hakings and of Agues,854,h. 

a8 SI ENES. 1282.y,557,a,>.619,2. | 

and ſharpe rep 

For hor burning Agues,: IP 
Tony EDIT 39; 287,h. pO $128. 
Tock _ gn 887b.1019, 

otake away 2 quartaine Ague, 
Good forthe quartaine Ague, 63g, f. 188.b.749,2. $anagzabed 

460.g,735,f.1009 &. 


Good for or to of loag continuance 415 0.437,8.463 | 
er ant.cntag 


 Se/8g,c. 
11444h. 1145,5.4.c.1 


L,c. gl r324z6., 


Tocoole a hor or burning Mend rag ng, T9 


Tohealc the Almonds of the throre,638,h. 

Alot: ſuccotring, an cxcellent andtawi'iar purger,410,g, 

= helpe the dilcaſe Alepecia, 88,c Jooke haire, 1259,h.1361,8. 

m_—_ the diſcaſe called Alphw, which cauſeth ſportins i in 
bodie, 114,d.859,f. 

To helpe the Angine,a ſwelling of the throre,445 &. 1172,00, 

Tohelpe wrenches of the Wnkles, 114,], 

Good 3gainſt S.Ynthonies kre, 413,c. 527,b. &8,a. 1051,9, 
ro74k. 115 3,2, 13070. 1278,b. 

To appeaſe or afſwage S, Anthonies fire ſpeedily,60,f h.261,b, 
269,a.Þ. c. 412,2.4724C. 

To cure S. Anthonies fire, 269,32; b.c. 298,F, 318,F. 424,24, 649.b, 
E55,2.660,2.667,c.680,a.860,f.1144,F, L150g6. 

An Intidote againſt poiſons, 1c75,n, 

To kcepe Þppercli from mothes,5 19,2. looke Clothes, 

To defiroie or driuc away lice from Apparcll, 299,ec. | 

To procure or proucke Y ppetitero meare, 185,2,190,4.749,2, 
241,a.872,9, 939,c. 321,d, 419,a. 428,b, 578,c 596,32. 732.0. 
1031,2.1044,i.1133,), 11442. 1145,d.6. 1207,0:1235, h.1244,C 
1281,i,1317,7 $1324a.1341,d. 

Toreſtore Appetitedecaicd,849,d. 1223,g1 368,2, 

Good againfi che 


I popicrie,399,e. 
A _— for th:A poplexie,770,h.0,849,m.374,b. 73 chaos 


| To m_ ſpeech to them that ars dumbe by the Apoplezic, 


332,4.1259,i, 

Tori pen Bpoſtemes m the flankes comming of veneric 14746 
To bring es Agee AMIE ns \ > 
Tobreake inward Apoſtemes,207,a. 2109, 

To conſume or cure Apoſtemes,282,g. 2$5,2, pig $092. 


To mollifie and ſoften A 
To cure Apoſtemations ENTRE r4 12c9, 8. 


'Tocure Apoſtemesofthe priuic members, 147,b. 


To rs oe nay mp and conſume, hard Apoſtcmes in anic part 


A remedie cant hidden conkrowe Apoſtemes behinde the 


98,c, 
'Toripen and break Apoſtemes, Gr 13 5 pTO ef eg61gh 


Tocure peſtilentiall «un 
To cure the Argema, whichis a diſeaſc in he cie,zo7,a.1 026.2, 
To helpe olde aches in the Þrmes,219,b. 


Good againſt therammith ſavor ofthe Acacholes,993,0.997 3Þs 


1013,a.b.c, 


Totake away any ſwelling 6f the Armes,497,c. LES 
To draw our withour preefe,54 | 


Againſtthe ſhorcf Arrowes,85 J- 

To (oy tens has bee Plthmatike, or ſhort winded, 848 F, 
238,v.1346,2.1361,c, 

A preſcruative againft a contagious and peftilent ye, 141,0- 


$47 ,4.1 28,C. 
Si , , orto drive away corrupt and nanghtie 
Ayre,849,2.847,a.604,e,1075,p.1190,g 
Todriverhe corrupt and peltilentiall a 
Red 847,4. 5 2 


ba the paine inthe Backe,55 
toe paine pee Backe 


too much Vencric,&c.£61,0, 61 


31 
$1 
tf 
[1-41 
E1 
1 17 
3 
+ 8 
: 
Et 1 
# 
$1 
t 
by 4 
$.. 
3 +1337 
{| 
4 
WD i 
S419 
: - 
* C24 
v7 
iy 
8 
Pied 
-H- 
-F! 
2 
WP: it 
bt 
: is 
+ 9 
FS : 4 
q's 
71 4 
 . FR 
4 
1H 
bs 
{ 


I"; Table of the Natur, Vertue, and Dangers, 


Nrengrheothe Backe G65). 1: v3 


_ for theweaknes & aking ofthe Backg452,a.b. 454.8 b,707g | 
Tohelpethe weaknes of the Bucfieys cauſed of Cemermort = | 


; Toopen the Belly apd purge colde flegmaricke and cholcricke 


of the whites,627,9. 

A good BBalfame tor greene wounds,z 27,4. 

A good Ballame ro cure votes pups and punQures,288,2.2. 

To make Barren,744,5, 

Tomoke the Barrenfruitoll,z91l 1341,f. 

Tocauſe Barrennes,97,c.744,b.970,b.979;8. 

A Bath good tor vicers and running ſores,1052,n, | 

An eftc&tuall Bath for members. out of i —_ gout, and kibed 
heeles,696,k, 

For cho/e that are Blcar- ejed;-6,b, 

To makethe Bcard co grow 3. 1-1 AR 

To ſcoure away the ſcurumes ofthe Beard, 147,2. 


| Tocaulſe the hairc ofthe Beard Gat 15 fallen offro grow againe, | 


984,6d. 
To dre away lice from theBenrd,z99, b, 
Toprocure haire in Beacdiclle men,t02,C, 
Azainſt Beare wormcs,5 $3,e. 
A preſent remedic for Beaſts chopfallen,; z0- 


Againft bitings of venemous Beaſts, 529,c.139.c.1 of PERL] | 
849,0.243 ,2.848,g,852.b.267 &.35240,355,2:335,0.4325b. 457.0 


495 24. 519 bs 5296. 5430, W694 $87.6, 64840, 659,C. 728,e" 


10609.b, 


To driuc away venemous BeaſtsyF2p.c 339,h.391,d. $2946 $45 8. 


6F24C, 


Totake a'vay a pinne, web, or an griefe clſc out ofa Beaſts cic, 


707 18+ 


Good againſt the ftinging of 21] manerof wilde Beaſts, 51,4. 


$24,0.266 b.495,d. - | 
Tokil fower footed Beaſts,755, 
To kill allwilde Beaſts,$20,c. | 
To preſcrne from being hurt wil 
1129,b.n.48,e. | 
To cure blacke and blew 2! 223 oY 
Good for dri: Beatings, 5 "i FT. 971,42. 987,b. 996d. 104440- 


1222,b, 


avy wilde & GT wy Beaſt, 


| \g with Bees,787,9.1075,0. | 
5 786,2.55 33. $56,A, 107 5,0, 


In boape gwopebarks yon 
i 2 AE RG Ot | 
1223 


To caufe Bees tokeepe togithe ORE 

Beere more holſome than Alcy738,h.. 

To can ERP Rr 6fes a75c 31356, 

To conſume or helpe Belchings: of the Romacke, WS n, 
G16,C. | 

Good againſt ſoxer Belchinss,c $,c,616,c. | 

To breedewormes in rhe Bellp womes 

Tolooſc the Billy gently, 55,4. 689,2,765,0 Mp gh 267 ie vlog 
257 z- 295 gd. $97 32. 941,2. 3210, 9524 F29,0.5424h, 578, 
695 h 983.2. 1042,b. 1550,2. b. 1952,f.1083,g. 035 2248 
1246,f,1259,0.1315,0.1324.., 

To openthe Belly mightily,770,m.407,0.714,2-720,8. 1314,d. | 

Againſt the griping painesof the Belly, 23,b.53,b. 337,4.751,9. 


- Toopenthe 


Tobreakeand ſcatter the windinevof the Belly = 29 


Good againitgriping ctorments, gnawing or fretting the Belly, 
988,2.938,g. 


humors,41 SB 


| To ripen and breake Biles,61,2.1 35»9-729,C. 
| Todraw and heale Biles,60,h, 
| Birdlime on taken is dead!;,r 170;f1 156,b. 


Good againſt poiſon of Bitdlime 10750. 

Toretainethe Btrth and giue ic lif©,624,4. 

To haſten or bring foorth the Birth,s 3 ,c.862,b.648,f. 574 962, f. 
I019,b.to65,a,1239,b. 

To m_— the Birth,696,h.z 10,4.1218,e, | 

Tobring foorth the dead Birth, 124,e. 65749-3934, 2. Rd: $46.2, 
1076,f.1172,0. 1178,b, 

Againſt vntimely Burhy624,0.962,0,f, - 

For Bitingg ot ſrpaye®, 47.0.74,2.882,2.871,4.968,9, 323,2, 
9494), 95242..535,b. $5740. 977,C. 99s t00g,t, 1065 b. 1154, 
1180,b. 1204;e.1221,b.1305,0. 1327,d, 

Toremedre the Biting pf febb ſe ſerpent Geral es,1 05540. 117 2,0, 
Tocure the Biting of a mad dog, 26,2.69,a. 125 £549,c. Wn 
848.8. 3526. 553, 560.h, 566,a, 578, d. 6&5,bavoglh; 1235.1, 

1257, 1305,4.13 23,m, 

T > helpe the Cfvenemous beaſts, bi 930.50 Þ. 7442.140b, 
250,e.85 4,1, Fg. $32,b. 267,8. 31,2. $74,9. $75,c.323,.. 
422, BIA. 1009 $52, hio6g,f.h $4.£1200,4, 1223 ,01a27F, 
134990, *© 

To _ away the Biarknes of any ſtroke or bruiſe on the face, 


To rey vp Bladdergon the «kin, 211 is, 

To cure the wounds ofthe Bladder,g5 8a, 

Good for the vicers ofthe Bladder,9s 8,9, 

Good againſtthe painesofthe Bladder, 81,2, $33, b. / 84k, 
1329,0.1346 


Good againſt &: ftonxin the Bladder,q33 ,4457,24.437,a. 572, 


1154.9. 

Tocure deiatbmmgics of the Bladder,318,f. 1333.2, 

To purges rotren marceer _ Bladder, 586,b. 

Againſte 5p" (96} wh Bladder, $$3,a. 895,a. 86g,d, 428,b. 
44440.463,d 


|Goodicr _ Bladd: 1,23,2.884.b. $69,4.871 ,2.9974C.955,4.419;c 


729,d.1318.2,: .: 
Toclenſe oc ſcoure the Bladder,y02,b,586,4.896,b&93,2, 
Tohelpe the phnegs of the Bladder,526,d,665,c.984,k1133,wm, 
Excellent good againſt exulceration of the Bladder, 76s ,c.341,4 


ge of the Yd a 470, Co 53546 
,104g,d. 


Totake apt 799,9,908,b, 

To heale Blaſh the cies, 1150,Þ. 

To ſtop rr ork I noſe,ſee Noſe. 

To ſtanch ouetmuc hBlceding aftcrthe biting of the horſcleach, 
1038,y, | 

To _ Bleeding, $c3,2. 2$3,2.899,b, 249,18, 962,2.968,a, g89,b. 
959,b. r1083,0 1162, 4,11444C-1195&.1288,b.1326,b, 

To ay all kinds of Blecding,z5 $,6.839,9.91 $z@. ICg1 9@.1145 Ge 
1207 


Hurefull tothe 


882,2, V91,c. 893.b.395,h, 391.6,875,b. 8974, $40%d. 553. Tp tanch Bleeding of wounds, 75A: $03,4, 899,aqd. 389. 


199K, 197333-1976,9. 
Againſt the luxe of the Belly,$4,ho92,c. g983,a.looke Fluxe. | | 
To ſtaie ar binde the Bellic gently,73,2.445,b, | . 41 
To binde the Belly mightily,1251,b, br iT 
Tofoften or make the Belly ſoluble, 250,c. 252,5.353.6. 2578. 
93946 32140.423z0 467,.512,b.529,0,548.9.604;d, 648,c.65 5,6. 
665,0,702,$-729,4 973 ,4.1982,0,1257,g.1314,2-d:1315.c- | 
Tobindevr top the belly,77,2.102,9.318, k.677 
997,24.1050,b.rogs,c.1144.t. 1154,b.1178,b,t232,b.c. 12422. 
Og .d. 1266,2, 1370,A4, 1286,a, 1289,c, 13144f- 4 
1324,41 1353,c.1379, 
. hl 4 4 het lucharhoneedropbe ar 
L Np a moiſt Belly,79,b. | as 
To ſtr rhe | | 
Torr pn pd þ $9 d. 


To purgerhe Belly mighuly of warcriſh and cholericke huwots, 


1086,b.1235,b-£.i. 

Topergichs Belly of cholericke humors, 733g: 770,00. 26298, 
420,2.467 0.97340. 

Topwnt the Belly of _ and melaachobcke ys 


_— 


».f, 692,2.984.p. 


Ts none: og 


1375,C- 

To Hay Bl Bleeding i ingny part 54 31 5 gs 318 g1 534. 
958,b.728,a,b.x082 k, 6 | 

Torakc away B 

To take away the 1 (hl the b.. b.722,4.1 281.9. 

Torake away bruſ. der other Blumitkes of the face,x85,h 326.8, 
E£964,12 $7,500. 


To take away!Blemiſhes other pairs of the bodie,z25 MM. * 
Torake aways "Blanegr IR bens on the fc 


47 ,2. yo1 ' 
Good for 
Gent PINE ws (49 $,3.618Þ, Cir 
To heap Bliftersin tn __ 150,b. 
Not to \ma Jae 5h aoradedpurey 1150,d. 


177i. 


"Good toincreaſe Blood, zo,c 


gigs tai 7 


" To 


| 


o ingonder we, orcold Blood, 138; #4,b. 180g, 
7 14-1044,2.11 44zC» .” | : . 1 $ = = 
[ © heale Bloodic Wounds,'.. | 4 


druve out _—_— 150 
fo dr by bege vnpr 2h 


Tc ingeader grofſe and cold blood 78,0786a059 

To cool and cemper the Blood,32a,c\4194c-1145,b. ' 

To difſ-lu- cloreed and Blood nn fuch as arc bruiſed 
with falling fromtyhplaces,841, b.$439c27944. 36249.) /  * 

To helpe vomiting of Blood,y05,b.lee Vomining,) 

To clenle or purge the Blood,738,b.930;b624:41243,4. 

To dilſolue or ſcatter congealcd and clomred Blood, 759,e.195,h 
| $54,a.$49,e.8$41,b.847,c 8824. 27934.352,0. 362,2.422,C.459.Þ 

; $97 z@gb. $30 ,0.540,6:029 0,727 1.72346, LOEG,0.4 22.3.4, 


oingender warerii1 Blood, 768,a, 

o ſtanch Blgod,794,2. 

y purging; to bring foorth Blood,7t9,a. 207, oo 

To ſtay Blood comming from the kidne1es, 6789, | 

Toþurific or clcnic the Bloydtromall corruprion, 50442. oak 

939,b.qfo,c. Dy 738,f.930,b.1243z0, 

Todrawe toorth Bloud by vrine,1052,0,f, 

Good againſt the Bloodic flae,$99,2. 388,1.47 $49.45 XY 

T o ſtop the Bloodie flixe,t02,b.505,Þ.789,0,f.750,8. 802,b.215,b; 

$60,d. $40,d, $41,2. $45,a. $87,a. $90,c. 312,b, 314,4.318za, 

911,24, 915.2. 321,f 323,b. 329,d. 958,bic. 388,c.419,d. 535, 

F51,a.624,9.630,b.638,4 674,2.728,2,.999,b, 1050,b.1102,A, 
1145,0.1244,3,b.1256,b,c.tz70,8.1 3! 4461375 Þ. 

Foo cure the Bloodie flixc,890,e.3 1 4,2-318,k,$24,0.53 55f.576,b. 

G —_— ſperting of blo0d,z00,2.3 14,e.318,a,c.899,2 907,c 

A3$&,3.55242.45442. 563,2.478,2.624,c,0,665,9, 1025 b. 

Te a,b.1254,c.1257,Þ-126440.1375,b. 

Tohelpc lpchos ipet Blood,60,f,802,b.215,c.840,e.89 o,c 340,b. 

411,9,661,2,1025,Þ, 

G ood for thoſe that piſſe Blood through the.diſeaſes of the kid- 

neies, 576,4. 

Good for thoſe that piſſe Blood, 40,9. 7448. 2 15,6. 840,e, 907,Aa. 

349,0.45240.45444- $78,g- 1244,3,b. 

To helpe pifling of Blood, 1025,c.1375,b. 

To ſtop ſperting of Blood which hath loag continued, 138... 
748,d. 1 184,m. 

To provoke Bodtticluſt,55,3.754,2,193 97,c:1 rd aa. 

To alay outravious luſt of the Bodie,q19,e.tce Luft. 

To conſanie t ſuperfluous humors otzhe Bodie,557,2-411,8. 

Fo conſume excreſcence in any partof the Bodie, 72,2. 


[To make the Bode coſtiuc,! 25 4,.- 
Good for the annoinring of the Bodie afcer bathing J472, 
To fill the Bodie wah flaturnts or windic belchings,775,e. 
= heale the Bodie being hurt within by bruſing, 78,1, 
open and ſcoure the ry ore0e pollogrovl the Bodic,779,8. 
Te kilo or poiſon the Budie,$60,g 
To defend the Bodie from - manner of corruption,410,b, 
To covle and moiſten the Bogic,702,c.1 082k g3z,b. » 
To make the Bodie ſoluble,t7$,b, 7£6.259,a. 571,82. 654,d. 72250, 
1027 ,2,b.1082,k.1257,k 1324c. 
To nouriſh Bodies conſumed, t248,2. 
[To make any part of the Bodic ſm ooth,Co.lk, 
To purye the Bodic from congealed or clotred Good, 3 $746, 
To heare the Bodie before the fits of an apuc,949,d, 
Tofill the Badie full of raw bumors,1334,c. - 
To heate the Bodie too muchor extremelyg1 33,f.1 40,2. 
To preſerue the Bodic inthe time of peſtiſence from infeftion, 
840,b,c.125 2,0, 
To make'the Bodiewell coloured,732,c.1154,7, 
To ſtrengthen and nouriſh the Bode 1n Creat nenkure, 1550. 
169,273 25* | 
To looſe ofiruRions of the Bodie,q63,f.53153- 
To keepe the Bodie ſoluble,73Y, a. 
To corre@t and take away the ranke ſmell of the whole Bodir, 


101 3,8,b,c, 
To prelerue tcad Bodies 770,. 


\ Tobindethe Bodie,ro82,k. 


Good for the Bodic benummed or growen cold,744,c. 


| To make the whole Bodie faire and cleane, 105 23%. 
| To purge the Bodie cently of cholerike humors and rouphclam- 


' mie flegme, 266,2, 
Hurrfull to the whole Bodieror7h 


Tocover Bones thar are bare,with fleſhy54,c.851 b.59 2.b. 


Good for the Bodics of them that are drawea backward, g88,a, 


;, ;, Ca 
- 


- Mf PRIny 


ears 5364 = | 
Tole Bones,759,fzg.1 244k. ; 

pn our vv ang, s Yaic. 399,m. 445m, 638 652.6 

T2240 

To heale broken Boncs ſpeedily, 1 2%g,e. 4 

Todrawe foorth corrupt and zotecn Buncs _ ſores and vl 
cers,897;f. 

Toripen and breake Botches,s: (8.394;A.7 ; 28.4 

Toripen and breake pefiiientiall Boechey,i 470.5354 


To _—_ and diflv/uc Borches, 85442, $49. £652-258,Y, f99Uh. 


009g ff, 
hh ripen Borches that will hai ly be brovght to wppurauion, 
56a. 
Tocurethe wemnde of the Bowels,959,a. 
Tocaſc or cureche wii ;griping paine and nmanncFichs 
Bowels,509,f.5 2440-553, 
How to make zead light, and cauſcir ſooner to be kanened, 


73e. 

Huretoll to the Bzaines,$4,9.1 24,4 140,24. 

Good forthe Braine,6 24,1.1111,0346,0 10s 

To comfort the Braine,1111,e.1 24440-1317 $-1346,e, | 

To helpe che turning or ſimming ot the h—_—_ 469, A 
7.2056: . pt 

To comfart the a and fceble Brainet1 dhe | 

To purge the Braine,899,e854,0.3999%.63gf gs $49, 357,d 

484,b.1116,r, | | 

To waime and Nie theBraines,s 24,6. _ | YN 

Toopen th; of che Brainc,s 24,4.569,%1307,0 | 

Arcmedie againſt cold ditcaſes of the Br: :Inc,540,a.619,C. | 

Tocure Baeaking- out in the whole bodicygt 4,F.) 

Againſt all nzauner Breaking-out in the head, 5 53,0. 

Good againſt the topping of the Bzeaſt,9 5142.46 5,5. 

Good for ſuchas are topped inthe Breatt wink rough legme or 
corrupt marter,190,b.635,a95 1,2, 

To incr:aſe milke jn womens Breaſts, 178;b, locke orice 
breaſts, 

To diffoluc the hardnes of womens Breaſts,42 2 þ. 423z0% 

To make ſmooth the roughnes of the Breaſt,z 5.4, 

Arainſt paines of the breaſt, 57.4.66.b. 899,8-1027,01073;2, 

To flake {wellings in womens breaſts,6o,c. 

Tocauſe orincreaſe milke in aurſcs Breaſts,232,b.659,b.877,b.d 
+ 57%,a.1125;2.c. 

To clenſc and ſcoure the Breaſt 164750) 661,c.459.b. 519,6. 56334, 
661 ,c.880,c.399,g8.1027,0, 

To purge the Breaſt of legme and melancholie,t115,n, 

To prge the Breaſt from grolle and thicke bamors, (46,b. 
6493 

To heale all ourward and inward wounds ofthe Breaſt,643. "Þ 

To afſwage great Breaſts and gric yp the n—_— 6,2. 

To breake iaipoſtumes of the Breaſt withour periil, 667,d. - 


; Good againſt inflammation of the Breaft, 5021. 


Good Fu the ſtopping ofthe Breaſtz1007 ,2.107340.1248,c. 
To helpe womens Breaſts v herein milke is cluregred,405 1,4 
To cauſe a ſtinking Bzeath,1og 5,b. 

Good againft,or to amend a ſtinking Breathy93 He 4r0gba01 MM 
12$1,9.1341,0.1346,9.13 £4,2. 

Good for ſuch ay cannor take their Breath vnleſſe they Ge or 
ſtande vpright,and hold their necks ſtraight 'Ps $69,0. 94992, 
$57,4.560,h $72,0.649,2. 

To make a ſxcete Breath, 30,e, $80gb.1110,d. 124448. 1283158, 
134933013 $454- 

Goad for thortnes of Breath,47,d.66.b. 137,4.190,b.744,2.7 54,4 
7 66,c.318,2,890,b,897,2.599,8- 95138. 436,24. 459-4. 53232, 
586,2.649,2.i.693,f.729,4 730,).1248ze. 

To helpe (horrnes of Breath, $56,c. 8932. 9264 465,b.648,c, 
667,4.e.1184,m. 

Torcemooue difficultic of Breathing, 124,C- FO; $58,4.897,k. 

Good for thoſe thar are Bzoken or hure I 4h 987,24, 


- Tohelpe Broken winded cattle,z52,c.1 3798. | 


To knit Broken bones,75949, SNP VEF 
To helpe inward Bruſcs,759,0.279,2.536,2. | we © of 
Tohelpe thoſe that arc Bruſed with grieuovs beati 
$7,0.279,4.919,0,557,d.648,c.g62,b.957,b.1223 5... 
To helpe Bruſes,557,c.616,5,349,c695,e. > a 
Totake away any Bruſc in ſhort ſpaceg75$,b, 
Againſt Brufings of the eares,1055,e. 
Good fur Bruſes gotten by ſtripes or fals, 75918- EN 
$12,0,971,4,; 


, bh 
C14 


Gegegn To 


& *; 
c © etthnd ub monncl > - pres eats. 
” 


——__ 


i 
|; 
i: 
iy 
L 
7 
; 
I 
Il 


Toripen venercous Bubones 12 5 gpm 3944, 


I z23,d, C3 - | 

rx of FL 60,8 

Lo coolerhe hot Turning of the l EY 
tion of the Liucr, 


Toheale Burnjngwirh fire, 42,4,; 19:34 135,291 jþ : 435. 

_ 707zk.105F,c.1099 b.1278,b, 

Good for Burniogs, 91,c.149,0,c, 242,2.273,2, 186.2. 288;u 
4130. 433g). 625,2, 709,b. 968,2. 1178,9, p310,by rag gd, 
1238,c.,1268,k1305,d. 


| Totake away theheat of Burning with fire or cunpowder,r3 5k, 


278,0.412,b% 
To _ - maner of Barnings,27$,3.4 Fab. 63 88.661 j6.708,z 
127 
Ie hes Pb got pr d.s 19,4327 0.43998. 
455g $3 $9®+ $36,2, $4, 3+ $7799. 649,e." 663 x0, ,"698,b, 
2 


Good for thoſe that are Burſten by fllingfrom ſome highplace, 


749,f.3 $2,b. $54,000 HER 
hat come by falling downe of che _— 


o6d tor 
1262,k, 
A good mciiderferchoo threw Biiftep 6a, buags,h. 


Good for to bath Burſtings that are hard to be cured, 1227,Ff, 


To helpe or cure Burftings 57, a Bf7932 H02zb, 2919 þ.3 $24b. 
958, 1.514,3,661.9.1196gb," ©} 1.1 | 


For Buritingsin young child:en,g7,d, b379d, 1026gb, lhe Eve 


recele or the rim and ruptures, | | 

To healethe ihward Bucitinge,789,:: $078 Fogg. 5 54g 649,h 
660,23, | 

Tocure Burkings tharkeve been ol lang ontmnnee795h 


; 


—- 
* WER 
X = 


Good forexulcerared Cankers,863 2. 
Good for the Cankers wu ts cies calledi in Greeke (cn 
nomnata,z $0,k = 
To caule Cankers,to50,y, 

A good medicine againſt IA Map 684. | 
A water to waſh Cankersin the mouth, 624,c.1 209.4, | 
To heale ſpreading or cating Cankej$,50r,a.689,b, | 
Good for,or to cure Cankersin the woutb,z 116,68 F$aFY 


941 ,c 
To fas Carkers bom creaſing wſeryeping farther z 7%,d, 
639,b.d. 841zc. 0s 
Tocurc Cank+:rs,321,4. 
Tokeepe Cankers from rrefathed Lad iiinking, 55 TR 
Good againſt Carbuucies, 288,y. wes * 
To breake Carbuacles 250,6.1 Low 
Tobreake or ripen peſtilcntiall A eaten 96/94 i 
Torake away or heale Carbunclesgo8,d.rogzhitey 


To ſtaie the ſpreading nature of a Corvuncle, and cauſchisve- | 
| Topurge Choler, 53,b.318,c. 420,3.410,A. 89940, $4241.702,g, 


nemous matterto breake foorh by the pores Bt 5b. 
To diffolve and cure pL Carbuncles 849,d. | 
Tokheale Caroles 1194,9. 
Good for thi Carcinoma, which is & anker ofthe eies;450gk. 
To preferue Carcaſes,frum purtifieng, 419,b. 
Agr Tong Ee I3Fgc | 
To refreſh tofe that have the Caralepſie 463,42, 
Anexcellent Caraplaſme.a45,0. | | | 
Excellent good againſt all Catarrhes, 85 ,b.288;n.r. (24d. 
| To ſtoporexprefſe Catarrhes chartal) from the braines intothe 


" Jungs,298,h 524,9. 


| Tocureor he!pe Coenkelgugs. 


Carnall copulation,578,d.ice bodily luſt. 

To make a faire Carnation colour 1232,6. {+1 

To kill Cattle 62:,c. "4 
Togloe and fodder rogither broken bones in Carle 75k, 
Noiſome to Cartle a2 4.c. 


How ro cure certaine diſcaſes that Cartle are croubled with, 


- $26,827. 


To cauſe female Cartle ro be delivered of their yoong ones, 
8930 
To cure Cattle of the cough of the lungs 56, d. 630,f.' 


1378.2. 
How ro make Cartle fart and luftic anichly 941, 0. 


TohelpeCarcle that are troubled vithube cough, apo bro- 


ken winded, $3zCs 


<AT bbefoabe NatareYertne gnd Dingers 


| Tobeale Ghgwet 
Good far 


P4 wy 
Good econ daemouldi Chae, 292 ;, 
'Toclenſethe C of 


| Tonourith the 
: HowtocauſeaſuckingChilde tohavea good culour,232,b, 
| Tokill wormes in yoong Children,z,c. ſee Wormes, 


' Tohe 


' | Againſt agues andfeuersin 
Roper 4 76gru 


- Good againſt 


; beds ns os fingers,  997;0. er ; 
GE poo my mk < _ 
Tocure Chaptin of the hands of 
torbe SIN —— _— 
ps of the feete and beele5g1g7,h, 
of rhe the fundawent,37 1,2, 


Good for the 29,dy0kJer 246zc,d, : 


yope” > Picke rough bumors and rotren 
199,C.2 23©. 2. 71,2. 7 
12 F6,c. By © $0407 | pam hee Maga tt 


| Tohelpe the Cheſt thatis inflanied, 3670 
aur ann v=o fect on 
ot 20m ery 


Hurrfullc 
To _— bumory at the Chel)124,b r3 Eb $72,739, 


| Huktlrothe Cheſt, $07.6: 


Toeaſc the paine of the Cheſt cauſed of Fg 


 Tocurelonginfitwitiesof the Cheſt, 1174,9, 
| Tocauſe humers that fticke inthe Cheſt to be eafily raided, 


684.h 686,3.105148. 


 Goodfor Childblanes of rhe how and hecles,137,f. 


Todriue footth che dead Childe, z22,c.looke Dead, 


| Goodagainft wormes in yoong Thaldren having an ague ioyned 


therewith,q19b. 
| TokilitheChuldein the mothers wombe, 19 54+ 696,h. 119442, 
1 1224,i0, | 
To beger waleChildredgr $6 woo . 


To cauſc a woman to beare wiſe Children,1264,9d, 
Tobring fuorrh maleChilercn,43,b85,c, 
Tocurearuesin Rns Childreagq63,9. 

Ide in the mothers wombe,1333,b. 


De dren,270gb.. - 

one gum and frets in Childres,a18.c. 

as to3n rap Sap .70 Fae | 
like to haue the ——_— ficls 


Hlaes to mak Children to piſſe well, 895. 


| TocureChinkginthe _ or fecte, that have great afiaiie 


with the French 


| Toheale ri 0m TI Ll CO 3 proceedingof cold,6o,k, 


To drawe foorth Cholex vehementiy,q7 ,b, $2,4.766,4.434;2. 


| Topurge yelloy and blacke Choler,827,a. 


Torepreiſe Choler rhatis in the ſtomackegr281,j 


518,2.920,b.992,4.121 $,4.1317,0.1217,4.1235,b. 
To purge Choler vpward and downwatd,207 ,a.210,2, 
Naught for Cholerik: perſons.13 5,b.138,c. 
To auoide Choler by the ſtoole,738,c. 74334. 897 ,A. 385 4.3974. 
4342-43 yer 
Good avainſtCholer 


Tocool: play apy: 2 and _ burning Cholery66,9.768,. 317,f- 


1368 
Tocauſe avi Cholcrike paſſion,77 Fob. 
Good to dic er colour Cloth; 39 5,b. 


| Tokeepe Clothesfrom morhs,$20,b, 111t,1,1228,a,13 FIzc. 
Good ro dic woolen Clothes withy1 037. 


To cure the falling of the guts into thyC ods,839,d, 
To abate the ſwelling of the Cods,57,d. 
To take away the ſ»cllings of the Cods.9:8,b, 1073zb. 
and hnarſncs,283,n. | 
Good againſt Coldnes of the finewes,1349,f. 
Good againſt rhg extreme Coldnes of the dodie,goo.ld, | 
Good againſt Coldnes cither through a Jong dilcaleor. by age, 


73 5,Þ. 


' Good againſt Coldnes in the ſomackez616.c, 


Good for the Ceeliacke paſſiong1167,c.. 

Tohelpe the Collections of bumors,*7,a. 

A remedie for the C oltg evil},1073 ,b. 

Tocaſe th pains f the Colcke i the bllieyG9,970,0441, 
32946 


' 
| 
[ 


Good againſt the Colicke and ſtone, $49,h.616,a.650,2. 
To take away the paine of the Colicke preſently,g7,f.g1 5,9. 
ceaſe che gripings and paines of the Colicke,z29,c.445,j, 
n:lpe the Colicke, 115g. 188,f,891,d.238,x.291,2,b.310,2, 
| 874,c.$75 ,5.333 ,3.400,d.1000,4.1007,A,T074;6.4156,A.1 2578 
To reſtore C otour decaied,30,e. 
Yo take away che bad Colour comming of the yellow jaundiſe, 
| | $4224 H05zc 09,7 £95 IE 
Yo cau'ſc 2 good Colour wm the face, 124,0, $68,4.1052,£ 1324, 
{ 134936» 
© make afairc yellow Colour,t1155,c. 
o make a deepe greene Colour,1155,b, 
o colour iellics, wines, and meats of a purple Colour,266,e. 
A profirable Collpzie for the opti 
u:tfull ro a hor Complexion, 40 
he Compoſition Sargnis Yeneris Ro for deepe punQures 
| or wounds, 657,02, | 
"= hinder Conception,s 53,8.979,4.1057,c. 
o helpe Conceprtiong72,t,:63,b874,6. 
To helpe Concoctionin the ſomacke,848,g.892.c.879,a. 560,28, 
| 732,0.1.725,C. 
To RR the Condilomara or infirmities of the fundemenc,54,6. 
o remooue ſtoppings of the Conduits,3:8,g. 
oclenſe the Condoirs of the windpipe.924,cC. 
To diffolus Congealed blood comming of bruifings or ſtripes, 
| 362,4.ſee Bloud, 
" Conſcrue of Roſes withrhe force thereof,108 335% 
A cocdiall Conſerug,473,2. 
Good againſt or «© kebe a Conſumption, 1221,3. 21 " 


1346,b, 
h ſpecial renfedic {Rr the Conſumption of che lungs, 1240+ 
| 795z6.8383,8.563 ,d.396,2 93722, 11744f.1223,C, 
med icine for Conſumption of the backe,661,e, 
Jury forchole thar are carring into a Confumption,7 334.8 
ood for ſuch 2s are fallen into a Conſumpiion,ur havethe fca- 
[| uecHeRique,i 69,44 14,f,. 1 -/ | 
Tocucthe Contracionot finewes, 897,c.420,a.546,c. looke 
| Shrinking of fnewes, 
For Conuultons or (hrinking of linewes,40,d, 47,0. 50,5. 54,h. 
$792.87,b.$49 ,i.c.318,a,c.{97,h979,d.352,0,457 5495455 
2.55 7,4d.578,4.635,c.643,c.598,b,c,1000,b, 


" 1069,$.1346,6. 

To purge Coxruption of ble bd by Rooleabo.s l 
Againſt Corruption of the air&,1192,t.1328,c, 
[To remooue Corruptign,6g8,c. 


Hurcfull tw, Come,69. 4 - 
'Tocaule the Cones of the f cerzto fall my infew toes 5o,f 
413,9:1206,c, 4 


[Torake away Cornes,%54,k.12 
[A \Counterpaiſon againft deadiv 4 AER, oeifonony herbes, 


bitingand ſtaging, of vene »bea(ts,1 O75,0. 


Torake a» wy the Cough, 35,2,53,d. $74d. 115 48% 1 54,0, 
893,a.897,k.z563,c.66t,t1190,>, 

Good againii the Cough, 178,c,75412.862,b.284;0,298, h .$69,d, 
958, 4, 4362, 445,0.479,2, 514,f.532,9 624,c. 649,14702,l, 
739i, 634,1.985,b. 1007,4, I©235,2,1073,4 od CIs 
I154;0;1255,001257,9, 1260,k.1328,b, | 

Go for the Cough,tz52,he..-,- | 
Mgainftibe Cough of the king 29,519,c.1388,0. 

n the Cough and bring forth tlcyme,1 120,3,b, | 

To helpe the Cough incartell,35 2,c. 

Again!taninvererare Cougho the lungs,1184,m, | 
Good for the Congh caufed of a thin rheume,G67%le . | | 


Goodfor adris Congh,1121,n, 

Goodagainfiacold and long Cough,$99,c. 

Good fr an old Cough, 47,4;87,5, 127,d rates 15 h5. 504.8, 
261,2,0.:88,y, $80,c.535;2, 54% & $63,0.186,8,630,C 649,2, 
724,0.1 1744, 1199,C, 

Arcmedict tour vid Couphcs,261,6d,a.465,b 548 1174gant 257,t, 
: 13244 

Againft the chin C ough in yoopgehildeen, 505 rl THEIgne, 
1372, 

Toripen an old Coughg775,hs | 


- "B99; grp;d 35240. ,420,24436,4, 540,f,545,4. 575,d. 638,c, 
_ 649,0,693,b,e.985 4£.996,6,1000,d,1016,A\ TA 223zh 


<AT blesf the Nature, Vertu? and Js 
(329,£.400,b.445,1.650,2.924,b.1000,2.1 I 56,2. PSY y 


To helpe Conuulſions, $570 739,£291ga;c. 436,6.569gþ.648,0. | 


Jo mende m p oe 470. 59, b. $33. $8. $49. $97,c,- 


s, 


Good againſtcold Cramp$,735,c. 

Tobelp- Cramps, 88,t.557,c. 789,f,291,2,c. 318,c,897,h.949,2, 
436,£.546,c .578,d.569,0.957,2.1063,g.1190.b, 

Tokall all lbuino Creatures,®20,c.822,2. 

TogJue rogithe: Cuts made abuut the vaincs,finewes, andten« 
dons,114,2, 


Goodfor (light Cuts,919,b. 


D 


Þ bf 124,0:72,b. papery 131,9,135,m. 769,2.$1 5,t. 207, 
860,g.824,2, 269,2. 270,b. 274,b. 23x,b. 298,d:e,f. 209, 
992,4,b.299,f408,* 424,C.445,0.472 612 696, 7i8,a,h.1017, 
' h.1076,2.1170,f,1217,c.1221,4.1386 12.1387,0. 

To take away Ldandzat, L41 1.1027, 

To ſcoure away Dinerati of che heady1227,Ff. 

Againſt Darkneg of the bghc,55,3,5%3,c.537,b. 

Againſt the venemous thotof Darts,55 4,1 - | 

To cxpecll che Deadchilde,83 :,b.z232,t.t97,b.4224c.429,2. 459.2. 
$27,2.546,2. 55746. $633b,61746, 652,3.657,Þ, 720,9. 1544.0, 
1072,4.1076,4.1194,4, 

Tecaule Deafnes,34,c. 

Good againſt Leafnes,770,i.288,F. 

Aremedie againſt D:aines,250,h-10c9,). 1222,d. 

How De&re ace pceſeru:d from the ſtinging vi oy ch jd. 

How they cure themſelues being wounded,6 5 2,4. 

Toſcoure away the Defoymities of the 5k 0,759. fa44.8. 726,d. 

Toclenſc or tak- away Detorminies of the face,94,b.149,d.765,Þ. 

19346, $79,0.736,d,11 58h, 

_Tocavſe yarimely Dehwerance of citilde, 970,d. looke Abort« 
ment, 

Tocauſe eafice and ſpeedie Deliuerance in childe bearing, 72,£ 
147,f.744,2.291,4.897,b.563,b 648,f695 ,0.1329,0. 

Diacalaminiher che cowpoſition,558, l, 

Diecarihemon,s compoſition good to purge the drophe,1ro07 ff, 
Againſt Difficultie of making water, 23.b. 188,*. 760,4.261,2 
789, $69,d.875,1.919,0949,9.422,.520,A. $4240.54 3c. 648.6 

1019,c.1186,c.1276,0.1393,c. 
Againſt the Difficultie of breathing, 279,f 958,8d, 439 aa 
1007,4.1076 11211. 3223,C. | 
To h:}pe or make good Digcftion, 52g .138,3,199,8.193,C% 
855,b. £60,4,.849,09. 848,9.091.9. 79,840.35 2c. Sh 
649,C,1732,e.11$4,m.1270zc.1345,c. 1349,0.13 5234. | 


| 


| Tocauſe Dimnes of bghtgr3 5,6 IN, 
Good againſt the Dimnes cf __ ,£.858,b- 


Totake or clenſe away the DimiWOot the cres, 57,0 522,f.532.h. 
$4$,0.627,3. 938 k.249,8.537,b. $49,4.627,2, 629,4.1074zh, 
1247,0-1357,b, 

Tocureo!d and cold Diſeaſes,897,c.$99. e711,2, 

Acainſt Dilcaſes proceeding of Fegme and cold humors,721,2. 

For Diſeaſes of the matrix,318,a.732.1.1027,h,qi223,b.1z38,c. 

To helpe cold Diſeaſes ofthe matrix, 1065,b. | 

To coole Diſ: aſes proceeding of heate,q71,a. 2IS 2D. 

Good againſt the Diſcaſes of the head comminy of cold cauſcs, 
47940.549,2, 

Good for Diſeaſes arifins of melancholie,1116,t. 

Good for th: Diſeaſes of the ſpleene, 529.4. 744,c.460f,g. $29.4, 

$42,h,657,0.97944-1129,C. 

For Diſcaſes of the kidneics,$57,c.1120,e, 

For Diſcaſes arifing of ſutfcr,t133,0, 

For melancholikc Diſeates,r160,d, 

For the.Difeale cajledthe Mother,r190,b.1 W7'Y 

For Diſcaſesof the ſtomacke,1223,g. 

For Diſeaſes of rhe intrailes,124,c. 

Azainſt a!l peſtilent, venemous,and infeRious; Diſeaſes,r 281i. 

Againt Diſeaſes of the gums,1306,a. 

Avainft Diſcaſes of che bladder,z3,c. 218, 2.497,6.869,d.1 223 6k 

Good againſt all cold Diſeaſes inthe bodie,1354,b. 

Good againſt a!lcold Diſcaſcs of the inward partes, 35240. 

For all co!d Diſcaſes chat be of hard curation,357,9. - 

| Tohelpe Diſeaſes that grow of flegme,rawe bumors and winde, 

— $544. 

Againſt Diſeaſes ofthe breaſt,288,n.460,d.632,4.63 5 þ.6334. 

Good againſt all Diſeaſes of rhe $9940.549%za- 


For diſcaſes of the luags,839,Þ. $8697. Tg, 639 


- 638,i.663,2. 


A 8. 


—-7 


' Ad Table my the Natore, Vertat, and Daxgr: 


go any, Viſcaſe growing by occaſion of-the | ſplecne, 


46 

Good againſt Diſcaſcs happeniog in the mouth nh throre, 
370z2. | 

Good for all inward Diſeaſes,855,93. - 


"Agaiaſt the Diſesſc of the m 


inde,$33,d. 

How to helpe the Diſcaſe of the lungs, cough, wheefings, ec, in 
cartell,826,827,569,d.630,f. 

Aremedic againſt peſtilenc Diſeaſes, $49,k. 840,2. $847b. 3550 
5387,c.702,m.1065,b.1281,i.1368,2, | 

Good againit all Diſcaſes that procecde of cold,770,0 

Good for hotDiſeaſcs,318,i. 

Good againſt the Diſeaſes of the ſpleenc, 7448. 3 18,8. EF7z6s 


1223, 

A —— ainſt womens Diſcaſes,$27,a. | 

To cure hor Diſcaſes of ce idncierandbindergragh 

A remedie for danÞF-rous Diſcaſes, 770,h. 

Good againſt all Diſcaſes of rhe finewes,638,c. 

Good againſt the Diſeaſes of the liver $39,b.1233,g8- 

A remedic for the cold Diſeafcs of the braines,5 40,8. | 

To mooue womens Diſeaſes in great abundance, $92,8, 

Againſt Diſeaſes rhat proceede of choler,719,9. | 

To ſtay the Diſeaſe in women,:33,a.115 8,g.ſee Termes. 

Arcmedicfor Dillmes,:88,r 769,h.12:99,c. 

Acainſt Diſtemperature of the ſtomacke and breaſt,r you; | 

Good apainlt hot 2nd tharpe Diſtflations inro the cics and 

_ other partyg283,3.1149,9, A 

To repreſſe Ditiliarions thar fall "Si the brains into the lungs, 
298,c,h.524,4. 

For Diſtillations of humorsfrom the bead,1152,2.1 rgol3. | 

Tocure the biting of a mad D0g,26;a.60, 849,e.84 8,8. 352,d, 
$66,4.578,6.665 ,d.1052,h,1 235,l.1305,0. 

Good againſt the bicing of a mad Gi delng Aeey 553.6560, h. 
660,9d.1009,f.1238,c.1252,f. 

TokillDogs,75 5,2.293 ,2.622,0d. * 

Good agannft chebiungs of the ſea hat 

Againſt Dzawizrg awric of finewes,420,2. | 

To hclpe Drawiag cogither of linewes »83,f.420,4. 436,247 -h. 
$46,c.897,c.947 ,c.949,4. yrs." | 

To cauſe troubleſome and xerrible Dzeames, 59% 3 149, 4. 


—_— 
2paigſtmelancholike Dreames,833," [Ps POE: 
_ Toput awas venereous Dreatnes 74,8, | [ \} 


Againſt the Datneſle of che lungs, 5 54,2. 

A Dzinbecocure che blacke iaundife,1133,P,Þ 

A conucnient Drink: for rertian agues,74,Þ. | 

To cauſe iy, 8 v8 cd 2,b.84,2,85,a.1 228,8.1337,0 

To $3506 7 co EN om Dronkenacs, 241,0, 2494C-) 1223,, 
1227,f.1257,l. 

To helpe the D2oppiſſe, that is piſſing by drops, ordtop after. 

$7,2.902,0,44430452,0.454,0.535,*12765% * 

To thoſe rhat are encringinzo @ Dzoplle, 53 25345 2457, 
$40,b.rorg,c.1076,q.1 202,b,” 

Good againſtthe Drophe 49,d.137,9. 689,f. 766,c.t, 854,.c 
- 849,c.$6 23h, 279. 288,x, 877,4.880,b.33492.3 38,2.357 52. 
400,0.408,2,424,b.467,C.524;t,C9 1,9.7 22,4.1007,A,1133,C 
d.c.1216,b,c.1235,c.f.r238,9.f,g.1z 28;.. 1350,0. | 

To helpeor curethe Droplie, 2992. 53,Þ. 147h. 3 14,F. 869,d. 
874.6 F41ze. 4380.5 29,3. bag 1.542, 2.624,0.691ze 996.c. 
I223,n.i235,1.1238,f,g.13 41,0, 

To do gently by ins hd kege fuch as have theDropſie, 


279,c.4 426, b, t 
' - inthe fideandimwazdbuiftings, 721,i, 

 Arcmedic a the Enzerccele , whichis the falling of theblind 

| yoo . 


A remedie for thedrophe proceeding of . colde cauſe x41 3G 

Good for the Droplie calledinGrecke tie goapaa,&c hoc 

Toproucke Dzowfines 232,b.d.281 . 

To cure the ſores ofthe Dugs,751,b, 

Good for wounds of the Dugs,794,2.' 

owes os carr, - 5 bo 

To kceepe downe maidens Duygs, 803 | 

err he 1 rg wok th, Dog 31.cie Pope, 

Toalayt $ 91,b, | 

To Pts re 4 TE | | 

To driue aw 1654 | 

To ſtay and curethe Dyſenterie which is afluxe of the bellie, 
5O1,2, $02zb. 333A. 445, 388,c, yrqze. 1156,0, 116740. | 
1292,0,f.1383,b. 

To hrlpe v ; Dyſſarie or grear paine ro wake water 33d ſee 


| Goodtorthem thar are troubled vith dimme Eies,249,2, ; ___ 


' Topurge the Eics of waterith humors,629,c. 
: To clenſe 


| 'To laie downe the ftaring 
To helpe dlethe and blew Eies yomning by blowes and tripes, 


| Tocurethediſeaſe in the Fits _alled Argena, $01 ,9.495,C. 
| To take away the yebs & ſpors ofthe Eie 


Toclenſe leaſe why fimie things from 
 Todimthe Eiclghtz72,h. | 
| Good for the Eielight,236,b. * | | 
| Toquicken or ſharpen the Fiefghr,858 baozggds "YES | 


| Tobeg 


: Tocurer 


E 
| (ood for mancring Gares, 938, j*.709.c.1180,b, 
I'o mitigate or cure the paines of the Eareg, 138,9.261,4. 


3418-54 f,573,0.10355.1074,i,1108,c,1248,0.1503,0, 
To heale Ccarcs 1152a. 


| Good forthenoi corbummingin the Eares,138,4,706,2, 


To healeold vicers in the eares,709,C. 
To take away the ſtench and corruption of the Eares,738,c. 
To ripen hard ſwellings behindethe Eares, 1170,b, 


Good an ag finging of the Eares,770,i,860,i. - 


| Good " the paine of the Eares proceeding of heare,778,a, 
| To helpe the iauoJuncaric Effuſton of naturall leede 53,c. 


661,90. 

To helpe thedroppiag of the Gieg,26,b. 347,4.103 7,0, 

Good tobe laide ypon burning Eies, 702,c. | 

Good for wateringor running Eies, 60,0. 347,2.512,f, 5530, 
563,9.1037,0,1033,c,1179,0,1305,b.1z51,b, 

To mwgate the paine in theeies, 232,f, 549,92. 622,b, 629,c, 
630,2, 

To ceaſe che painc in ſore Eies and RNaic the hot humors from 
falling intorthem, Cogi.5 49,2. 

To hurt or offend the Eies,72,b.135,m.112:140,2.1387,0, 

Toclenſe the cies from filmes,629,b.484,i. 


| Torake away the burning anditchung of the Eies, and to clecre 


the Gghr,$87,4.706,c, 
Tohelpe rhe inward ma_—_—_ of the Eie lids,410,Ff. 
To cuce vlcersof the eies,6; 2,b.1226,a, 
Good for pa vey and watering cics,1178,h, 
Good for, oft to take away the inflammation of rhe cies, | 91,b, 
22 2,t 778,b.502,b. 509,2.622,b.629,c. 630,a. 632,b, 70c,e, 
' T150,b,z0r,2.306,c.33 2,b.949,g9.509,4. $99,4,604,d.1351,b, 
To helpe lore,wateric, ſmarting, and blaſtedeics, 347,4. 41 2,4. 


709 
| How to preſerve the Eies thatthey be not hure with the ſmall 


pockes or meaſels,124,g, - 
To hcalc Eies that hang our,1091,2. 


| Tocoole the bacte andinflanmati-ns of the Eies, 341 30-41 2,2. 


4133.13 F1,b. 
Tortake away the rednctef the Fie! ,766,4d.604,4.6:29,c: 
Toclenſerthe Eies of hay or ftripes,r192,h, 


$37,b.548,9.706. 858,b.1074,h, 

Tohelpe the irchingsin the corners of the Eics;qt 0,f. 

To ceaſc the pane and burning or imartingof ihe Eics, $19.9. 
604,d.629.c,705,0.105 5,6. 


cleere the Fics 4nd amend the dimnes of Gghe, 
$4942.6843i.1349,2,858.d. 

baires of the Eie browewna7;. . 

got jb. | 

,$1018,c,1035 4d 


F | 
Key from chc ball of the Eie,g912,a, _ | 


To preſerue the Eielight$77,2.9,537, 
wounds ofthe Etvotves, 5094b. 


| Good for wetping 


An Elefuarie good forthortnesotvinde, anold cough, paines 


gut into thecods,q 2,5. 97,4.835,4.51 430 G43,2.1033,D. 
and availcable againſt 


$48,c, -/ 
Sar are Enraged through the bicing of a cad 
dogge,z89,a. 


| Hurifvllro the Entrailes, 2 93,2. 1017,h.1156,b, 
Good forthe the Nloppinge of 32,7 29,0. 


'To the Entrailes 428), 
'} To yr hang 964 KG led and cJutrered blood inthe Fotrailes, and 
healethehurt places, 279,b. 


' Toftrengthen the Entrajles g10,g.108 2, 1083,n. 
| To ach the pints of the Rana 


1 Arcurts ajainkiche ghaviegs and pripings f the Eacries 


proceceding of of rawnele, 


f 
"ey \ To 


To heale the wounds or hurts Cf the Enrrailes, 331,b.661 i. 

To remooue obſtruRtions our ofthe Entrailes.73 8,c.896,d.410,b 
470,E .569,d.647,2.1057,2.1 184,0. 

Towaſte away windines of the Entrailes,849,h. 

To ſcoure or clenſe the Enrrailes, 843,b. 896,d. 422, d.5 35. a. 
68 4,2. 

Good, avainſt wormes of the Entrailes, 942, a. 

To purge the diſcaſc called Ephebs, which cauſeth (pomines i in 
bodie,t14-d.445,0. 

An efpceiall rewedie for the diſeaſe called Hpbiaber « or night 
Mare,83 17 2 


Good 2gainſt the $99,e. 
To hclpe the E 391d. 
To ſtaice all Eruptions of blood,r 247,b, 


To caſc or affwage the inflammation called Eryſipelas, 60,h.:98 
42442.685,b,t009,f.1144,f.1 39,9. _ o 
For Eryſipelas cerebri,S. rip oat.” fire of the braine,508,d. 
T9 take away Eſthares,:207,e. 

againſt Excoziations of the conduits of the yard, 222,b, 
9150. 
Good for Excoriations,$69,2.1 255,2. 
Good againſt the Excoriationof rhe vuula, 936,b, 
To purge filthic Excrements through the noſe,54,d. 
To bring foorth bloody excrements,769,a. 
Good for foule ſtinking Exctements of the bloodic flixe, 
1027,1. 
'To purge ſuch Excrements as beinthe Nomacke, firſt vaines, 
and neereſt paſſages,410,b. 
To ſtate bloody excremeats procured by ſwellingof the ſpleen, 
51420. 
To purgecholericke Excrementsbyſicge,q34, 2.43 5,2. 
To conlume any Excreſcence ia any parc of the body, 72,2, 
$7532, 227,c. 266,c. 
Good againſt the Exulceration of che privie parrs,r 308, h, 
Againſt Exulceration of the bladder,765,c.r1 zt,k1zo8,b. 
Againſt Exulceration of the kidneies,11219k, looke Kidneics, | 
To coole burning lpnlcererionh x 208.m, 


'B.. 
+» | 


"Ew Fables and tales of Maridrake confured, 28: bf 2. 
To take away blacke and bleweſpots of the Face that come 
| by bloweg193,e.557,d. 

To ſcoure away ſunburning fro the face,759,h.965,h.84 Leaesd 
Toclenſe away freckles, morphew, and (uch like deforminics of 
the Fate,94,b,r49,d.765,h.197 ,£, 855,0.g41,,e521,), 
-otake mm lencilesor ſpors in'the Fate, 115 h 765zþ. 193ze, 
3 5526+ art Lo abr d.721,] L113 347% 

T takeort ſpors and freckles ofthe Face, 94h. - 
To make the Face wn er \60k.1252,0,12579), 
To ſcoure and take away ſpors of 'the Face & maketfaire, white 
and ſmooth, 8q5;d.557,0.1 28 1,9. 
To —_ andbcaurife the Face, 1044351244 b. 1176 287 I 
" 29s 
To away ſcuruines ofthe Face,r),; 1 
To cure the blemiſhes of the Face,q45,d696zi, 
To cure copper or ſauc rs a2, 45 10094] 
Totake away the rednes of the Face,b85 5 ,c.845,f.239,r.579 
To cute the Falling of the guts into the cods, 88, ks 
and cods, 
| To cureche Falling off ofthe haire,o0,c.$54,). | 

Good againſt the Falling ficknes, 354,f B27 0(3:9 6.867; $99.1, 


2,C-1244,3.b. D299 EM3 Eo. 
Toheal Dk ating evilfor fieknes, 102, 199,g; $56zc $39,c. 


101940. 


Tohelpe thoſerhathaue the Falling ficknes with cadnes and 
Poems” 7 8e 

fcknes in children, i55 £83 e463 $703, 
ar lone: 


Topreſeruc a man from the Falling lickneigos,d.” 
Good againſt Falg, 1704,h. * A 


* 279,0352b. 657.2. Oy Tho f8qr,9.279,0 919d. 554,29, 
Ee br bone > +64 ; 


Corttfek For Sf Sas. 


35798 Elie 460:e; "498,b. 578,2. 698,f 702,730, 7352. 


"$93,039 1;ba47 3899;b:770|ho.849,) Be3 CE aOprreco,b, 


Todrawe foorthof the head rawe F Flegws 
Good for ſuc por 6. Fatleii from places, 1954 Bork. 


. | AT ableofthe Nature Yerhieand Danger 


To ſtaie the Falling downe ofrheumes, 1242,i. qq,01 748 

Good againſt the Falling of waterie humors into Geer wa 
breſt, 284,c.1037,p.1244,c.1343.b 

Good againſt the Falling of the vuul,936,b. 

To ftop the Falling downe of humors inrorhe Cheſt, 10994 
13 1440.1342,2, 

To heale the Falling away of the haire of the ee lids, 1 17h 
13344, 

Good for thoſe that be Fallen into a ſwoune $568. | 

To helpe the diag atdehner, 930.6 1 3346 | 

To helpe Feeblenes ofthe ſpleene,r 334,0 

Toheale the chyvks & chaps of thz Fete c comm = k 

To cauſe the cornes'of the Feete to fail away, 150 jor 

To helpe the goute of the Feere,26 1,b.e.r303,8. 

To io away the corneso! the Frere without neifion, 4138 
1 266,c, 

Good againſt chaps nd childblanes ofthe Feere, 137, 

To heale the chapsof the Feere,r 190,e. | 

To balpe the dilcaſe called the Felonie, 557,60. r'2 33d. 263.0. 

To make men apt to fall into the ſame, 775,b. | 

To take away the paine of Felons and heale chem, 86 $63 Fd: 166 

Tocaſc the paine of Felons,87,c. 

Torefolue,concoft,and _ Felons,Go,g. F-1 | 

Toripen Felons,r19g5,c 863,09. | | 

Good for ſuch as are fearetull,gb0,d, | 

Good for or to coole hot burning and vehotwins Fe 
66,2.471,9.512,b.668,3 034k, 1082,8 I251,c.t256,e.iz$rg., 

Tocyre rertian and quartaine Feaucrs,$ ;9,c. 467,C, (81,9, 

To helpe Feauers ofwhar ſort ſoeter,a67,c, | 

Good for the Feaver heRiquert5s,z, - ** | 

To alaie the heate of 3 peſtilent Beaver, 321 de prey, j 


To breed peſtilent Feauers,77 2, 13 24,2. 

To cure wandring Feaners,? 14,9, 

Singular good againſt ri rertian Feavers,575 Þ. | 

Good for Feauers of long continuanceg248 ext 1247 

Good againſt peſtilent Feauers, 502,6852,b 14735 0,586,f.68 4k 
IQJ1,b. 1190,C, - 

Good againſtinmerwirring Feaucrs,73 2a0og,l. 

To helpe hot burning Feouers,22,5,b.674,f.,902 mi + 

Good againſttertian and quotidiap Feeuers gr Gayaady 

Good ws old —_— 1116,r, 

A ſingular medicine againſt Feauer quartaines, 5 

A yy wg kerT hate 4 me 31 _ 1096 

How to keepe Figs from purrifieng,630 | 

Good for,or toclenle away fcabbie Lok the pate 
1037,c.t190;8.1224,h.1297,c. | nj 6 

To take away the Firein bacniogearfealliagaanki 

Tocure S, Anthonies Fre,860,f.261,b.298,1. 412.2. Fo 

To heale the Fiſtula called Aegilops, in the corger of 
68,a.30r,d.gr6,4,” cru 527 ye >; 

Good againſt a Fiſtuls,913,2-916,2 687 8,506þÞ.- =i:20;6 > 


| To ogtorteFiltulbcLotehe fundungeat pond * ea Tal; 


To heale Fiſtulacs,331,a.58x;e. - " | ; wc te 7 
Tomundike Fiſtvlacs,357,0," dro wt-7 
Tortke anay hard elloutnef Fltlac 08... {TRE + 
Tokill Filh,qo$e: 11> + le Hate 


Tocarch Fihwiths 213A ©. x za> nd MENDES ch 
To take away (haking Fits of a i | 346,42. TY 
Tocure the extrefweand tivorous Firs of Fre!” 
Good 2gainſt or to take away the Firsof a6 f0r; hs 2 389d, 
I57 20. 

To take way tht Fiteof « quatteine ague, 887M. Eg hood 
To take away thaking Firs of an agueg7rze.1358,b, + 
Aremedie apainſtcold Sooner ts 1 he, ere onde 7 
Gieed far kernch hvwiie FhRGien7Faupie. p - 44 fr OY 


Toripen the opoſtzanes othe Flankes cowemi of vehievic, 
I&7,c. | — bros IG 


To row 26d poſe Feet 
CE I eas 


460,6.467,b.527, 0 I 


Topurgze ego 9494h. « 
1215,2,1217,2.1297;0.1317,0; ab ee ; 


Kunnrt fieſinpG 


Fiegme,185;c.248,f. 
oF - wy PR” * 3S*# 


Ot 1 | 


R 
-- : » 4 y n —_ 
= 3 dior act; "ET 
_— 


«a - 

To yoide thicke tough Flegme out of the ſtomacke, cheſt, 
and fartheſt pars of the bodice, 33 5,b. 445,c- | 

To purge all grofſe Flegme, $99,c.400,2.467,b. | 

To cauſc Flegme and water to run foorth of the wouth 306,b. 
619,9.729,8- 

To ripen Flegme and to cauſe it eaſily to auoide, x03 F, C. 
1328,b. 647,0. 649i. 

To purge corrupted Flegme outel the chef1,q45,e. 

Todraw foorth e gently and} purge the bea&, 25 2,b.542,9 
624,b.1 244$- 


To auoide or purge Flegme by the fioole, 738,c 7435 $97,A. © 


397,4.460,c,h. 45 Gao 9739 1 15 5,2. 


To ſtir vp Fleſhip defire,124,0.13 30.754 
To withſtand Fleibly defire,674,e,f.1202,2. 


How to preſcrue rawe Fleſh from corruption,535,d. - 

-To drawe {pl:inters and rhornes oug of the Fleth1, 96,2.495,9. 
To takeaway the ſuperfluous outgrowings of the Heth,8 54,1. 
To conſume away proud and ſuperfiuous Fleſh, 1158,b, 

| Tokeepe proud Fleihfrom growing in wounds, 13345). | 


To 2p proude and luperfluqus Fleſh in patents rlecry, j 


Total — away proud Fleſh groningin the onlle fied . ſee Po- | 
|. Toheale the rifrs ofthe Fundament,and the infirmitics thereof, 


lypts, 
Todriue away Fleas,39! 472,d, | | 
Todrive away Flies,389,h3591,6, | 
TokilFlies,z88,c. 
To ſtaie the Flixe,960,2.1263,g gh 


Good againſt the bloodie Flixc,3 14d.3 18 1#899,9.388;6.7 PM | | 


To cure the bloodic Flixe proceeding of choler,t232,b, 
To os the bloody Flixe,102,b.gog b.748,9,b.790,g.804.2, 860,h 
8:9,i,840,d.841,2,845,2.,390,c.3 

32340.329,6. 958,b,c.z88,c, 419 
674,2.314,d.3z18,2. 736,c.962,4, 977,2.989,b. 1037,g.1083,7, 
1099,4,,, 1147,2. 1167,0.1174,8; 1186,4.124433,0. 1246,C; 
12544f, 1256,b,c. "Ik OuN aab3gh, 12924b. 1314, £ 
1326,3.1234,d.1375,b X 

To heale thebloodieFlixe, 787,.583,4,f $03,b. 215,b. 829;2,f. 


$87,2, 890,e,f.535,f.57 6;0. 109 [pd 1229 pd. 1237648 263,050. 


1283 ,b.1369.b, 
Toby Jowne or proncke womehs FIGDets,v2,0-12/4,0.140,> 


141, 19 $20: 207, 4. 210,4. 256-8- $09. a4 10 6 $66,b, 


867,2, 

To ſtay ; cucrmuch Having of 
Termes, 784. par gn pe 
' 389585 $396-661 31). 707517 055gh. 

To ROSE the belly, THE S44h, .298 .340.b, 953d £. 
1058, 1059,a-1062,2-105943. | 


To wy or cure all Fluxes ot the bellic, 8$39,2. 958 b 445 5 gs 


© Ss, 156,60,129$3,d.1292.: _ 
of humors fro chetoinesg4;h6o, 
= re helpe che white Fluxc in, women, E8,2.505,b, 960,2. 
665 1.674,d.1983,c.1158,b.1182,0.1 292,b. looke Wires. 
Toſtop all kindes w_ Fluxes,1 264,e. , 
= helperhe Fluxe of che guts,q ts.e, | 
To ſtay Fluxes in women proceeding of a "DEAR fp 
all kinde of Fluxes about the hott 223,06 | 
Grad fr Fineng 99 984,2, ' + & | 
Toheale old Huxes,1152,3. | | 
To top andeure al} Fluxes of blood in wan or woman, $41,2. 
$87,a. $90,e,£1147,301153g\,1206z2, 
To ſtay the inordinateFluxeB3 33,0.2840.3 4750. 1994 
Good againſtthe Fluxe of the ly aculing of the 
ftomacke, $54;8 1247z6+ f 
To ſtypihcFiuze of che Hamerrhoides, $58.2.41 os 
To ſtop allFluxes of blood;z1 $50 $39,2.841 a8 87,2.983,4. 13346 
th 10:419;0.45 252.4540 648,4.1110,4.1244,9,0, 
Ag | 


for f leg$,497,d. 


Good Foe for Sinks ho odpyes fall ntorbe tregtionazoge ' 
dize-and 


ered bodies, PO.- 


To oneemedveaty 7 ſ 
Tokill Fores.755/a. $42] 3% 
inſt Fractures of «l 


bones. 
Good ute Femme mon 
Tocake away | g26,e,7 20,010 528+ 
Torake away 


} 


A Tableof the Naturts,Yertne and Dangers. 
| Toclenſe away ſpors and Freckles of the face,94,b. 192,e, 250; 


|  Tohealethe chaps of the Fundament comanng of colde, 6 


[24Þ, 314,;0.911,84. 915$0.32 16h, 
0.524,0. 551,92. 639,b638,4; | 


pugki Flowers, 32,8. 72,8. ſee. 
93,1,3182l. 913+2.323,0.958,b, 


| Toglue togither Gaſhes made about the 


oof the | 
| Torake away the Gnawings of the ſtomacke proceeding of a 


hen rra br oh ang tank 


85 $4 pIG. 1721 .1133,r.2158,h. 11942, 1298,t,1328,h, 
1354, 


| Good agoinſtthe French dilcaſe #57. 930,246 3-b.13 17k, ſee 


French Pocks. 
+ Tocauſe Frenſie,1247.f. 
Good againſt the Frenſfie B56,ez2 $7,2.639,r, 
A medicine for the Frenfie,3 18,t,457,2. 
Tocurea Frenfic of long conmuznce,g58,d, 
To helpe Frets in children, 218. 
Good apainſt the (Ry of the bellie,90$,2. 
Good 2gaint Frettings of the gurs,787,4.101 8,2.1345,c. 
To mitigate the Frettings of the bloodic flixe,7$9,9. 


| Agent the Frentings of the gucs and cncrailes,of coldecauſcs, 


I 349,C. 

Good again the Frerting of the fundament,7$7,9. 

Good againſtFretrings ofthe bJadder,787,4.1174,0. 

Toexpellthe dead Fruite, 89 1,b.ſce Dead chulde, 

Toraiſ: Fumes, 34,2. 

To ary moalt and beale maligne vicers of the Fandament, 
O 

To coele and remper the heatc ofthe Fundamenr,z;2.c, 


called $4,0.371,2.799,0458, a.553,d.1252,f, 
To caſe the burning heate of the Fundament, 217,b. 394d, 
k, 
370,a.1189,e,n 150,2. 1006, b, 
To helpe all paines in the Fondament,291 ,©341,9,702,Þ, 
Good to helpeche Fundawent gur fallen downe ia yoorg chil- 
dren,495,d.680,c.,702,e,f.1167,b. 1244,2,b, 


Tocurc hard fwellngs otrhe Fundawcnt, "WW 35,8.1130,c 


G 


| 


(ONS toppings of the Gall. 639, £.124,0.279,2, 


912,b, 463,4.507,c.689,c. 


Tohelpe the ſtoppings of the Gall, 22,0 ÞS1240.43 7,4.463,9. 
507 IC. 578d. 


Toheale Gals ofthe fundament, 1152,9. 


. Good againſt merie Gals.287,), 


To ſtay the running or ſpreading of Gangrens, 72,d. 729,h. 
1044,k.10524h.1292,0. 

Aremdic againſt Ganorenes,1044,c.125 2.h, 

A Gargartfme againſt che rumors and ſwelling of the vuula, or 

almonds about rhe throte and roore of the toong, 190,49, 

Tokcepe Garments from being eaten with motlics, and = 
make them haue an cxcellenr odour, $443,9. 93 8,c. 941,t. 
951,c.1026,d,11986,p.12$1,0,1351,c, . 

veines., finewes and 


rendons,1 14,2, 


Hurrfull co Generation,553 


Torake away the ſwellings —_— Genit0:9,908, b, 103 5,2. 
Good for th» Gtddines of the bead,770,9469,b,5 27,0.546,h 


; $99,b. 7435," 1009,9, 
Tocauſe Giddines, 35,4. 


| The ve of Ginger, 5 5,8. 


Todrive away p 64h PP $9,h. 391. I 86. 

Tokill Gnars,3$8,c.r156,t. 

To cauſe Lang or gripings in the omacke, 1190,9, 
1192,b 

Good 2gaight the Gnawiog of the belly, 391 0.4206 .617,8, 

To cure the Goawiogs ofthe belly,$91,c.908,2, 


hot cauſe, 232d, | wc te FP 

A remedic for the Gnawings of ihe guts 770}, 

For cedure Gon of the raines, 50,b.45 2,4.454,2 661,c. 
674,h.1150,2.1182,b 1246,8.1276,c, 

Tocaule to begclivered oithen yoong,89 3,C. 

Tokill wilde Goares, $20,c. 

Totake  2wpy the paine of the Goute,94,8.13 1,3.2 $0,f.412,> 
5603i.1125,8- 33234. 729,h, | 

For the hot Gour,1328,1.1381,2. 

Good for the Gour in t| hands, 1303,2. 

Todtic wateric humors ofthe Gout, 1037, h._. 

Tocaſe orafſwage the painev/ the Gour, 3 3 1»b. I $5,b. 859.4 
283,b.. ES £33 2,6. 426,b, $0Q9,c-535,c- 665,h. 
849,f,1026b.1133; SR LO SR SITIG: 13 IPA. 


326. 
<4 et 


FF, «/ 


A retvedic againſt the Gour, $60,h,490,b.; 264.686 107 2,4 


11 25,8123 &,ee - 
To paine of the Gour proceeding of an oc cauſe, 
Ja&o $1240. 


G 
To the Gout of the feere,'261,5,1125,0.1303#,1328,), 
To a gon Grauell, 23 Cogn eye _ 897;f, 
5 77,f41000,3. 1009,0, £129,4: 144,h, 1 224,m, 
I 9-913 1246,f,1266,e, | 
To drie foortaGrauell migheily,t$ $2£-789%6 
To drive Grauel} out ofthe kidacier, r248,6.1255,b. | 
Gy for the Grauell and ſtone; >$86;b," 261.3. nA; #75,0, 
ab8,c.677,c.1144,h.n $2,2.1243,.. 1+ 
Eno Greene-licknes, 3'4f, 101 þ4308. J2agf, 
24-73 $,0,1133,0 | 
nft sſthmaticall Griefes.,288,y, | ty >, 
To :lpe the Griefes of the bladder,q97,d. ' 
47g ag F wer | 
pe Griefes proceeding of the Mrees 
La ——_ the Griefe of the belly,89 5,h, 
| ForJong and cold Griefes of any party*49,9. 
Againſt Griefes proceeding ofoppilatieni,977,Þ. | 
Agaioſt the Grieſes ofthe brealt and luogs, 288,n,G61,e, #77,". 


197 334, 
To eaſerhe Griefes of the raines and bcllic, of colde cauſes, | 


46,c, 
- þ azainſt all Griefcs of the tomatke,z17,a, 
lpe Griefes of the hnewes, 1346,e. 
Copa tor the Griefes of rhe cies,z phor- 6,c. 
d againſt Griefes of the principall embers of the bode, 
11! 5,0, 


Aremedic for rhe Gripings of theentrailes 070k, ; 
Gobd againſt or ro mingace che Gripings of the belly, 397 2. 
436,2.457,b.524,e.1076,9. 617,g. 


Gobd aganolt Gripings of the belly in the making of vrine 2,2 


Toicure al Gripings of the belly proceeding of windines, 3 3 5429. 

Towitigate the Gripings of the bloadie flixcy989,0. 

Toibelpe Gripings, 57,2.878,2,897,k.1073,4.1199,b. 

To;helpe the Gripings wittun the belly, 53,b.1 37,4.751,0.882,2 
$91,c,893,5, zor,c. $65.2.872,d, 875,b, $80,2, $24xes 
1009,c.1073,4,0,43 6,3. 878,2, 

To: ripen fwellings in the Groingr170,h. 

To: waſte away Groflencs of the linewes, 105 5c 

Tomake Grneſts che werrier, 58 L,Y- . 

Tqcxaſperare or make the Gullet rough, 859,f, 

To hclpe the red Gnmme in chuldren,z1 vc. 

T9 belpe the fwellmgs 1 the Gums,qto,f 

Tqftrengthen the Gums 845,92. 1263 ,i.1 237,Co 

Ty clenfc the Gums, $2 6,c. 

Agaiaſt tlic ſwelling of the Gums, 1314,c. 

Guod 2gainft vieers and for:nes of the Gums, 919,e. 5o7jb. 

' 6763311 52h 

Ggod again rhe paine ofthe Gams, 1255,2. | 

— away licate of burniog by Gunpowder, 135, k. 278,2. 

07k 

Good againſt the roughnes and frerring of the Guts, 797. 
x 3 49,C. 

TS breake and ſcatter the windines of the Gurs,908, 2, 

Good againſt the falling foorth of the Gur, called Saccue venir 
1394,d. 


T$ cursthepainesand griefes of the Gurs, 40,d.892,c. 509. 4 


| $24,6.102$,2.157 4,6. 1349,C. 

Aremedic for gaawings and gripings of the Guts, 7704f I £ 8,4 
[#24,E. 

Areredie avainſtwindines of the Gurs,65,c. 

To hurt the G uts,769,4. 

To>cure the falling of the Gurs intothe cods,$3ggd; 

againſt the rormenrs of the Guts, $63,4. 

To clenſe or {coure away excrements 77) bumorsin 
[the Guts,: 62,9. 101 $,2.1027,0. 

Tb drive fbatthworwes ot che Gures,02 $,c. 

To kill the ſmail wormes otthe Gurs,941,9; 

Th helpe the vicerations and ons: of he Gurs,479,e. 


| n 
T* cauſe Haire to grow thar is fallen off through the diſcaſe 
Alopecia, 34,<.88,c985,c.10 1326.2089,btz 59g. | 


againſt che Gour in the huckle bones,s 89.f7 oGeutrag 0: 


_— 
j T7 F 


Toclenſeche Hiwfront ales epics groyoitonp 

To cauſe Maire to comgiti places charwant'| burning, 
ſcalding,or atherwiſe, 79:6:08.e: 0708s, 0.985, 974, 
1013,e, 

Tocaule Haireto wone yellow rage 443 30.2266 3 

To curc the pilling or falling off of ry as _ 
pecia,g0,c 919 38.6745d gf, MD OSCLY 

To cauſe Hare to fall offggo8,b, - $"2U5 

To procuce Haire in beardleſle . eo +4, : : 

Agaiaft the falling away of the Haie of the hevd, 


ſharpe hamors,f60,c, + * {820t boos? | 


985,c.1013,e. | 
T&caule'H ive ro grow in ſhore ſpace,r 35.5. Es: 
Tomakethe Hiirered,t 210,c, Cu. 
To roote vp Haire 97442, 


Tolilperhake hathaw: wir Hale pled, «men 
"11 Mo Cat .: 


Toke Hare blacke Jogadye,hitifbhiinet d, . M0 


To preſcrue the Haire of the head from a I 

To dic Haire yellow,y $8,c.145 fa Swyelngs ke 

To take away ſypertiuous Haire,7094d7 2 8,c.9 20,F, 

To ftaythe hw din Hare, 4r0,f.581,d.674,5. 1208;a.h, 
1307,h.1309,0.12 27 FF. 

To bene the chaps of the Hand#comming of colde; &o,Þ. 

To make the Hands ſmooth, 60,k 1140gb.1 252;e-2257#. + 

To purge chaps of the Handy being kin to the rope 
859," &g,0. 

To aflwage zhe paineefche pourinthe Hands,r 393zY- 

Good againt mangines of che Hands,49 1,b, 


To chap, blifter endrnake the Hande rough and kl e36 bY 


To helpe the Hardnes of humors,37;d, 

Goodrto ſoften the Hardnes of the inewes and matrix, 149, 
' 149,0.524,73,b.1108,b.- 

Ay Hardnes of breathing, '724zÞ; ſee hortheR of 
breat 

To wate and conſame Hardnes of the ſplrene, ”s 43.197 c, 
395,2.96,0.977,d.-1027;9. H17O,0ft95, "13 $750. 13:65, 
looks Spleene, - 

To diffolue or waſte away the Hardnes of v omens breaſior 
pap3,q 22,0.423,0.1052,h. «(66 

A retyedie 2g2inſt the poiſon of the ſea Pare, r 1720, CID. 

Good for rough Harſhnes of the throte and breftyt 120,355 

To aflwage the paine etthe Baunth, commen!y Son——_ 
182,e, 195,c.559h. 

Toke away the Hawe of the eie,q2 2b. 695,dat7s,hi 

Good agaiaſt ſundric diſeaſes of H:wkes,g12,f, | 

To heale ruening vicersof the Dead, 10: 5,c. 

To af; of hure Ain Head,529,0.573 ,2.1050,), 

To driuc lice out of the Head,399,h, 

Tocauſc Headach,3 2,b,24,2.142,2. r19m47,abo6da0g2 
-1-F9 2,d.1 247,0.1251,9.1252,b.13 Flat i 

Tobelpe or _ away the Headach, 760,b. 178,b, $56,,4r0\£ 
$48,c.553,c,l, $78, £1055,c. 1074;k. 1202,d, "Woe 2394s 
1257,n. 

Arcmedie for a continyall or old Hoadach 970,h1387 0.460%. 

.* 46335Þ.711,5, 7 243b- 735z0% 

To cate the intolerable paines of the Headaeh, proceeding of 
heare,270,c.5 81,0. 

To purge the Head, 53,2.135, 250 £306, 2. $99-daprugyh, 
709. I 15. 12 199% 244-213 17,6, i2<8,a. 

Good tor thoſe that taac 1/1 Heads of a coide cault;578,9 

Againit wounds of the Head, $432.1182;c. | 

Good for Roppings ofthe Head,1208,Ff, - LEY 

Good fur the Head, 24,4548, 1.674,d. © 21 

Topurge the Head eye & of foule and flimic Jumore, 3069, 
$1 2,14.669,,709,c.  . 

To make the haite to owe a pilde or balde Head, $5984, 
1913,0. 

A remedie againſt fore Heads in children,s5 3,4 X044z0, | 

To heale ſcabbed Hezds in children, 14 1,t. ; 

To purge water and flegme our of the H-a9 by the mouth,r 1496 
252,b.867,2.542,9.619.4.,729,9.1219,2, | 

Good ag2inſt infirmities otthe Head,ots horcauſey674,d, 

To cure the naughtic ſcurffe ofthe Head, 854,). 9850. / 

To helpe and eaſc the paine or aking of the Head, oltlt, 
287,),n, 4362, 470d. 508,b, F19,0, 5785). _o_ns __ 


1182,), 


Tocure all urs and hutrsin the HeadyzB 5,2, 1183.04 je 


Good for to walk the Head with, 10377, | ++ 


wr 


W; Teble of the Nature, Vertss, additions 


Good elegelaf dizziges ohtheendubhg B97 0 10g. 
bealc running vicers of the 

Ts affli& ———_—_— 573 rage 

Todrive lice out of the Head,399,b. 

To helpe the (curffc of the Head,fee Scuiffe, 

Tecaulc and heauincs of ihe Head,qo,b, 

Good againſt heauines of the Head,703,t, 

To preſerue Health,1190,0d, 

co. va ey uk. | | Fi 

Toc dacs Caring, 1305 

Good for hardnes of Hearing, 706, 7 

To ſtrengthen the Heart,124,), 693384 6F5zC« 73 5,9. 168 2,241. 

x083,n,1160,b, 135,42, 


To comfort the Heart, 890,h,z3 2,4 473,453 $,e.g60,2603 A 


6E4,2,0,6.65 $aC, 792,1,0, 111 toe 1264,1, 13 75g ($35 024, 
1353s 
Good arte the trembling and aka of he Heart 896,h. 
604,49.103 2,i.1083,ntib6o,c. | | 
Todrawe a plague fore from che Heart 154. $1 bs: | 
Good for the Hcart-burning,241,2.4 14447 28,4.126;,0,e, 
Todriue yn aniGn from the Heatc,840,b.668,b. 
Good for infirmities of the Heart, lboke lnfiemarics, - | 
Good againſt the paſſion or panting of the Heart $45 x*agbg,b > 
$42,1.654,f.1032,i.1390,c. | 
Todrue peſtilential and corrupt aire from the Heart,847,8 
Toclenſe the Heart, 11 16,r. 
To make the Heart mertic, 855 ze.8B7,c, $90;dh, 53 5a 548,i, 
560,f.568.,d.1111,h.1399,c, | 
Beneficiall corhe Hearr,848,g 548,).560,f,966,2.1 106.8, 
Againſt (welling about the Hear, 38,9. | 
Torefreſh or retoice the aphex ts x $6:Þ.65494, 
To take away Heate of the face $45gt./ | | 
To take away the Heate of burnings ad (caldings,! 27748 
To abatethe intemperate Heate of the raines,1243,f, | 
Toquench the fieric Heate of the cies, 1 2 274c. 
To coole the Heate of the invrarles,1 219 ;8- 
Good againſt the Heate of the breaſt, lungs and bladders 33,2. 
To take away the burning H<ace 1 wounds, 845,42, | 
To alsy the Heate of the bloody1145,b« | 
To coole and temper the Heatc of be fundament and privie 
partes, 23 2,C, 
Tocoole the Heate of burning ichrag 208,m, 
Tocoole the _uUe ofthe inflamed hucr 60,947 fd.321 g0,yor ab. 
© T1448. 045 gb. 
Tomitigare all kindes of H-are no8; $04 |; 
Totake away the Heate of ſcalding by water or oleg 3 tk 
Toh:ale the extreme Heate of theynouth1150,b. 
Toceaſe the burning Hcare of the flones, 217,b. | 
To alay cbe extreme Heate of the kidacies and bladder,70 2,2, 
To refreiiforincreafe jaward and n@tucall Heare,73 2,0,73590. 
Totake away the Heare of inflapazations, 58rze, 1 233,0.1 277,24, 
| Toquenchthe Heate of hoc fwellings, 1207,e. 
Good againſt the burning Heate of the mouth and almonds of 
f chechrore,845,3.1091 A.1120,8. | 
To mitigate or coole the extreme Heate of the inward partes, 
768,2.471,3.70L,4.131758. 
To alay exteminie of Heate in burging feucrs, 102g, 1083,h, 
1232,d, | 
To = the ferucnt Heare of heakingrh, 78,h. 
To alay and take away the Heare of vrine,t 149,b, 
To wr a ſharpe and ferurne Heare of choler, 768,0. {ce 
Choler. 
To alay the Heate of the ſtomacke,, 845,d. 321d. 419,6.738,5,. 
1120,0.1144,9.1145,4.1324,9. | 
To alay or take away vehe ment Heate i in agues, gog,f, 70 $3,h. 
Of 368,2.1 3820, 
Good for cucr awhichls a conſumprion,! "I 


; Our virgo cop gr marr] ers Wo d. 178,94 .424,2, 


Good for the chaps and childblanes of the Heeles,137,f, 

A remedic ag3iaſt the venemous qualitic of _Y $422, 
$7 24t-938,i, 941,Þ. 

Toopenthe Bemozrhoides,; Me ANAL \& 

To ſtop the over much flowing of the Hemerrhoides, 661, k, 
$24 1c91,b 1199,k, 1227gb, 

Tocure the Hemerrboides,291,e. $49.8 630,0,g91.660,4.123 $,d. 
1292,”, 

Good againſt the prone the Hemhorthoides,934.8. Tn 

Good againft fclling of the Hemorrheides,s $042. | 


Toceaſe the blecding of the Hemorrhoides,q1 1,1. "Y) 

\Goodth compinecheHenyorrboide vaines wah, - 5p *; 

Toproucke the Hemorrhoides to bleede,r35,4.417,i.695,0, vo 

Tot _ away the eine of rhe Hemor: was ps 77044. 291,e. 

902 | LY wt 

A counterpoiſon for Hendanes72g- 

Toreak Hewiok 

Toc ens to <4. xi Es 

Tocure Hernies,514,2.577,a.looke Ruptures,  _. 

Gaod againſt che Þ t$,2878,2.457,4,552,2:698,h. 

Tocurethe 44,487 2,6.878,b. >b. $80,h.45738. 97944; + 

Tocure all aches in the Dip8343 3,0. 

To aſwage and curc the goutcat the Hips,854,h. t 

Toallvage the paine of the Hip called Sclaviea,s 88;e.299,h.v1 10,8. 
400,b.665 $.722,0, 

To helpe olde aches inthe Hips,219,b.q3 3 bo 

For Piſſing of the eares, 4172.4, 

To take away Hoarſcnes,z $,a.278,c.288,n. 6544b. 7294. 1121}, 
1149,2,43 422; | 

To remedie the Hoatſenes that commeth ſuddenly, $54,6, 

To lay open Hoics of Fiſtplacg or iſſues, 1235,n. 

For ſtinging of Hoznets,1 075,0, 

Torefreth a wearicd Hozle & make him trauell the batted 


 Aguinſt ache and paine of the Hucklebone, 54,h.190gh, 749,c, 


198,baig,s854,0.318,9.520,2.5 51,b.557,h-578,c.649,7 796,e, 
as 6 1017,90%1072,d.1303 he. 


To purge by fiege and vrine cholerike Bumozo,453.d. 930,89. 


To ſtay Hamors from flowing intathe cies,592,b.284,c.1350,b, 
To make thinne, thicke, grotle, and roughſlimie Humors, 47;c. 


149,a.898,1.437 684,21 235,h12$1,1.1190,9. 
Todigeſt (altand piturtous Humors, 939,g. 


To purge flegmarike and choterike Humors by vomire and ſiege 


689,2,c766,2,f.770,m.976,2,779,v.26 2,89.689,c.972,c, 

Topurge aduſt and cholenike Humors,471,2,1116,(.930,g. 

To purge by fiege roughflegmarike and watctih Humors, 116,2, 
766,f.26 244.33 442.429 ,4,460,C,724,4.1133 Th ,£.1218,d.1219, 
2.1235,i,1238,2, 

To digeſt and conſume grofie tegory, $34d. 14,2. 949.647, 


84 

To drave foorth by floole blacke and filchic "4 ors, $42 ;e 

To concoRt and bring vprawe Humors that ſticke inthe cheſt, 
124,b.13 $,b.195,c.$71,8.572,0d.984,c. 

To purge waterith Humors mightily, 47,Þ.116,2. 272,93. 321,24, 
350,4. 467,2. $42,2.63 $,b.690,2.71 8,2,7 20,b.722,2, 1986,2, 
[113340,v. 1217,2,1235,f1259,8; 


To cut thickegtough and clammic Humors, 137,c.138,c, 140,32. 


951332.53242.647,2.686,b.1525,b.868,d.1025,b. 

To voide by yrine cholerige and waterith Humors,732,c.1 133.6 

To purge thicke and grofſe Humors by vrine and hege, 749;0. 
9309,8-23449.4672. 

Toconcet or waſte away rawe Humors, 747,a. $93 b, 843.0, 
617,6,h.5929,e.1121 k.1223,0,732.1.87 $,4.$68,d.1190gi” 


To cut and raiſe thicke and tough Humors of the cheſt, 195,C-. 


1027,C, 
To ingender navghtie Howmors g1259.c, 
To flegmarike,cholenke and caclancholike amen downs 
war $,827,2.460,f, h4&3,c.1114,2, 
To difſolue grofſe Hamors,1327,c. 
To purge naughtie corrupt Humors,z18,g,k.930,8.357,9.437,Þ. 
,_ $45,0.465,c,q70,c.£47,2.1027,0.410,9.463,2 930,c. 
Tabring footth by vomite grofle and rough Humors,578,F. 
To purge by fege tough and flimic Humors, $99,e.3 57,4. 949,h. 
4©7,2.1018,2, 
To purge cold ficgm3ticke Homors qto,g. . 
Topurge by t all thorps hot cholerike © ON 410,29, 
467,b.1155,9 1192,2, 
To drawe foorth gently by ftoole|crude and rawe Humors, 
Intl Fy. 
| Topurge melancholike Humors,r1 60,9. 
Tocon ontemeradde and flegmarike Humors $99,w. 


| Todrive foorth by vrine and fiege hor, cholerike, kyrnr, and 


hurtfull Humors,930,g, 
Toenpell thicke, tough, and clammic. Humors out of the cheſt 
+ and lungs,684. g.686,2.1037,h.1051,2.,1154,2. 
Todigeſt rawe Humors of the cheſt and lungs,729 ,0.739,). 
Tocure' 1135-138. 
Tocure 35G. 
Good for ſwall Hurts,919,b. 


How 


tampered nit Toure e456 


Tee away all Hats from the eies,537,c629;0,/ 1) 

To drawe water footch of their bellies that-ace Hxdzoptie, 
;691,C.73 fz@4cc Droplizs <2 
| F. OH TTIER LL. 

Or:frefi avired Jade z62ze, | L 
Good againft the Jaundife, 391,9.400jb. jo 24 463 Fe 
| $07,0,57$,2.96331.1097,0.1243,b, 
Tp cuce the laundi'e, $56,c;864,d, $27,i.8 39,0. $40, 938,gy. 
341,d.42 2,9.695,c.r2323,m 
od againſt the yellow laundife, 863,7.84 2,5, 279,2; 927;b. 
{ 348,0.557,0.5 78,0, 


» helpe the ycllow laundiſe,760,b.198,b.: 233;SK.372,92 racf] | 


4372.463,3.5:6,2.979,3.1083 h.11 19,C.1184z0 119y,c, 
Thy purge peatly by x viine and ficge luch as hage the RY 
1279,0,d. 1042,d, 
Apurgation for the ycllow Taundile,318,e, 
Singular good fur rhe Laundile of long comvnunnee aa, 
Goods & blacke Jaundiſe,113 3,Þ,q. 
0d againft rhe olde and long latting feelings of the Javes, 
| 93443- PS 
Tocleofe thi lawes of f1:mic lege, 87,01 158. Fe 
| Ip comtort rhe Lawes,12 44 d. 
F Top take away the ſwelbogs of the lawes,s $7,h,145 8,£13 tes: 
| Good ag inſt Corruption at froe laves, 66 677400 
Tirtake away rr7gednes of the lawes 501... 
tÞ aflwane or heake the difcafe called Ignis facer, orwild mou 
| 60,f. 298,i. 660,4.676,b,1051,9. | 7 
As 12ialt vaige Y mnagitations, 1160,4, 7 
vod ro lmng JF.nmageric wiib,t 24 h. 
- Good for J nipertecions of th: b:ad,r027,a; 
Fbr ImpertcRons of the Cx 3,629,9. 13514h, 4:54 
To helpe all Impertc&on5 of the hper,z r9,b zag egy. 
| For Impertettions of the htngs,2388,a. 
For [mpertcQions of the rae $,69/3 »3.724,V.! 
To take away the fwelling and paine 6! hot JmpoTumes,59:,b 
To bring harde Impoſtumes to Maturation or vpencs, 1 11456+ 
| 39432 471,0ot170gD. 1299.9, 
Th corlume and difloluc ail cold hard lmpoſtumes, 22740% 
againft Impoſtumcs in the joints of the Ragers,362,h, 
p aſſvave a flaming lwpottume and bring it $0 MPEne5,4722C. 
To breake lnpoſtumes,207,2:210,4.46 F,a.. 
TÞ ripen and breake venercousl: vpoſtun exiacke lank,1328, d. 
Aremedic againſt Impoſtumortions of the throre 31940,” 2 
To bring co maturation & breake peſtzlcnuall Inpotthmativas, 
i854 + | 
T6 moth6c malicious Im poſtumes;? 170,C, 
« Tyfſoftenandripen gr pnagt®-1. pq 
curethe dilfcaſe called Impetige,Cg,h, 
For Fnfants that haus their finewes drawen togither,g39,d, 
To helpe an Infant that 1s vexed withan ague,;6 3,4.702,l.y505,4. 
[978,C, 
Good for Infants that arc like ro have the falling ficknes, $80,d, 
Againſt che Jnfection of the age or pettilence,$49,2; $40,b, 
| 478,2.599,1,$04,c 996,a.10*g,,d, 
(remedie againſt all Infe@tons caken by evill 2nd corrupt aire, 
and rodrive the ſame from the harr,$47,2,996,2.7199,t. 
ood againſt all colde Fnfirmittcs of ric ſtomacke,732,i, 
oodfor the lafewiticvof rhe morher,613,2.1108,2, 
pr Infirmitics curable by freating711,”, 
'o heale Infirmities of the findament,54,d.553,0- 
| remedie for the lafrmutics of the hare, $60,2,c,f.c69,2.599,h. 
r1f0,b. 
ood afainſt the Infirmities of the ſpiccne and milr, $49,d, 
495,0.542,1.732,1.979,2. 
o helpethe lafirmities of the liver,q22, d 495,0.507,2732,i, 
500d for Infirmities of the kidacies, 42:2,d.65755., E69,4 495d, 
#42,h.73 2,7. 1000,2,11230,c.1121,1.1246,0. 
ood for Inficmitics of the blagder,8%,A 495 ,4.542,1.73 241. 
00d for Inficmirics ofthe cheft,47,4.318,2.475,a.586,2.1 199,b 
ood againſt Infirwitics of the bnewes,428,4. 
ood againſt Infirwities of the mouth, 508,94, | 
Again? Infirmities in the cares, 1 24,7, . 
To cure Infirmities that come of fluxes,r099,c, 


Good for Infirmitics of rhe head coddcg aol and 
pad 


. 


£ 


a... 


QLQO. 


oY YT. 7 1 RE EA. LL, 


| ATubleofthe Nature, 


; 


Guod againſt all lnfrmnies of mer mtg 
To cure all laficanes prbrteney of tharpe 
humors,1121 Ss 
puta es nr e.g 5k & os 
remev1c for old Infirmuies the c an 
Againid all lafirmincy of the blood, 57,c. 399. 
Good ior all colde andcontinuall lofrmities of the hendand 
fhaewes,619h 5 4 
Good aganitiificmiciesof thehend;of a barenile va 


. Goodtor the Jufarmaries of the vall,31$,e,- 


To helpethe Jnflammations of the-oimonds, throre;” anti} 
partes adroming,839,f.366, 2.379,2,72 8,2,b.1c9r,a.1180,0, 

Good for loflamraarwns,'236,b.z50;d, 362,0.41238, 473,6.529;b. 
$48,0.667,a 674,2,702,0.1030,4: 

Tohcal. but and tharpe paians, $4629. 42442 581, 
667,c.679,2.1153,2.1335,l. 

Nat to (utter Infla:nmations eo ride; and if they ho,1 ro afeage 
themg108 453. - 

Azainft eh- Inflommarions ofthe hngs,504,2.318 (ema;cmot al 
702,l.705,b,11:1,i, 

Azaieit Inflammanions newly begungz1 64d. 1223,64 

Totake away Inflammations,6ob.65,b, 195 36623348, $E0,c 495.2 
1018,b.1og5,c.riztgk, 

Aic wedie r_eche loflammacion of the ones, 198,046 a 

. 10934. ETESIER | 

To Gfotuc Inflammarions of thebreaſt,! ungs, 26d rongh acre. 
Ne,1242,0. bet 

To appe lc or allwage hat "Deane As 60,f.7934/ nag. 
: 702,c:965,b/raz lk 1235,c 1235,hrg6850% | 

To hcelpe or _ Inflamwations of the wes, 502h, 202k pas, 
z06,c 332 #-oigif40 Ff,412,2; hoon eaſes 150;b., 

Good earfialls Inflagmaticnusy! 294;2, | te iþ 6 

To breede laflammations, 121543. 32 | HTS 4 | | 

To rake away LHamaationyin wunds,291,hfg,v A 2 

Tacoole ajl inflammation 282,90 322,44144f, 1 146 

Againſt the InJammanion of the raines,t3 4g by »| 4446, * 


 Afremedie 3gamft I-fluymanenot the pap+,193;0 20144 #9 9 


Toſtzy the beginning of f Inflan,muations,! 205m, 1275,000098, f 
04,2, 
To _ the loflammarion ofthe liver,$a5 947d 45mh.s 514g 
2 k.1009,01243 0.1376,2. | Py 
For AY Be G's of the kernels,t180; Ho 294,2, 
Good for If! mmarions of the tundament, Gro Gen, 
1059,Þ.1076,F.1167gd, 
Totake avaygt cure all laflammations,$62,f 273,2.291h at 
4244%445 J667,c 676g3.680;2.1027,4,1210,2.1 aagktegy. 
1 275,0.1 27790-12378,0,1 304,h1376,b.1389,2. |: 
Good 2:am{t the lnflommonions of the mouth ang almonds of 
- thethrote, 845,a. 366,2, 37042. 702,n, 738,a,b, 1091 ", 
1294.2. 
To alay the 1:flammation of the ſtomacke ter boeredagaeyg 
To mitigarc the inflammarion of theencrailes,) 
Againft the Inflawmatios of rh: Intcltwnss,n1ag-43494./ 
To cure members ozrof Joint,149,4 : 


Tocure the ſhakings of the Iomts decliniogrothe, pauifiry947 . | 


To hcIpe aches and palacdin tlic laints, 13 426, 638,a, 105 FE. 
1073,d. - 

Toe, Or heſpe memhers out of loine, 369 04G36n6eph 

Good for the loincs,250,k, 

Foſtreng:henihe texnts, 52,9. Ft | 

Toconfume winds: twellings the "Eva PIE | 

To fizy humors fromfolling into the loiwes, 60,F, | | 


To abate or afſwage aches and p31nes ofthe Loans, 6p. 19h | 


£95 0.5 12,4.638,2:600,0,724,0,101 6,7, 
To athvage or dztiolue lwellings 1 the Bana 31.667 
Good for weeping wounds of th. ws Bras 
Toknirficmly the loint of members hat were aiplaced, 7 
To foften the frelhngs tothe loints,799,p, t _ 
To digeſt 6lihie flmpincs ofrhe Lomwtes,que6a, * | 
To take a%ay the fwellings of the Ioimes,a71,h. | 
To mitigate the painc of the lojats cauled of hot RON 

mo!sgg12,9, 

Te helpe the long centinuzll. prine of the toins, quidy 
 Gour 7 
pips che Inintsof fegme, and ranebumors 'yom 

' fto2le, 1133.5. _ | 
To cure che Idtariea.q22,2.460,, 

For mans inuoluntaric ITue.1150,3looke Genanbes, 


* #.us, 


» 
_—_ 
- 


LY 


i 
8 
' 
F 
| | 


S ? + H4Y » 
_— © So _ hn 


© 120, Wo I YE te AE TS. HG EE We 0-4. me CO SEES 
7 * "Y T F P RES gl nn, lhe -þ ke 


a protons memory; 
—— 


HORNS LIP [ 


| Good againithard Kernels,5 80,2. - 


| To ſtay or fRopaliifaenof blood, ng 860,b;/849,e, 


8$4542.234,0.911,3.452,2.459,4.1 1082,m.1 102,44 _—_ 


1227,b.125 4h 1263,0,1292,b.1306,c. | ; 


To ftop theextraordinarie iues of muy 2hgge 411,2-860h, 


129 
Goodegainit che meme ade womens liuen,234ye 1648, 


To ftopall Ifſuesof bloodin man or woman,1 (263,0.1314.5 


To ſtop white iluevof women,1292b.looke Whites, 

Tokelperhe Jichinginthe corneryeahocinngee;h | | 
To rake away the leching of the eies BY | 
Tocure the ltch of the bodicz2281 ,m, 


Good againit'orto helpetheltch, 31s. "oY 650g. CO 


c05,D.1052,].1116,firg2, | 
Tocureallmanerof ic b,z1 4zf.105 1. 
Tocurethe ſcuruie lech,z299,b. _ | 
Toingendet euill Fnice,1pge.1059,g. 
To ingendcer a grotic,cold,and flegmauke Ap om 


/ [i 
Wd 1 | 51 
K .# a; why 


Ae tel A ad cs 


__ eares,jawes,necke,arme hol-s,a0d © pawn. rite 


Ft 


Good forKernels inthe flankes, 1204 

To waſte away Kernels vnder the car 

To conſume or waſte away haid frlknge enact WK 
1328,v.looke ori fwellngs, fl 

To diffolue Kernels m cherhroate,293,c 

To waſte away hard Kernels,41 5,2.560 

Good againſt Kibeg,665,i1051,q-! | 

To heale Kibedheetes.42,d.178,d.2 Maagjatora). 1387.6. 

Toopen Rtoppingsof the 895,4. 318,32. $69,4.341,0. 
423,b.444.c:463,1,4.5354095 21.1133 0.13290, | 

THORNTON 1 10296 32b31 Ba 693,h133 hinting 
1199,4.1 

To Kok obſtruftions of xl oy Kdngies x3 «. 733, £.888,4318,1, 
$68,4.869,b.878,7.42 8,h. 

Good tor the vicers of the Kidneies,33 ' 79942958... 

To ftrengthenche Kidncies, ro8 24k, 

Good for the dngics, 23,5504.2 8b 871,9907, 91504194 
729,4.1243,c.1318,2.1323,). 


To dreake 2nd drive ford che foneha the K-4ncics, 85, 3499H 


£45 533.57 1,2.578,c.1066,d. loote tone. 2. 
Good for thoſe that are troubled wh the one of the Kidneies 
775,c.$45,d.638,2.1048,c. 
To helpe exuſcerations of the Kidgivn $02. 3180 341,d. 
1127 
Goodtieve to afſwage the —_ \ cheKdncics, 832d, 287,23. 


313,91 877,0,0. 349 3,6 724;0. 91 b4gk AOZFgC. 1073 of T3JoWk 


1243,0,1255,0, 


To hejpe ati ammationsof the Kidhwiedisn $,f.702,2. 


Good for the dugs of Kine that have beene birten by 6 YENC» 
mous wor meor arec hapt;646,2, 

To ſoften the Kings cuill,c7,0.54,6:55,0.293 0.1 242.8. 

To conſume and waſte away the K 
1077,{1133,)1180,d.13 28,0. | 

To diffolue and exrethe ago 74940. 217,b B5g,a. 859,e. 
$60,*, 292,0.495,2.560.1.6 38,h.655,9.677,-. | 

To amend the lothſome colour of the Kings TY 

To kill or drive away Knats,ſce Ghars, 

Good for weeping wounds of the Kne@g,509,b. 

For Knitting of bones Fingular gooe,7 $9,4,f,0. 

To take away Knobs.408,4. : | 

To conſume 6r make fubule hard Knets96h190/597;b. 

To waſte or conſume and heale hard © 195 ARTONEE WH 
dament,566,b.10g1,b. | 6 


[2 


L | 
% Ood for Kameneſſe, 1016,2, 
Tocaufſc Lankenefle,964.d. 
Geod agointthe Laſke,! 317%b. * 
Good againſt the Lake proce hofras rag. 
Good for thuſc that are d with a hex 4 472, ©. 


cd ah I 4-4 ke 


_—_ 415.2. 56,4 984d. Tohel 


'To I 7 of women with childe;738,4.b,733.8- 


So 


To ſtay or Fa. 6 60 Cacrk 22427942. 102,b.50 s 
748,9,b.990,g 215,c. 227,9.860,b839,t.840,4. 841 pt 
590,C. 3120. 31440. 372,0,87 5,6-430,5. 911;3.915,0.32 1, 
_ 323,b«419,g-43 3524. $45,045 4950-6304b.638,6; 657,4.6740, 
| 9238,a 50.736,2.983,2.989,d. 1037,g.1050,b. 176,y. 1083,c,4. 
1108,t,1140,0.1147,4.1 OTE LT hg Gs, 4195;c, 
\ 1227zC,1244,8,0. 1255,byc.1259,c. 1 263,ÞP» 1264,b. 1270.2, 
[OED 1292,2. _306 6s L30956= 4 14 13 2654." 13544. 
. $. -* 
A rewedic for allkinds ofhackpogel, k 2050b, 1227. 
Goodfor a Laske of long contmuance,728,d.| + 
To Rtay the Laske in yoongeluldreng70,ce | 
- Goodtorthem harwonlave Eager to farths leany, 2350, 
12 
\iBpbets.ss 0" 448 HR ,a,ſcec Bodilieluſt, | | 
Good tor theznflammauyon of the Legs,6765,b.7cg,F. 
hype > ge vas the Legs gotten by colve or long tan- 
in | 
Good a o—__ m 23 of the Legs,491, b. 


na helps th pid ———_ iQ the Legs,2 19,b, 
ora away wellings s, 491,4,497,c F. 
[en ny ned err ew Fr TY ogs 
Toheale ſcabbed Leg3,43 $xc 721.k,1278,þ, 
Tokill 755,4 
Geod fab webas have che Rethargie 1 85 

Tr Opry 90'h encortm 
To helpe che Lethargic,a57,2 652,04, 
A good purgation fur Leapers,8 27,2, 


{aj 9" per > 3 34zC. . 
Tocalc the £,306,C.117 2,Þ- | 


To take away Leprofics,827,04453,b.557,i.55 8,k. 736, 4. 
Good againſt the Lepric,6$7,a 720- 1328 pl. 1361,a 
To caulc Lepric, 1050,9, 


; 


To heale the Leprie,743>4.408;d.460,2, 728,e. 


Good againlt Kentiles, 13 28, 

Torake away Lenril:» itheface, 765,h. 1 x5,h. 855,c. 288;r, 
293,C.1133,1.1328h. 

To kill Kice,$22,4.,709,0.1 17 2,0.1 195,D. 1307,Þ, 

To eriue Lice out @ che beard, bead, and all other parrs of the 


bodie, 399,b. 
To deitroy Licwinclothes or apparell,399,e: 


To heale Lichens (that is rerters or Hngweres ) inchildren or 


yoong lafants,1314,e.1376,b, 
To preſerue and prolong the Life of man,734,). 7354b. 
Tocurethe burnings by Lightning, 2782. 288,z. 
To clenſe the Lights of raw humers,1i 248,86. 
To help: Lims burn with fre,987,2. 
TocurcLums outof int g87,2.1202,f.fee wewbers, 
Good to bathe Lims out of coinr,1227, tf | 
For chaps of the Lips, 115 2,2, 
Enimie to the Liucr, 293,a2.1917,). 
Good forthe Liuer,882,b,218,2,h,966,2. 1004.2. 
To coole the hot burning of the Liver,2 22,4.845,f,941,0.321,b, 
— I pn400% looke inflawmation, | 
ſtoppings of the Liver, 124,t. 738,b. 755,c. 
ay 32 LY 279,42. 318,2,868,0. 936,b.348,b. 
35 2,042 $,b.575,9.689,c.977,0.1004,a,c,1341 ,0,c. 
pe obſtruftions of the Liver, 3,4.279,a. 3 18,2. 930,b,ec. 
936,8.938,C.42 2,2. 437,2. 46332. 507,48. 57 8,b.695,c.706,9. 
1004,c. 1202,b. 1257,k.1341.4,c, 
Againſt paine of the Liver, $7,2.1073,C.1300.2. 
To coolethe heate ofthe inflamed Liver,66,c.845,f.z321,b.457 ,b 


$1248-7Þ 70 2,k,10cg,d. 

To mollifie and rake away the hard ſwellings of the Liver. 188,c, 

To ſtrengthen the Liver, 93 $,c. 597,a. 1082gk, 183;n. 135 $2, 
1754. | 

Tocomfurtthe Liver,$:9,c.1317,2.1341,c,13 50,4. 

To ſcoyre orclenſe the Liver,1044,c.1133 116,t.1190,8. 


To take away the fceblenes of che Liner, 939,0. 1033, 2. looke 


Weaknes. 
To ſtaic or reprefſc the waſting of che Liver, z4$,b. 
Good for thoſe that hauecuill lwers,35 2,b,$76,a,c. 1178, d. 
To ps them that haue a weake and colde Liuerys 245f.1025,Þ. 
the Liuer-ficke,r000,b. 
A good medicine againſt Loathing of meate, bly I 20740. 
1223,0- 


Tohe eas pelbes Loines, 1073,c. 
Good 


aks 2gainſt Loſenes ofthe finewes,770,0.638,a. 

To ſtaie the Loolenes of the belly,r337,c. looke itopthe belly. 
Ggodfor Looſencs of the ioinm,64g, g. 

Ggod tobe put in Lotions tor cankers and ſores in childrens 
wouthes, r209,9, 

Ghod o be puta Lotioas for thepriuic parts , & ſcaldings wich 


omen,1 209,28. 

s excellent Lotion or waſhing water to heale: ſores in the 
mourh and privic paits of man or woman , to faſten teeth, 
10924, 

To cauſc KL one,696,m. 

T6 make one Lowſie,13 28,2, 

A medicine againſt the Lowhe evil}, F7,e. 

Top diffolue knortic or hard Lumpgi any part of che bodyeaog. 
(68,2.72,4.747 þ.860,c.899,h566,b,71 4,0. 

To mollife and diſperſe hard Lumps,68,a. 

Towaſte and wake ſubtill hard Luwps,96,b. 

To cure a Lunatike perſon,8t1,b, 

To quiet the Lunatike, 65andes. 

To make {moorh the roughnes ofthe Langs,z TanT29 A, 

Good for the Lungs, 1256,c,42328,b. 

T6 OPcn or io Sioeta Of ſoppings of the Lungs, 
| 124,b.779,{,340;f,$78,£470,c.1076,q.1248,c5 

To clenſethe Lungs, 459,d. 546d. 56334. $78,b,586,2,649,b. 
| 984,c.1116,t.1257,k. 

A {peciallremedie for conſumption of the Lungs, 1 24,0, 795d, 
| $63 of. 997 ,4.1174,f.1223,f. | 

Tohe! pe Wheaſing ofthe Lungs,557,d.563,C. 

To heipe the Lungs that are inflamed, 765.594,A4. 318,145 5b, 
F72,0.701,4.1332,4 

A remedic for the tuffing of the Lungs,779,\.869,0, 5$27,c.542,c. 
698,b.1239,b, 

Againf the 7lcers ofthe Lungs, 504,4.505,c.563 5.661 ,f,663,4. 

665,f. 
Gooda ainſt the couch ofthe Lungs,s 19,0.1338,a. 

To Conday the pipes of the Lungs, 138,).7 29,0.984,c.1120,% 

To concoG raw humors of the Lungs,9 34,k. 

Good for the Lungs opprefſed with rawe andcolde humors,57,f, 


| gob,e. 
ta delas, 1050,l, f 
To procure or ſtir vp bodily Luſt, 95,9.97,c.124,c.132,b.15 5d. 
| 158,b.1 75442.193;0. 195,e.883,c. 895.274.2.868,c. 
| $71,2,872,2,c.874;b.$80,2.899,c.955,4.445 f.572z0.614,2,0. 
| 627,c, 629,b. 665,6, 968,32, 977,4.993 z4,C.19024,3.1047,2. 
| 1099,C. 117449, 1246,c:1 248,e, 125 I,0 1354. $296. b,c. 
| 1289,h.1334,f 
Toreſtraine bodily Luſt, r5$,b.772,8, 4194.1 202.9, 
To ſtay Luſting of women with childe,72 8,440.7 3 358+ 
| a 


M. 
O bring Wadnes, 270,2. 


A medicine againſt Madnes,; 13,f.457,9. 
To rake away Madnes, proceeding of melancholiz, or of the 


ſpleene,63 

To cure the biring of Mad dogs,26,4.60,a.Jooke biting. 

To kill Wagots,1 186,g. 

Tocure Maidens of the greene ficknes, and ſende againe the 
| ligely colour intotheir faces, 201,b. 

['Whart dothcauſe a faire and well coloured Maide looke like a 
| rallowecake,69,c. 

| Good for yoong Maidens that want their courſes, 55 8,1£30,e. 

| To keepe downe the dugs and paps of Maidens,803 4. 

'To make a Man vell coloure@,124,c. 

[To make a Man gratious in the fight of peopie, 4490. 

Tokcepe a waifaring Man fromv;carifomnes, 946,49. 

| Apurgation good for a furious and mad Man,827,4. 

[Deadly ro Man,818,b.42 2,2. 

' To make a Man barren,744,Þ, 

 Tocauſe a man to loake yoong,1116gt. 

| Tokill a manin ſuch ſort as though he ſeemed to die laughiog, 
| _ 8s, 

| Tocauſemento Malechires, 158,2, 
| Tocaſe thoſe thar be Mangie,60 
| Torake away or cure Mangines, it POT 240, Shak 3999h. 
|, 48,d4z9.e&5ol, 


SO GAIN Eh: wotny. 


Good for an impoſtume of che Matrix,1027gh, | - | L> 
Towatte and conlume, breake or ſcatter away the wdines of 1 | | 


Good againſt Mangiaes of the hands andlegs,49 
Tocure Mangines of the bodic,t 281,00, th, 
An eſpeciallremedie WEE the nighe Span, 0:5 fs 
Totake away blew and black Barkes,cauſed of bruſings, 19: a 
93$,i.720,0.7 22,b. 1252,e. 
Totake away Markes 3emainiong after ſmall pocks ormeaſcls, 
696,1.1 276, 
To take away blacke and blew Markes ghar: are gorren by ſtripes 
or fals, 759,8.854,2.352,c.540,0,722,b.1253,0, — 
To cauſe Matkes ju woundes, io be-fare and well coloured, 
x 108,b. 
Totake: away Markes out of the chin, $21%b, - 
T orake away black: Markes of the face, 7 20,e+ 
IT 6 take away blacke and blew Markes of the skin, 7236 1G 
Good for the Matrix, 1013,9, 
For iwelling of the Matrix, 1027,q,303 5,8 + 
To helpe the coldnes and topping of th: Matrix, jou. mon 
546,2.1027h lodge, 
Tomolific & open the Matrix,47,£522,c.5 3 $,0.1073,b.1 23 Las 
To helpe the inflammation of the Matrix, 40,c. 2911 ATI. 
445,0,1202,0. 
To cure th- ſuffocation and frangliog of the _— 392. 
893 42.527 ef. 
To bring the Matrix'into hir right placestor3 49208 &T 
Toclenic the mAtr11,97,0.282 0459 bibgbga, . | "Y 
Toclofſe rhe Matrix 6 24,2, 
Good toſoften the hargnes of the Macrix, | 17d. 459 _—_ 
F 24,4,b.5$27,5.1108;d., 
T9 hclpe the itrangling and paines of the Marris, $3393. 
341,7.945,c.445 1.5 $3,2.537,9.1202,0. 
I ©remooue hot iwellings of the Matiin,149,% 4:1, 


Tocure ſorcs of the Matriz,75 1,b. 


or Mein 9950 hep IRN 8 2 dog) 
To cure the vicers ofthe Matriz,a91,, 1027, 
To cure the frettings and vicerations of the Matrin,q19,e, _. | 
To purge the Matrix or wombe after childe deerting aha lect [ 
, Womenor Secondine, | | | 
| 


To ſcoure out legmauke MPatterchrough the guts,B56,c, 
To raile rotten Matter out of the cheſt and lungs, 1256,c, 
Mn peſtilential Marter to breath foorthby the pores of the 
x 5d... 
Good again{tthe Meaſels,$04,2.53 5539657,0.1 Kaas 
How ts MWeates with,124,h. oj : | : 
A pleaſant Mcate,596,4.614,2. | 
Good for ſuctyas cannot brucke their Meat,5 42,2, 
A fingular Medicine for the yellow iaundies.90,2. 124,0.1 27d. 
$29,2354,C, 35740. 314. $124Þ;0. 919,C.936,4. 4118, 4220, 
$73 ,4.575,a657,C.7c6,d.11 19,C, | 
A good Medicine coclenſe the cheſt andlungs, 1174,e, 
Atamilar Medicinefor all ages and fexer,11 15,n. 
Todefend from the hurt of poiſonous Medicines,946,d, 
Againſt deadly Medicines,712,b. 
A convenient & holſome Medicine for the ſtomackq10,2.411,5 
A Medicine that may ſafely be giuen toallweake people of whar 
2ge or ſexe ſoeuce they beg1 24392. 
A finzular and prooucd Medicine againſt the tone in the blad- SE 
dergs724. | 
A Medicine againſt all poiſons of renemous beaſts,952,9. 
A purging Mevicinei in many difesſcs,fit for all ages,r1 Whcd 
An excellent purging Medicine for daiatie people, 1115,),m, ; 
A Medicine good for children and women withchulde, 313,1, f 
12432, 's | 


Es, A an 


- 
<L2E7S4 "4.5 200 \ Wy, onde 9h 4 " oY 
me or oe aſian 6 0p ye 6 "_ = IG 
q 3 wy c —- => 73 4 —= HI 
TO ag = Ser 3, 0 : - ws 


TR 

—— od 
, i 
© 4 as 


An amarous Medicine,fge,m. | | q! 
A ſingular Medicioe againſt ſurfcir,702,f848,g, bs of IE $5. 
A good Medicine for thoſe thar are burſten,762,b.291,9, | = 
A good Medicine againtcankers,745.£,684,6. | - 
A \iedicine for the pleurifie,3 18,f,1019,c. 1073.2. | W;. 
A Medicine for ſeaucr quartaines,854,h. IC0g,C. f..1 bo 
A fingular Medicine for the ſtone 1n the raines, 57241, | 
A Medicine againſt (caldings, in the privic parts RA wo- 

mang745f. 
A purging Medicinefor the Gm ngs 


A for the RT 


Toeaſe rhe painoft pms oY 
16,b,c,d.1z17 


EE I Ia os 


hhhb 2 


ous mT — I. ea 


9", 5 
” 


_ 
—_ 
"4 


A Tboaf the Natare, Dangers memes, 


Good todriue away Melancholie, 65 4,c.840,g 560,9,6.1116.C, | 
To purge Mclancholike \bumors by »827,9. 460,f,h,463,6. | 
$27,d-546,C. 


Good frthole tha ae rrowbled wich Melanehoke $FfaaFod 


_ 27,0. 
Tolnirenr das of Melancholie, 60,g. 
plaiſter,roz35,b. ' 


To ſwage rhe paine and take away the ſwelling and inflemmani; 


on of Members vexed withrhe gour, $49,t. 
To helpeoreaſe all Members our ofjoint, 344d. 8:4. 638,9. 
649,h.728,c.973,d.1202,f, 


To rake away the paitte and inflawqorion of Members our of 


joinr, and Srmely coknir the joint,759,8d. 


Tofpyopattyoct OY of he priny Mem: 

rs,30, | 5 

To rake away rumors andl happen ro: Members 
wiſe bovieshaue er ke wr orourÞþf min,” 5 9Þ- 


Good for Members torncgrent and bruiſed, $67,8, . 

Good for a black: and braiſed hanger, deckaing ro wonibes: 
. tic,679;k, © {3 

Totake away the akiog orteemblip; ; of be M- uber 624g. 

Towanytcolde Members; x&76,v. 

To ſtrengrheaweake members,116t,a., 134644, - 


To kcepe wolnded Mt mbersf.em inflamm mica ded rankliog, 


or being rankle$1otike awoy theſame,4q5;0; © | 
To cute the apoſtemes and tumors of the privy Members, "I 
Tohelpe Members ſubee &xc the palſie,469,b gee 11501 
To :afſe members ſhrunke vp,29t 2. "ty 
roy, og and pretivee the neakned Memopleg) ang F 
1009, | 


' To comfort Memorie;527;e. 1 wht k 


Tequickeathe Memorie,624,b.11 10,2 

To top the oyerawc hl iog of the Wenſles, 913.9 44g, 
: 11472 At165,b 1190 k.r;89,9. | 

Toprancbrwyaens Menſes, 7 24e. $64.2.862,d. $83,5.926,2, 
$64,2.962,f, 9965. 10c0,b. 164444. 11842. 119498. 1195;b, 
1202;d.1219,2.1222.g2239,H1 257,k19 49.Þ. 

Tv anche one Merie,1 24,4 £997. 65 4c. 73:;f. 966,42, 11604e, "2 

To k:epe from BJerrigals,12zcz,g.. 

Good abainſt,orto cure Merrigals,2B7 g. v7,a ' $97,h 

Toki} Mire,z57;. 

To iucreele or cauſe much Ditein women's breaſts: dale cine 
ſucke,178,b.155,i, 232,d.247 ,5 3060. B77, '» d8784.880,4. 
926,2.420,9.44 5,7 65999. 1£62,2. 1 2FgAE- 11741d. | 

To cruddie Miſke,roc 9H, 

To drie vp Mi kke,y44$;2.1076;r. TL " 


Not to futfcr Milke to ciuddle of waxe fower inthe tomackey | 


$534. 
To procure Mike i incartle,1059,9. $eraaoragh 
To helpe che QJiltif it be watted,zen }, 
Tocure mag hardnes of the Milt: Y 3 95,069%.979,0.007. 
1327, 
To ar and take away harge (ning ofthe ay, 188;c, 
8972. ; 
To [coure the Milr,104440.7116;7. rx 1334>; i 
Toopen the fſtyppines of the Milr, 174940. p42. 461 ,2,d, 
470,c.435,* 647,2.962,1 111r1;6.1 296.1 334d, 
To helpe or cafe the paiitc ofthe Mil: &28, 74940. zot ,f. 
Todrive away forrow and care of ind 
655,c9*2.F). rreo,c. 
Good for thoſe that re troubledin Munde,q60,,. 
To rroublerhe Minde,250,7. | | 
Toexlilarote wt glad 5 ray Cq4,92.11 65ze, 
To in-ender $1 rrth, 1 1 1 | 
Avant the poiſon of 2Piltictowe. 
Todraw much Botfture from _ w and ality the beaine 


299,40, 

To eric vp overn uch Moiſture of gomocte,r207.6 ; 

Againft exce(hur ch Moro $,1158,f, 4 

To bring 60-ne+the Monthly coutſe ot women , 47. Fo,b. 
945,c.410,b.542,b. 

To {top che Monthly courſe,$895,e. as, d.looke Flowers, 

Tobring downe th: Moathly — 35h looke for defied 
ficknes. 

To ftop the inorginate conſe of ed Moartly eknes, 748d, 


7$4,2-285,0.1 144,6.1 age. 
Toclenfe or rake away 


Zn ru r49.d, bog 
bra b98,9,104456.1 rag” ; a6: 


17. , $054,044 59 9p IE: ee es 


, 560)g. C542. 


wo 


Toctenſc or xake away the whire Morphew 83k4r 
To enterhe Morpher: a hes, 2a 684,Þ. HEE 
Toclenſe t Moen Og 944d. 765,h. 227 
L 7onlinifa, | . z by b.674,). 

o ſcoure away the Morp wofthe $kin,7 827,0,674,b: 
Good f tori be ares tr oublee with ey or Jo 


253,2.299,).101 al I11,8.1190,h, ©. 
Tot JIM SIS. or Ropping of the Mo: 


Wo th zE: $33 ;f.946,0.470,e.'527,0.546,g.560;b, 

To Geand fofren the ſores of the Mocher,796;8, - 

Toclenle the Mother an@ helpe conceprion,263,v.578,i, 

Good — the paſſions or eiſcaſes of the Mother, | 874,d.762,b, 

2 122 

To col the Mother fallen downe t& renarnd. torkis natural 
place,$92,a. 1158,g; 5.517 

To molhfie the tumors and horgFcllings: us the Mother, 787. 
44535 27,0.10 27,1.11 Yo,ey + 

To helpe gr eaſe the a yr FT: 3956. 445,n 833f. 
$7 8,6,946,c:521,a.587,0d.1072,0,0m,0, | -- 

A prelenr ! remedic for thc fizs 6f the Mot rotdp binds, | 

To reuiue thofe that be ſtrangled withe other, 897 1 .460þ, 

Tokill che childe inthe Morhers wombe,i 95,e. 

To keepe gartwenrs from 2Botheating, or Morhes, 843d 93%, 
941,t\gF1,c.520, baoz6, d.,1111,l.: 13 51of., 

Tokil! Methes,4186,v. 

Againſtthe birmgs of the Morſe called a Shrew,rar ;h.93 $3, 


-. Todric vp moiſt and heale virulent vicers of the Wouti 30k. 


Tocureallvicers of the 

Good apainft vicers and lorcncs of the Mouth, 91 9,0, 325, 
$07,0.581,f624,0-67758. 

Good 19 wait the Mout! wathall,r 24429, | 

To ſtaie or cure putrificd vice vithe Mourh,83 9. 1031,b, 


. Toripen and breake 1inpoſtumes and tuqgucs of the Mouth, 


4653, 
Tocutrecankers of the Mouth, $47;c.17 Ty lnoke Cankers, 


_ Good againſt theinflammation ard burning bearofche Mouth, 


$45 ,3.323zC- 30036770788, 31091 ,2.,125/2,k.1306,0.1326,b. 
To caule a good lent in the Mouth,886,c, 
To afſwage and conſume hard apollemes, rmors and torofiue 
viceis v1 the Month, 374byc, 
A medicine for fore Mouthes mm children or elder people, 745. 


To healevicers inthe Mouth, 214,b.843,c,963,1 1102,b.1121h. 


. 1207,c,1209,2.1210,2. 

To bring muchwarer, or cauſc flegme to run out of the Mouth, 
864,0,849,0.3<6,L. 61990, 

An — for old vieers and malignznc 
ſores 

How to/h w- the Wurraine and other inbeaicies sffitting 
cattle,$26, 827. 569,09. 

To cure or helpe all Wurs,s 26,9. 

To helpe thoſe that are Qrangled with caring of Puſhzums, 
938 672; f.107 5,0. 


5 | N 
rengthen and comfort Nature,7,80,s. 
To COS Naturall ſeede,:; r,c.178,b,754,2. 
To deſtvoy Naturallſecde,744,b. 
To bring downe Natural! fcknes of women, 29,b looke ficknes, 
Good againſt Maiteis of children that Rande out overwuch, 
897, 
Toroke away hoſe Nafleg on the fingers or rocs,729,h, 
To caule eugned, corrupt, and ill favoured nailes 
444;9.669,2,736,c $15,3.1170,d.1180,c, 
To confunjc and griue 2way the fwellng of the Necke,486,b. 

To heale the galled Neckes of cartle, 970,b, 


. Toh Ipe che canwrattion of the Nerucs,947,f.Looke ſhrinking 


of Sincwes. 
Good far Nightwheales,r2c7,e. 
Good for ſhnging of Nettles, 23 3gv. $72. | 
To proucke or exuſe Nreſing, 53 ,2,1 90,t.540,3.548,f,1219,h. 
Toclenfethe haire of its,519,32.1027.r. | 
To kill Nirs, 22,2. 709,d.1172,n.1195,b.1307,b. 
Againt Modes,on the Nerucs or finewes,r 342,2. 


| mo make fubrilc hard Noderor kiow,g6.hitod.397,h. | 


: the viſe in the cares, I 342 
N 21 34224, Good 


Good againſt 
| Tohelpe 


Good forthe huachingNoiſtis'the cx 


| res138,4.s 
Toſtanchbleeding ar the Noſe, 908,49 +9 58,0, 398.b.z 89,f, 


5 $7,571 1b.1o74s- 


To cauſe the Noſero bleed,747'91 $,t. ro74,mh, 

To rake away the diſcaſc the re called Peppa. 684.4, 
11 $6,c, 

Tr EE 

To [ ry a". Cc, 

Toengendertrall , 


For thoſe that are not Noorlbedofierthei wee, vos jk. 
Againſt ofthe feete andhands,9 97,c. 
How toingender or increaſe miilſke in Nurſes breaſts, 23 24b. 


— 241,#.306,c.$79,2.926,2.450,2.448,5.659,5,0.112 5,2, 
To ingender b] clammic,pituitoys and cold Haan, 13$6,a 


0- 


yo O rake away the Obſenrtie or darkencs ofthe Fight, 888, 


F 49,2. 
Toopen Obftructions, 140;a. 13 $0,9. 


| Toopen Ovftrudtions of all inward parrs, 1 0578 | 
; Toopen Obſtrufions ofthe Liner, 50244; 137,4,73 8 bif.749,8 


"65,6864, b. $652,2, 847,c. 2 $7.4.295,4.878 £9rr, b,e. 321,Þ, 
341,d.359.Þ. 43792-444,0.463 ,4.470,.. $076, $3 540. 563,24, 
647,3, 691,24. 962i. 996,b, 1007,c. 1057,d, 1083,h, 1111,f, 
I 133,D4i,1 3024, 1223,8. 1224,m, 1246 /,1248,0, 32 $9,5,0. 
12$9,f. 13470, 

To helpe Obſtruftions of the liver, 3,0.862,2.314,#.3 $2,2.46 3,5 
Looke liver, 

Good — ObftruRions or Fppainge of the ſpleene » 639,c, 
137; d.738d, f. 749.7. 868,4, LOI 939,d,394,4. 42242, $7 5g. 
647,2.977,Þ.1195,f.1202,0. 

To cure or waſte away NN that is colde fwellings, 632, b. 
iT Ce, 

A mocks Olle,cv0od rocure decpewounds, and thoſe that are 
made thorow the body yor made with any venemous weapons, 
and alto prickt finewes,433,0,d. | 

An Oile ſerving to many purpoſes ,445,F- | 

An Oile good to annoiat all rough bardnes and ſcuruines} gorren 
by icc h,qo0,c, 

An excellear Ointment for members out of joint, goute and 
kibed h: 9 birt > 

»n.946,d. $42 ,2. 

tons,31 4,953,2.1341,d,c, 

Againſt Oppreſſion of thechett with raw & cold oniles $7,t- 

To lay open Oufices of hiſtulacs or ſues, 1235,00, | 

Tocure the diſc aſe n2med in Latine ©f-edo,325.9, 

Againſt Ouercaſting of the fomack g10 50m, 

Good 38 ainſt Onerfiowings of n.onttt aerL, IO9P Ns 

To diffolve Outororings, 747,b. 

Torke away ſuperfluous Ovegrowings of the fieſh,$54,1, 266gC, 

To conſume away windic Ourgrowngs,790gt.$7 5,8, 

To kill Oxen,6z 2,7, 

To heale the galled neckes of Oxen,979,b, 


P 


O eaſe thoſe that make water with great Paſne,760,1. 
To remedie the Paine inthe head called the Megrimw,257,9, 

-\288,r.460,9.1123,).1390,b, 

[AS Paine, 28:,1,978, d. 445,h. 495,9,617,h. 1207), 
T1256, 

To mitigate all kind of Paine 283,, 298,9.616,b. 

To mitigate the Paines in the cares proceeding of obſtruftions, 
op ovens $73,0.1:23,0, 

To alſwage the Pame of the gout,S59,d.,1050,n.105F5,e, 

To mitigate extreme Paines that proceed of che tone, 1257,t, 
789,b,c 

To healethe Paine ofthe ſtomacke,pracecding of Choler,217,a 
$54, 

To dy the intolerable Paine of the hor gour,r323,l. 

Againſt Paine in the breaft,q60,d .1073,C, 1076,q, 134940, f. 

To help: Paines of the pur ,veAum Inmeſiinum,:c77,7, 

Totake awav all manner of Paine,789,0.445,0, 

For Paine of the (tomacke proteeding of acold cauſe,r327,d. 

Good agaiaſt, or tocalc the Paine inthe kidacies, 897 b. 27,4, 


A Table of the ROOT cnt agvs, 


$65,4.897, b.57 , b. : | 
Tocalethe Paine Sm Ry. 


cauſes, x 


ditie,892,c, | 
Torake: away the Paine freattaſenhitbere [ 
$0194, 4 | 
Aganit * Paine inthe head and Romac k6,20896938 pre 
3233, Pl 
Againtt all Paines of thei ioints,t $49, A 
Tocure all Paines proceeding of wingic andepld c bg 
Gaod azainſt , or to allwage the Painesof rhe hnewes x. 670. 
-" 445,h. 526,c. *99,f. 5A 


A 
Toicaſe the Paines of the gurs anti rnmenght en. 


a». x7 + 


% U23 þ 


— 


Azainſt Paine of the bladderivined with beat and op of 


viine,729,6. 
Good for PancufrhecheN,no2 $,.] $073;c. | 


Toure all maner of olde Paiacs, procegding of a cot exale, 


190,h.1346,c. 

To:mitigate Paine of rhe eics,proceeding of iears; 1684;e. 

Tu take away the Paine of the goure, 250,f,257,b.fer Goute." * 

To helpe the Painesin the fide, 87,5 789,h.300,. *65 p90 
445,1 462.4, $35,2-563,4.586,2, 17,9, 6245. 98451, 1073.6, 
$076,5.1300,3, 

Againſt griping Paines of the bellic, 23,b$891,c; $754,hi\ '$97,2. 

| $33,7.460, \d, $49gÞ. 553ak-100ges LOL ,A103 556. 2976,4+ 

238,C 

Ava 4 {t Paine in me head, proceedin” of coldeanſe, 299,c; 

Againſt the griping Paines of the b-Ihe In women after they be 

brought to bed, 27,3, looke Throwes, 

Againſt the long continued Pains © [fthe hea4,460,0,554,3.717,4 

Againft the Paine of the reeth, 8: by &, 'voke 1 our} ache, 

A remedie againtt old Paincs of the buck! vORcS,i 0178; looks 
$eiatica, 

Pcofirable zgainſthe Paincs of the bladder, br, 3,539 ;b 85,2, 
97g 90A « $26,G, 578z6.665,C 934F, 1035,0, TI37 20 
1346.2, 

For Painting of womens faces,&57,d,h, | f 

Topurg chaps and rifts in the of the handsdeing co- 
fri germane ro the ſcabof Na ples, F9,e.$4 9,m, 

T6kill Banthers, 622,c, 

For Panting of the hearr,$45,c.looke I aGon, 

Tokeepe lon: maidens Daps,2%0z a. 

Torture fore Paps,751,b. 

Todifiolue or waſte away the hardnes of ha Plpo,crefhiita;c, 

Good againſt he inflammation of the Paps,1g8,c.r 307k. 

Good againſt the hard ſwelling Paps,198,c, | 

Tocure vicers of the Paps,291,i, 

To ftzy Parbzaking,s53,a.looke Vowiting. 

Tocuce the infl-mmation of the ſecret Bartes in man orwo- 
M304 5230-454 3D.445,06 | 

Torlen! le the invard Partzs,$19,C. 

Tor »mfort the inward Partcs,%7 3,f.70248, 

Gopd for w-ake arid feeble Partes,1027, k. 

Tovilſelve and conſume cluttered blood in any inward Part of 
the bo he $43,0-45944 $074 972,%,Þ. 

Toſtrerothen whe inward ! Varies, 1317, d. 

To £00! cor temper the h are of the privie Parres,232,c. - 

To Rrengrhen a Part weatened with ſuperuous moiſture, 
1599 7. 

G 6.4 ior wounds and vicers of the ſecret Partes, 794,94. $78.c, 
419,0.452,C.453, b.507,e. 

Aoaq' aft the invarc, 'Partexiafl med, 775,d 31HE 471,a. F132 
702,):.1:2r, ious leflemmerion, 

Tobeate Partes over cold,1016,f, 

To mitigare or coole the extrewitic ofheare inthe inner Parres, 
765,42. 419,0.471,4.702,M. r2814, 

To tate away the eric heate of Partes thatare dirten or ſtung, 
1027,1, | 

Hotriulic ro 1116 Ine r Partes,1 37,4, 

Toſtrengihenfnewe Partesg1110,2, 

OffenGue to firme and (ide Parres of the bodiegaghe, | 

To mak* rough Partcs fmer 117 440% | 

Good for the inward Partes therare bro-engrentor hurr,G38,2; 

To faſten or draw togither Oacke ave ſaint Partyt 1079, 

A medicine gant the vicerations and eeplige the _ 
Parts,747 

To aſſvage fix elliog ofthe privie Parrts,to5 2m, 

Tocuce wounds of the inward Paris $0 $637k 


= 


d- ” 
Wt: » al699” 0; Ge 1 


@ " , , bv x as 1Hy"40 + 3» 
Dit 3 i Bn OY PEITRT YL 


. Goodrofatten 


dm rhe inwarde Parrs, 


; 46232.658,2.1009,2. 
ericke Paſſion,: 5 F,b.5 $7,4.1247,c. 
| Forthe Paſſion of the hearr, 542,i.fece Heart. 4!) 

For the wclancholicke Paſhon,i160,c, [5 
Tocure 116,b.897,c.374,b,569,0.624,d.1346;e, 
Goodfor he Pale, 499.897 5994/9; or9 635m. 


1016, 2. - | 
Good for thoſe that are troubled wichtheſhaking Paulfie,249,3. 


$24,Þ. | ; 
Tocauſc the Paulfic,298,d. |; 
Torefſtore ſpeech to thoſe that haue the dumbe Paulie, 332,2. 
I111,t | | 
Good for thoſe that arerak-n wich a dead Paulicy619,a, | 
jg away the Pearle of the cze,, 563, c,f. 695,d. 
1035 4 ki. 1 Bene: 
Good for ſuch as are Peuilh,z 294b. | 
Good for thoje thar be Penſiue,527,0, 
Todriuc away Penfivencs of the winde,655,c. 
Good for old Peoplethar are dull ang without courage, ro in- 


creaſc their luſt and trength,883,i.: 
To nouriſh and reſtore aged People,and to amend the defeRts of 
nature in the younger,r000,c,d,c. | | 
To helpe the diſeaſe calledin Greeke worie, 53,2. 


Topreſcrue from the Peſtitlence, andexpell it our of thoſe that 
fe infe&ed,125,i.8q0,b.331,c. 668;þ.684,k.100g,c. 

| Tocauſe Peſtilentiall marrer to breath foorch by the pores of 

the skin,815,b. ; Fo 

To expcll poiſon of the Peſtilence, and to cauſe ir ro breake 
foorth in bliſters in the outward part of the akin, 147,h.811,2, 

_ {7 ; | | 

Singular againſt che infeRion of the Peſtilence, 849,2. 919,a, 

604,e.684,k.to0g,c.107F,Þ. | | 

 Tobreake I adhd 147,c.i609,f. 

Todiſſolue and cure Peftilenriall carduncles,$49,b.1 009, f, 

Againſt Peſtilent feauers,382,b.668,b,684,k1031,b. 

Againſt Phegme atkog rpon the lavgy,297. 

Good againſt $80,b, | | 

To Jilſetue Phlegmons of the reals, Javiee, and rough arceric, 
1243 z£. [| 

Good for a Phzenticke man,356,e.1202,0, 

T» quiet a Phreaticke man,654,d,c, 

Toconſume away Phymata,1154,c, * 

Good againſt the Phrenbegz57,a.638,e. 

78,2. | 

Good to limne icures with, 1 24,0. 

Tocure the Piles,530, 669,c,0.728,e. 

To ſtop the fluxc of the Piles,8 5 8,2.288,x,530,2. 

Tg open the Piles of the fundament,q10,b,$80,c, 

Tocure the Pilling off ofthe hairc, |90,c. 199,k, 949,9-6742Þ. 
696,i.985,c.1016,0.1252,h, = | 

Torake away Pimples of the face,765,fg:341,c.1133,r 1293 t, 

Totake away the Pin inthe cie,1019,c,1037,n.1120,g.13 Flgbs 

To open the Pipeg,64$,2.984,c.112þ,2,b. 

Toclenſe the Pipes of the Jungs,133,h.954,c. 

A remedie for thoſe that Piſſe in bed; 72,5. | 

To helpe Piſſing by drops,57,3.9 44,0,45234. 1376.£, 

Good againſt, or to ſtop Pifling of blond, 215,c.378,5.744,d. 

' $074b.342,0.452,94 54,4677 fr046,c.1 24432,Þ.137 5,b. 

To cauſe one to Piſle freely, 888, 2.89 gakg95,c.578,c. 

Good the hot Pille;a98%,o. | | 

Tocauſc haireto grow on bare and pild Places,985,c, 

Good for Places our of itvint,770,0,| * 

Good againſt the $20,c.$47,2-$82,b. 478,23. {#356 
$99,2.604,e.668,b.to75,p. LB 2! 

A preſeruatiue ro keepe one from the infetion of the Plague, 
and codriveiccurit hebeinfefted therewith, 125, i, 8472. 


Fg no 2 4 8-4 | 

Singular good for aP 11,8815,b.587,c.1009,F, 

Todriue the yenome of the Plague from the hart and other vi- 
tall or ſpirituallparer, $815,c 668 


Good for the Pleurtſie, 300,a. 57240. 63532. 9g0b,e. 1243,b. 


 n256,c.1257,8, | 

Good againſt an old Plevrifie,8 54,d702,].1121,i, 

A medicine fot the Pleurifie,318,f.1619,c.1073,8. 

73 Pda ares + ogy ru | 
the ſinall Pork, $0442.53 5:8-657,0.104446-1325,h, 


' 


Table of the Natures,Y ertue and Dangers. 


1317, 

To heale the French Peckes,1004,cao0cg,k. - | | 

What doth eaſe for atimetheFrench Pockes, yer nor perfcAlic 
curerbemw,287,L | | 

To preferue a man from being Poiſoned, 557,e. 

hy phone's 9a Poiſon inwardlie raken,q415,b.563,c. | 

Good againſt all poiſon, 787,b,249,2.851,9. 839,b882,2. 287k. 
8991.3 290.33 1,0-357,4,95 2g. $40,8.537;c.b95,b. 698,b, 
996,3.1009,d.1069,a,c.i1r152,c.190,0.1223,0.12 81,, | 

A remedic againſt Puiſon of ferpents, 29,c. 875.e.952,2.578,4, 

Againſt deadly Poifons,198,c.535,b.698.2.1065,b.1281,n, 

To Oy 45;b. $62,c 847,b.z01.e.87520,0,350,b.352,4. 

$49, 25 . _e | 

To refiſt,or be an enimie to all colde Poiſons,140,a.86:,b.8:0,n, 
847;b.735,0.1252,0.1282,y.,1342,4.,1257,2., 

Aremedi: againſt deadly Poiſon g751,4.945h.542,h 1075p. 

Todraw the Poiſon of a plague fore from the hact and other in- 
ward or vitall parts,$11,2.815,c. | | 

To refit or withſtand poilon, 941,b.603,2.649,c, £77,9. 684k. 
1075,P, | 

Good againſt all Poiſons of venemors beaſts,5 99,2; 

Good againſt the diſeale Pohpus,inthe noſe,3 22,2, 

To take away the diſcaſe called Pohpue, in the noſe, 854,). 


Good apainſighe French Pockes,. 930, 3. 463zb, 705,c.5;6,h. 


624,09 II 86,c, 

A ſingular Popmleon,q12,f. 

To open the Pozes,51739, 

To helpe the Poſe.926,d. | | 

A . againſt a corrupted or peſtilenc aire, 141,c, 
1328,c, | 

A Prcſcruative againſt birings of al maner of wild beaſts, 

A Preſcruatiuc againſt the infe&ion of the plague,1 252.0, wy 

A Preſeruative agoinſt all venome and poiſon,1328,c,5 57,c. 

The Pzeſcruing of Grapes awhole yeere,728,n, 

The Porfit and diſprofic of them,bid.g. | 

To draw our | 1548+ | 

To ſtay the (ſpreading natuce of Preygium,r292,d, | 

To helpe thoſe that be entred into aPtilicke,11 5,9. | 

Excellent good againſt the Prificke, 795,c. 883 8.51 4,f.563,4 4 

_987,b.1134,m. 122 3,c.1248,b. | - Reb. 

To cure the Prificke,1 174,b. 

A Dultis for all mancr of ſwellings,r1035,a, | 

Tocure made with (harp prong weapons,288,7,2, 

To facren Pullen, and cauſe them ro lay ſtore of egges, 1069,h, 

To cure t:1c Pumples of the face or nole,765,f,v. | 

To Purge choler and wateriſh humors mighuly, 47,b.50,4. 

- 766,2.35%3.467,9,638,h.,718,2.,1235,bf.1238,p. 

To Purge by fiege and vrine,g38,2.720,2. 

To Purge choler and rough flegme by fiege, F3,b. 116,2.897,8. 
$99 ,0,450,c.467,2.689,c.724,4.972,4.121 8,a,1235,b, 

Topurgethe Belhe,q1o, a 733,g.776,07 £6,f,250,0.252,0.,314.M, 
fg82,9127,0.1182,",1246,f.1235,Þ.1259,g.1326,h, 

To Purge the belly mightily,779,b. 718.123 5,bJf. 

To Purge by vrine mig htily,54,i.689,d. 


To Purge by bege,924.b.724,92.1137,b.11 84,d, 


To Purge gently cholericke humors and ſlimic flegwe, 1 243,8. 

To Purge tough flegmaticke and rawe wateriſh humors by fiege, 
116,2.766,f $20,2, 899,c. 410,8.460,C. 722,2.7 24,2.1017,h, 
113 3,c,d,e, 1238,9,f,0. 

To Purge rough, grofſe, flegmaticke, and cholericke humors by 
vomite,407,2.41 5,b.638,b 689,9,c,d. | | 

To Purge the head ot raw flegmaticke humors, 135,d.619,d.ſee 
Head, | 

To Purge by vrine and fiege ſuch as haue the dropfic and iaun- | 
diſe,279,c,d, 

To Purge vpward and downward, 170,4.387,8.919,f.1286,2, 

To Purge thicke Hegmaticke and cholericke humors by floole 
and yomire,1287,a. | 

To Purge by vrine,738,b. | 

To Purge gently, 898,l, | 7 RE 

To Purge choler,flegme, and wateriſh humors by ficge and vo- 
wer 69+ 4 qi $8 

To Purge melapcholie,973,9: 

To Purge grofle flegme and cholericke humors, 770,m.&89.c. 

To foo downwards flegme, choler, and melancbolic, 827, 
460 63,2, | 

To Purge forciblie by omit wateriſh humors,choler,and flegw, 
638 ih 


of 


w4.2» 


4 
q 
A fam 
e 
To cure the Purplesin young children,10:9,4. 
, 
; 
1 
q 
( 
; 


| OOPEOI, the yellowe iaundaſe , and bad luers, 


$,e, 
agulas ad gentlc Purgation,12 
a <> me WR 359, £ 
b.1133f, 
Poon (- Purgation to curethedrophe, wth 50,a. 23,0. 
reg + $54292.420zC, 113226 ,0L0, 
x 


| tied Parger,4 196-10" 3s 


rly,769.2 ad I ER 
r Purger for all people,1 115,i. 
thoſe that are $270, 
$358 | 


ory Pur ro vio 


for thak 
3ood againſt the P 


'o make a perfet Purple colour,266,c. 

'o take away Pulyes,54 9,0,10FL,o113 3,r.132%h, 
 oheale Puthes in the etes,1234z!, 

'o rehiſt Putrefaction,$40,2.938,c.410,0.419,b.729,0, 
Good againſtPurrtfattion oi the iawes,677,c, 

[ 0 ſtay PutrefaQtion of the mouth,630,f, 


Q 


Unrtaine ague,689,f.1009,k. lvoke Agur quartaine. 
- To curethe Quartaine ague,849, k,Looke Ague, 

Alingular medicine againſt De Quartaines, 854,h.1009,c. 

A remedic againſt old Quartaines,179,2.463,2, 

To helpe the Queenes Euil called in Latine Sowme,217,d.looke 

| $ euill, 

A remedie againſt the venemous qualicie of Quickluer, 
$72,f. 

To cure Nuotidian 2agues, 1 184,8.1341,0. 

ſores Quatidian feauers,467,,4.134 1,4, 


R 


T* repreſſe the Rage of luſt,772,9. 
'To appeaſc the Kage of fretting tores and cankerous rkeers 


God x the Raines,: 243,c.1333-). 
£ remedie tor the running of the Kaines,g7,e 56 bars 2,2.404,2 
| 661,4,665,1,674,6,h,1000,h.tr 50a. 1182,h.1246,g, 1308,h, 
To helpe obſtrudtions of the Raines,3,d. 
To clenſe or purge the Raines,45 9,5.498,a, 
Gogd for the Raines of thebacke,1318,a, 
T 0 yoide gravcllour ofthe Raines,42 $,c. | 
A fitgular medicine for the ſtone in ce Raines, F725). 
Good for griefes of the Raines,63$,9.7 244d. 
The commodities of Raifins.72 9,2. 
TotorreR and take away the Bankenes of the whole bodice, 
| grarmecholes,rorg ,2,b,c.looke Smecll, Bodie, ay tb 
To kill Kats,357,c. 
To waſte away Rawehumors,y47,4.1073 jc. 
odr raw foorth gently by ſtoole crude and Rawe humors,t115,e 
for them that are full of Rawwe bumors,116,a, 
Todigeſt and bring vp Rawe bumors that lic in the cheſt, 138,d. 
20$,b, 


p zinſtRawneſſe of the tomacke,$843,2, 


+" 


F 


ohelpe the Redeum in children,248,c. | 
Totake away the Rednes of the face,855,c.845,f.288,r, 

To ſtay the Reds, 962,d 1082,k.1083zc, 11 58,b.1237b. 1309,b. 
| 1326 a. looke Flowers, 

A Kemedie for litches in the fide,$43,b. 984). 

A Remedie againſt biting of venemous beaſts, 250,e. 

A Remedie againſt ſoreheads, 1044,c. 

A Remedie for Gangrenes,1044,c, 

A Remedie againſt ſore heads in PE ee What 
ARemedic againſt griefe inthe ſideg843 ,b, 

A Remedie for the wild ſeab,r044,c. 

A Remedie for the gripings ofthe intrailes,770,f. 

A Remedic againſt dim cics,1974gh, 

A Remedie for all kindi of laskes,318,k.ro5o,b.1227,c, 

A Remedie for the biring of a mad dovgro8; fa089,a. 

A Remedie for ſtuffing ofthe lungs,770,t.869,0, | 

A Remedic for cheuraatiche and watering cics,41 2,4, $09.0. 


A Table of the Natare, Vertur, and Dangers 
A Purgation meere for thoſe that are troubled with choler, a. 


ro me 
PH ns Stars ,250,b, 
A preſent Remedie for the «2m of neofio duce] 
| TY oY LAT oh encas.-y 
1303,d,c. Fr. 
A Reledie againſt an ol{ quartaine 


: Againſt ſharpe and thin Rheumes,11 49,9, 


PO ar rr ye pifſc in bed,72,8,. ' 

emedic againſt poiſon, 847,2. 949,i.422,d. 198.574, 9c. 

1066,4.1154,b.1199,h.1227,t.1308;e.13 28,c. b 

A Remcdiec for the cankers ua the cies called in Greeke Carcine 
maia,z5 0gk, 

A preſent Remedieagainſt the ſtone, r092,h, 

A tout raigne Remedie againlt venowe, 8750. 

To provoke Belſt,791,c. | 

Good helpe thoſe thatare readie to faint tor lacke of Reft, 

m7; 

Reſtozatine ro the bodie,1174,b. 

Good againſt Rheumeg,349,2,648,2. 

To bdJpe or cure Kheumes,926,0, 

Topirge Rhcumatike ——_ outoftheh:ad,no7gh.. 


To flay the Rhenmiſmaia, that is fluxes of humors, fo "a 
loincs,6,f. | 


Good deviaſt cold Rheumes,747,2.*9 5,b.288,n;1112,F. 
To ſtay Rheumes that fallinto the 12wos and tecth, 2244;6%)) jþ.49 
Good againſt the Kheume that falleth in a ke po 


2$7,1.2538,n.1223,c. 


's 5 


Todric vp the Rheume 860i a 167,a, 

Toſtop orkeepe backe Kheumes, 5 24,9. 1037,p:1367,2. 1190, 
I1314,C 134234. 

To _—_ R:cumes that diſti] from the braines j into che lngr, 
29 9zC yi) 

Again Rheumes thar fallintotheeics, 288,r, | 

Tocwre the Rifteg of th: fundament,790,g 371;anzoaf, | 

To cure the Riftes in the palmes of the hands and feere, 
aMinitic with the Frenek diſcaſe,69.,b.8+5,d. "0 

To g/tc togither Rifres about the vaines, hnewes, and tendons, 
11444. 

Totake away the Ringing ſound in the cares, 8$60,h. 706,2. 
I1055,C,117248. 

Good againſt Kinzwozmes,657,2.3 18,h, 

Totak: or (coure 2Way Yes mes,141.£747,0. $270," 

Toheale Ringworwes,728,c.527,e.1 37690, 

Good againſt or to ends Kottenncs. 340,s £93,c, 


For Rottennes or rotting of the lungs, 1128,1.1174;b. 1 248;b. | 


1260,k, 


Torake away Roughnes of the roongin hor burning feaucrs, 
11::9,2, 1265, 


Torake away Roughnesof the throte, 142,c.6 3 Fa6$4.d792,0, 


1120,2,1149,3.13 740. 

Good againſt Roughnes of chebladder,787,d, 

To malhbe Rouzhnes of the breaſt,1 31bs. 

To helpe the inward KRuggednes ot the ciclids,qro,f. 

To take away Ruggednes of the windpipez701,2, 

Good for Ruggednes of the skin,178 | 

To take away Ruggednes of the Jungs,r315,b.1z1 8,413 34.6, 

Tocure all Roughnesof the 1kigg-408,0.1243,Þ, 12389,k.1 pow 

Tocauſe Rumbling in the tomacke,r 115,j. 

To cure Running of the eies,1305,b. | 

To ſtay the Running of theearcs of long contingance, 799, G 
I1'$2,2, 

Good for Ruptures, 54h. 327,8.455,2.457,Þ. 50g,c. $17, 
661,c,i.1026,b. + 

Good for Ruprures i inyoong children,997,0.680,a, 

Good for inward Ruprures,r25) $54, 

Againſt Rupeures in yoong children,g 84,]. 1026, h, | 

Tocvre Roprores and burſtingsof the rim, $29,d, | 

To helpe or cure Ruprvres,85,b.,793 b'8-2,b, 8;9,6.291,f958,5. 
446, e514,2,64$,c,1147,c.11 $6,c.129 $,g. 

Aremedie ro curegrcat Kuptures chat hauc be:ne of loogcon- 
tiquance,7 934d, 


$>> 


$ 
Gre for thoſe that be ad, 527,d, 
fo driuc away Sadnes,560,a,4,654x0;0, 


A Table of the Nature, Danger, andVertuce. 


_Gwod and boleſome for Hallades, 382, 
Forthe @altnes of humors,1127,k.1 
An exccllent Salue to curewounds's 
$,239,b, | 24A 
A tocure apoſtemes, tumors, greene wounds, ingeterate 
vicers,burnings,hurts,vr cuis of rhe licad,: 32$5,a, 


A Salve tor many good purpoles,255,2. 


36 148,32. = 


An excellent Salue to incarnate or bring vpfleſh in deepe hel- 


low wounds and vIcers, 4314. 52.4... | 

Todiffolue clutrered Sand,and driveit foorthgi8g,c, 

Todriuetoorth Sand,760.2.louke Graueli, ; 

_ Todriuc foorth Sandof the kidneies, r240,0, 

Tocure pert: ly all maner Saucetiegme,765,F. 1099, y 

Good for Sauce,y5,9.142b-185 a. 188,2.190,2, | 

A pleaſant aud bolciome Sauce tor mans bocie,gz,c. he 1,2, 

Tocure ſpreading Srabs,72,0. | 

Totake away or hc al Scabs,827,e,z12,c,188. h.314,f4: oobdand. 
5 ogy $0,1,9720,9.728,c.7 36,0. he 116,f.1 Nets ets 
I255,4. | 

To helpe Scabbed headsin children 141,29. 

To cure the Scaby of horſes and kane 125 5,d, © 

TohelpeicurmeScabs,; 12,c.z14,t. | 

Profitable again(t Scabs ofthe han, 938. 287,f. 298,y. 9302, 
795,ha 2876. * 

To take away Scabs of the gin in i: ces time,1223,h, 

Tocure ailmaner Scabs of the bodicyq 14,f, 

Good for Scabsot the bladder,t ws 

Tocurerunning Scabszacs,d, 

Tocure Stabs nt! ecprroras 42506. K 

For thoſe thiat be Scabbed and have filthic skinsgo7 5,2. | ; 

Againſt Sccalding »£ the vrinc, 1174.9. 1308,h. | 

- Tobcale Scalding with ole or Waker, 42,3.24243; 278.4 188,2, 
291,k.,1099,2. 

A medicine wy Scaldings in the priuic partes of mat 
or woman,45,f. 

Good againſt Scaldings, 91,c.288, gi 433zÞ. 625, 05 C0. 
1210,b.1235,). 1238,c.1265,k. 1:05, ; 

Totake away hcate of Scalding by water or cile,r 35g). 


Tocure all maner of Scaldings, 278,2.297 k638, g. oy 708 2, 


1099,Þ,1273,b. 
To take away Dcales,1252,c, | 
To help the Scales of the head, 34,ep85ge,1 Q1 6.6583 0277x, 
To draw fuorth Scales,698,c. | 
. Toclenſe away dric Scales,b60,c,. ; 
Toake away blacke Drarres of the! okin,$11,b. 
To take away Scarres,188,Þ, 29! jo. 
To fcourc away Scarre$ta ihe pinuic party, 027,m. 
Tocaulc Scarres, $1 752. 
To make Scarres 1n woun,s faire 2nd well colaureda oY, b, 
Geodatainftriic Sciatiee,689,t. 1$2,4.1 $L,c. 190. h. 7494ti1 97A, 
188,x. 357435 $7,b 578,c.625,0.996,5.1073,2.1129,4. 
To atlwage, icurc or helpe the Sceita, 799, 195,C,0.; 207,42, 
210,3.219,4, 85 4,0. $97%c. $4434.422,0,453 10443 PgeR: 
, 706,c,d.1125,29, 1137,0.7393,0 ys 
Againit Dcolapenders,5 534. * * *! 
Good againſt the diſcaſe called the Scorvur, 201,4.32 6. 
Good againſt the ſea $e02pion;s 5 240. 
Againſtthe baings & ſtingings of Sqorpions, 454.7 BE, 1.819,2, 
266 ,b,924,3.949zC,551.3.57 2,9. 648,c = 2,41129.0 1 252,y. 
Togatic thule that arc tungeot the poop to teele "fs paine 
at all,54$,h. | 
To preſeruc a man from being 0anger Scorpions,957 n 1075, 
O, 1129; 
A remedie for hole cher be w_ of the Scorpion, 23 6 267,34. 
382,2.551,%,2009,2,1075,Þ. 
How the Scurpion becommera dull and ſenſclefſc,and bow he is 
delivered from the lame,$19,2.9:6, 
Toſtaic Scuurtny inthe cholerick pailion, 5530. 
To ſtop Scourmys vpward and dowigware, 137 8,d, 
To cure Srratchea,5©74". 
An approouced remevie 2gainl; | Sereffonzer, or the ſxelliog in the 
throte,97,c. 
C:o0d againſt the Swropbulzr.53 0,2, lee herd heraet. 
Tohelper! the Senrffe of the he3d,34,c.409,4.101 6,b.r027,r. 
Toclenſe away Scurfie,60,c.926,c.q08,0. 985.c. | 25346 1297,C 
T acureleprous and naughtic Scurffe,72,0.125 5,9. 
Tocurethe naughric Scitfie of the head, Fea 092 eas 54. 
To takt away the $eurffe inchuldre 141.8, 


"ls klihie vicwwaFne 


Tobealerbedric 
Tocure the white Seurffe,123g,ka 305,e. 


Tocurethe white Scuffeofrteheac.qos,d, 1289, k, 


Totake away Scurtte of the kings 

To helpe or cure the diſeale called rhe Seuruie, 189,d, 195, 
201,4325-3.463 10.497,0.1 1979424 

Toca(c thuſe that be Note 2 wh 4 

To conſume and ſcoure away work Scuruineſſe of the 4 
face, 147,2.1328,h, = 

Againſt Scuruinetſc,504,9 hae: 

Tobring downe or driuc fdorth the Scouting: 141g, 147... 
188,0,762,2. $83,0.#91,h.282,f, $65,b. 897b. 459,2.546,2. 
563 ,0,564,2.607,2.652,4,1096,3.1223,8, 1" : 

To = pellihe Secondineinmoit ſpeedie _— 147,}. $47. 

17,0: 

To ingender Deede,1c 47,2, 

To top the oucriluwing of the "Ly rhe 09 RR 

Toincreate Scedeyr 31,0.198;b 754.0 85 8;a665;e; 117 4;d. 


To healerhe Scurfie,743,2.408,4.1207,h, | 
Scurttc,995,b. 


| To cure the inuoluntarie flowing of the Sebde in men, $3zc. 


661,9.674. 1.993.Þ. 11 $0;a.. 

To ceftrowe naturall Seede 7444h. 

Todric vp the Seedeg572,b 674,0,t.1076,t.1202,2, 

1ocooleand quenchnarurall cede overmuch,z42,h.ro75,r. 

To ſtay the 1nvoluntaric courſe of naturall Secge in man of 
Woman. 997, b. 

To comfort and delight che Senſes, 30,e,73 $.4:88,c. 

To make the Seal $quick apd hucly, 124,2644,0073 $,b.1110,a, 

To comfprethe inwars Senſes,1122,0, 

Todullrhe Senſes x3.5,m., 

Tocure the difeaſe called $erip/gn,fg,b. 

To preſetueſrom the flingingor hurcc of Derpents,659,2 PI 
1074,0.11 29,Þ.,1281,p. 

Againſt fimgings or _—_ Serpents, 29 ©.47%Ye. Fog b 74:2, 
149,4./7Ft,a, $82,9.314;d. $69,4.322,2.35290.355,32.949,). 
$19,023 2X35 055390 SS7,0-562,0, 72,8, 576gC. 573,d. 
$86,1, 624,c. 649,*." 659,%. 665,c,4.t98,2. 989,4.1009, f. 
101990, e635 ,b.1154,b 1180;h.1:0:2,c.1327,0, 


To h<tp4! thole that arc bireen of Serpents, and ſpeedily ro alaic 


the paine,18 2,3.576,c. 1450,d,. 

To driue/away Serpents,949, 2.333, c. 391 f9.429,b. $42,":5572. 
679.3 p89, 175,0.1199,f,1202,c.1:39,b,c. 

To cure Shakings of the woints declining to apaulſic,oa7,f, 

6 remedictortolde Shakingsgc anſed of thicke homors,1154,c, 

To take away the Shakiazs of che ague prielently, and cuic the 

+ lameg1'2 $2,v. 

Totake away the Sharpnes of vrine, 1257,1 519.4. 

To remper Shar pnes of chuler,702,4, 

To mirigare the Sharpres of humors, G61,f, 

1148,1. 132441,7:9,d, 

To dulizþe ſh:rpnes of thinne kumors,1260,k, 

Norſome to Shepe,4: 4c. 

To kill Sher pe.622,C. 

To ror Sheepe 646,12, 

Good aj ain ortokithe Shingles, $39,9.261,b, \. 269 ,8bC- 
41 2,3,1051,k,q. 1074,k, 1 50zc 1207 FE 

To hcalo broker Shins, 436;c. 

Torike 9w3y Shmeringsof agues,5 57,2.b.854,h. 842, 0.949, 
$57 ,4h:09 85% 

Torr $hwers out of the leth,698,c. 

Aegan Shozrnes of breath, 47 $4. 1374, 1913 b, 744,37 $444. 
766,c Þ56,,, $93 .2.318,%, $50,d. $97,2. $99.8. 436,2.459,4. 
45 5.by $32.9. $301, o34g. g985,b,1c65,4.11 21,0. 1154,. 
124% c.1 25740. 

Good for Shortnes of breath vpon 2 colde canſe,1072,d, 

Az ant the Shotof venemous da1ts and arrowes 85 4,1, 

Againſt the bring of the mouſe called » Sh2ew, 14th. 

Tohelp+ &hunking of fnewes, ,42,d Go, B5y4,e.29 1,0 899, 
949,2 1436,3,445,h,040,f,616,b1016,3.546;c. 

Aganifl thetalling Sdicuneg or ail, 102, 68 $4,£839:58 970M 

' $99.1 357.2.379.b.6 54,{.698,f. 

oo cure > he BI Sicknes, B56,c, 339,c. $93,9 462,b, 475,84. 


I121k, 1265,k, 


Acre ibefalliogSicknesj in yoong childreo,832, 394,c.460.8 
498,b. | 


To wooue a bring downe the ratura!! or defired Sicknes of 


—_ gd 749.c ,760,b, 770,r882,2, $19,b. ws 


CC ETEESSTARNLEICIEN 


AT blesf the Natares Yertae ind Dangers.” 


| 8,c86;c)4,c919,0957,0,42,2.0, 428,2.4 57,9 5272. 
| $3599-$5 52d. $5728. $69g6. 616,c,648,a. 02942,b., 10724. 
\ XaL0ght GENS | 
Tocurethe greene-Sicknes,201, b.3 14;{438,c. 
Tobring ont. rhe deſired Sicknes of yoong maidens,630,2 
Good ro coole a Sicke bodieyz21,d. 12524f, 
To comfort great]y the Sicke,473,b. 
To comfort and nourith Sicke feeble perſons, r2g6,e, | 
To trength-<a thoſe rhar hauc beene biphwot a long liogeriog 
; diſeale,#96,a. 
To ſtopthe inordinate courſe of the mombly Sicknes,  748,b. 
 $03,84.293,).318,1.323,b.661,hrog $;c,1291,2, ' | 
Good aganſt any pe<ttilent Sicknes, 535,85 
A remedie for the turning Sicknes,770,h, | 
Tohelpe the Sicknes called the forgerfull-evill,56,e. 
To helpe rhe pains inthe Hidez9 19,2.445,1.53 $,2.563,a.556.4, 
| $96,4617,8.698,b. 9 84,1. 996,c.1257,k.1291,b.1300,4. 
Good againſt inflammation of che Side,701 go. 
Againſt the painc inthe Side, 432.5744. 69,4.87,0.$43,0.399,4., 
$65,2.899,9-445,1.460,d.53 $,2.61748. 
To purge by Siege ſluwic flegine and (harpe.humors, 10072, 
1219,2. 
For Sighings,t 160,d. 
To cale thole that arc giuen toouermuch Sighing,540,b, 
To preſerue Dight, 877,4. $37,424 
Fo mcrcale or reftore the Sight being feeble andloft,537,9, 
To take away things which hinder: the Sighr,  438,4d. 1026,2, 
| 1206,C. 
Tohelpe the dim-Sigited,49 5,c-53 2,b.looke dimnes, 


| EffcQuall againſt the darknes ofthe Sights 5,a.888,c. 
| Toquickenorclecre the hghr,855,c. $58,b.288,5., 887, d. $33,c. 


\ £68,4, 90 2,2, 537,Az,>,c. 563 27,9. 695,09, 73 $0. 10350, 
| JO7 499 THT G reli f 2,30.1 17 24h.13 24th, 1 347,013 54,0 
To dull the Sight, 138, $38,2.1305,f298;£. 
Good for wounds, prickes,& hurrs ofthe Dinewed»1, k,1037;1 
Good againſt the i:.firmities of the Sinewes, 897,11,635,8, 


| Goad againſt the lovſenes of the Sinewes,770,0.6;8,a . 


| Tocure wounded finewes, 149,9. 

| Goodts heate ard ſupple the Sinewes,1210,c, 
; To ſtrengthen the Sincwes,53,4424,b,d. 

| To comfortthe Smewer, 13 17,5 

| Good for the Sinewes, 250,k. 


'{ Hu:rfullro the Sinewc $y1050,]. 


| Togleworioine & conſolidate Sincwes cutin ſunder, togither, 


1 L£4,2,147,2, 1148, 2.11 60,4, 


| To ftais the wee ping of cut or huce Sinewes,ſee Weeping, 
| Good to ſoften the hardnes ofthe Sinewes,147;d, | 
| To mo the diſeale calledin Latine Singuiaw, that is Yeoxing, 


' $91,t, {ce Hicker. 


| Totake away the Dkarres of the faceg7 20,0. 

| Tp alaiethe fervent hear and ruggednes of the Dkin, 178,h. 
To cleaſe the Skin from pimples and Lenrils,t257,i. 

| Toarendor clenſe the Skin 1a the face,i88,h. 

| Torarifie rhe skin,6: 7,8. 

| To make the skin (mooch and faire;765,C.2 14,4. 

| To rak= away skarres of the Skin,7 22,c, 

| Tocauſethe Skin to ſwell and bliſter, 81 5,2, 


Againſtthe roughnes ofthe Sking21 4,2, 
is = away the yellow neg formic of the skin, 44442, 
Againſt ſcabs, or ſach lik f the Skin, 738,b.287,f.57 5,4. 


| To take awa & freckles, ſpots, and other biemiikes of the skin, 


754,b559,0.1259,, 


| Torake away morphey and blacke ſporso0n the skin,$27,e, 
| To ſcoure away deformities of the Skin, 759,h, 444,24, 696;i. 


\720ge, 722,0,736, d. 


| Good av2inſt the diſcaſe called tbe Sbyzdy,195, v. ſee Scuruy. 
| Toproucke adcfirero Digerpe, 3 2b. 


T6 proucke Sleepe cently,lette by a hot & dry diſteper,702,b, 


; Toprocure or provoke ſlec -P&z 5 3,Þ. 66,2, 791,c., 24! z4.+$4,C, 


298,23 ,g,h,c,m,858,0.643,0.108 2,0. 


| Tohelperhe lacke of Slcepe, 222,9,702,0. 

| Tocauſean ynquiet and deadly Sleepe, 234,d. 
 Toſhake offheauic and drow:... Sleepe,t 24,2. 349,m, : 
| Towaken him that is fallen into a dead Sigepe;35 6,9.8 bogs 


To proucke overmuch Sleepe.135,m. 


To cauſea ſweere,ſaund and quiet Sleepe,674,8. 182,6.13704 


Tocaft inro a dead Slice pey270,b, 
Coodfor thoſe that are (et codead Sleepesyg3 5aCs 


Ll hr we —_— wee INE 

ore k 1s 2 ” 

Ta econde the ranke Smellof the acmcholes 

1013,byc. 

To Tq rake ana the rank $melofthebody& 
Oy pos rag." 121 pra | 

To drive awa $nakes,388,c, 

nezingsſ342.357,0 ra rgorntbe 

Doles of 


Tu proucke ; | 

19 purge chap+dr niftes inthe eſantys that nekin 
tothe {cabutNaples,859,F, 

Toclenſe old hlhie Do3es,749,0.897 ff, 

T gheale vp hollow Sores,349.A. 

Good againſt Sorenes jat the throte,74 riaabe36. 


Again} fretring Sores,504,2, [34 
Todrawand healc Sores quick!y in children & ol people,69,h. 
Toheale deepe ſores,410,d. | 
Tumollfc and fofren the Soresof the mother,790,8, 
To hcale feftered Sores of the ciclids, 11522, | 
Tohealc Sores of the mouth, 10923, 
= againſt ſpreading Sores,132 8,h. 

eale juch Sores of E fundament and ſeerer __ as weal- 

H od paſt all cure,q10,d.507,e. 

Toicure Sores in childrens meuths,1299,A, 


lomundific and cjenſe old fliinking and corrupt Sores m1 


_ thewg897,f911,4b.507,8, 

Toronfumncor waſte away plague fores, 5 $6," 587,c. 

1oheale Sores of hard curation,,273,b.410,d. 

Tofcourc away Sores of the headgr2 27Ff, 

Toheipe Sores of hard curation on the plandulous partof the 
yard,278,b, 

To ſcore cunning Sores of the head, 1027). rogue Achores 

For cating ſores in the corners of the cies, 117 8, hut 179,d. 

Forrunnin” lores in the headsof yoong childreng1t074,ke | 

To heale Sores of the ſecret parts of man or woman,1092,h, ..- 

To ſtaic orkecpe backe eating Sores,72,4,687,4.1051,q, 1186,4 

Very good for a plagu: Sore, to draw the venometrom _— 

. andinward parts,811,2,515,b, | | 

Godd to cienſe rotten ſores,1 31,C.507,d.r 050,0, | 

To afſwage the rage of fretting Sores, B39, g, | 

To fill vp hollow {ores 1050,0, | 

To cure cuill Sores of the paps ,dugs,and matrix, 751 "Y 

Good for ſores of the bladder,1n120,c, 

To driue away all S0zrowe,599,c.654,2.1116,t, 

To take away Sorowetulnes proceeding of mlancholie , tak 
1160zc,0, 

Torak: away Dounding inthe cares, Eco, 'J 19556. 173). 
144232, 


To j ſtore loſt Sperch vnro thoſe which are taken wich the 


dumbcpavific and apoplexi*,33242.,1016,d.1111,0.1 Re oe 


To increaſe Sperme that is naturall ſe d.13 1.6. 


Good againit Hpct;ingofblood,go7,b.qz6,2.40,f300,. | 

Good agairiſt Sp<triny, of blood, caulcd of ſhape and {ak by- 
mors diſt ling, 1208, i, 

Good againſt Sperting of corrupt and rotten matter , Gu 
665,4,1121,4.1035,C.1256,C, | 

TocuncoRt Spertle,7 2936. 

To ſtopor cure Sperting of blood, 748,b. for b. 215,c, tak 

890,0,1.314,0-318,2,0,599,4 340,0d.419,0.452,4.454,2.563,4. 

$78,92.661,2.665,a,t.736,c.987,baozs,b.tig2,s. 1121,i.1458,b, 
1184,m. 1186,a, 1190,k1i206,2,1227,b, 1244,4,Þ, 124720, 
1257, kt 1260,k,1 263,g,h. 1264,..1334,0.1375,b. | 

To proyuk: Spertting,z06;b. 

To procure eafic Spettyng,! 121,kn20,a.7 29,0,1256,c. .r328,b 
Againſt rhe bitings ofthe - Dpider,called Phalarginm, 321.4 5,2. 
10t,2.363 ,b.$33,9,949,C.964,4,1009,f OE INY 

For flinging of Spiders, 107550, | 

To make the vital Spirits freſh and tech ,10h8. 1082;2. | 
To ſixengrhen the vieall Spirits, 560g. | 
Tecoole and retreſh the farming ſpirits, 1 339,b, 

To refreth or revivethe Spirits,30,e. $45,C. p 

To quicken the Spirits and make them more lively, r my 
To helpe the Spleneific be waſted, 279,c.307,f, 


A remedic for thoſe that have cuill Splcenes, 470, 5 0b745.9% 


869 ,4,708,2.970,2.1246,b, 
Again(t paine ofthe Spleene,$7,2.749,c.318,2.728;e, 
To ay the ſw ceiling ofthe Spleene,51 4,e- 


246,b., 


ATubbrf dann 
To helpethe $ 


pleene ourre with grofſe blood, 938, d. 

Againit hardnes of the Spleene, 57,c.744,4.749,c,t.31 $,9.395,9. 

$ Len deed 1195 ,a,f.1327,01346zc.. | 

To dimunih or waſte the Splecne,898,L11 95 b. | 

To open the ſtoppings of the Spleene, 1 37,9.738,f502. Fe 
8$62,2.847,c.3 1822-4372. 444,b. 46338. $63,3.996,0. $0! 
1223, 2.12244W.1246f.1 257gk.1259.b.1:89,f. 

Todraw foorth fixed in any/part otthe bodie, $493. 
_ $6,2.897,f. $99,m.445,m. 495,2. 6 274d. 638,i. 652,0, 6pdc. 
720,0.722,e.1066,d. 

Totake away or clenle Spots ia ihe face, 115,h 765,h. m"_”—_ 
$88,b.3 26,d.1133,r.1158,h1194b.* 

Totake away Spots,q45 0.132 8,h. | 

Totake away blacke and blewe Spors > the face, 8sh.u 193 ze 

© P55,c.841,e.318,a, 

To take away Spors ofthe cies called lt atjne Albugines,14 026.2 

Totake away the Spors of the skin , 75490. 1133,f. lm 
1382,0, 

Toclenſe away Spors inthe cie,6 $4.4.695 ,d.706,ec. b | 

To take away blacke and blewe Spors [gotten by ftripes'ar fas, 

758,5.881,2.318,2.410,f.5 57,e.720,8.1937,Mm. 1044zE. 12234, 

Toi take away blacke Spors of the skin,$27,c, 1052.0. | 

_ Topurge white ſportines of the skin,$ 59,0, | 

Toſcoure or take away Spots of the face and to make iefaite md 
ſmooth,845 d.288,t.293 ,0.720,c,7319].1257,m.1298,f1349,0, 

Totake away all foulc and ilfaucured! ew in any part of the 

.  bodiez1o016,e. 

Tohelpe Squats, $49,c.130 4,2 looks Bruſes. 

Toeale the Hquinancie or Dquincie, $60, 938,i.1 wo. 

= hejpe the Squinancie,z18,fþ $2,c.557,9-702,t,u.11 z8,e. 

againſt the Squinancie in calldryng3 94iCs - 

My pure white Dtarch,686,ec. 

| Tocuterhe Stench of the moutlF324,s 1110,d. | 

To take away the Stench ofthe armetwles,looke ranke ſaell 

Totake away the Srench of che breath 1 110,d.1281,% | 

Good for Stifnes of the ioinrs, 1207 ]. 

Againit Dtinging of ſerpents, 29,c. 149,2.3 14,d. 863, d. 352zC, 
355432335 ,0.520,2,65 2,d.1065,b.1075,0.1200,2. | 
Good againſt the Stingiog of Scorpitmes 786,2, 267,24 92448, 
949,c,1075,01282,y, 

Good for or to healethe Stinging of 1 venemous beaſtes,. 266,b, 
35224. $195, $42,254 8,b.551 4. $ogh.586, d. $87,c.1069,f, 
1208,37,1223,d, 

Good againtt che Stinging of all mand of wilde beaſts,851 35. 

Good againſt the Dtinbing of the breach, proceeding of a 
naughtic tomacke,410,b, 

Good againſt Stitches,43,0 &9,2.87þ. _ 94,1. 

Good 32ainſt the Stitch in the fide, 109 3,9. | 

Togake away the Stitchin the fide with the paines hereof pre- 
ſently,908,e.,624,8-1 17040. | 

Good againft the Stichof rhe cheſt, 1673,d. 

To cure the diſeaſe Stomacace,; 25,9 Jopke Scuruie, 

Todrie _ caſe the Stomacke,- 35,8 $5539b. Fs ny Wie 
1082, 

Delightfull ro the Stomackeg379,9 bito57,9. | 

Tocomfort a weake aad treble Sromacke, 222,0. 833 jb. 1031,2. 
10823 ,n. 

An a a medicine for a windie and cold Sromache 266538, 

Tobreake winde of the Stomacke,46,2.892,c. 

Good tobe laid ypon an hot Stomacke,702,c. | 

Againſt cruditie or rawnes of t rhinack, 843, 1073,6.2083,0. 

Topurge the Sromacke of waterilſh hyumors, 13 58,9. | 

Goodfor bad or ill Stomacks,z52,b.t065,9.1334,de |! 

To cauſe 2 gyod Stomacketo meare,s78,c.ſec Appetite. 

Good for an hor Sromacke,r232,b.r275,b.t324,c. | 

Good againſt the toppings of the Ftomacke,z52,e. ! 

A comfortable purging medicine fof the. Stomacke,41 4,6 

Hurrfull ro a weake and colde Stomicke,1232,9, 

Good for fuch 2+ haue'a ſower, ſquamith, and wateric Stomacke, 
$42,i.1082,k.1227,e. 


To cure or eaſe paites and griefes of the Stomacke, ,d.288,n . 
$13; $78,:.93$8-947,e. 546d. [5 458. 1073,0.1 223 bot 
ries'or TD: 


x 


away of e all vent 


ke,35 849d hok es | 
TotFay or take away lothſom 
r044,i.,! 207,c.1266,0. 


FX 1346, 


Good, holcſome, and profitable 


| Tobreakethe Stone in the kidncies 

nes the Stomacke, 4g. 933,d. 

| Tocurethe Stone and voide grouell, 891, f hee mag. x 3d. 

Tocoole the heat of the Seomarkfla,eax.f 941,d341þ.4t9,a | 
for the Stomacke 


, 4 6a | 


rem Daverrs. 


$66,4.871,2.979,b.526,2.5 $3,2.649,c;i.729,0. 10F7,b.rogt b. 
1120. 1242,2.1244,C.1263;2.1266,b.1314,b1324.4.” 
Hurefull tothe Stowacke,65,a,131,d,c.138, 5's cf Þ. 
$73,3-691,b. 718,a,b.720,2, 1007,d. Hp 218;e, 123 5,6. 
q P29 wh 4p oo þ a os, 9 
 Tocuerturne ac $2.335,0,718,a,b.10 
Good for or to ramen apt fe} "rs 9 
T DR 0 cold 
owarme or heateacold Stomacke, 180,b.r90,a. 855,b.&gr,c. 
293,0.868,d. 907,c,553.h.596,2. 6 29,0.188,2,73 $4. 123.8; 
- 1370,C,1351,4.135 8b. 
Troubk ſome tothe Sromacke, 135,2.325,b.529,4.720,b1235,2. 
TI Stomacke, 907,c.1 252,4.1270,c,13 37;e. 1346,a. 
1349.d.135t,a, 
To comfort a cold Srowacke,868,4d, 1281,9.1349,c. 1358,b, 
To ” weake and feeble Stomack,: 184,00.1341,e.1 3499, 
135 
Againſt wambling of theStomacke,314,4 $78,c, $44,2, 
To dry and ſtrengihen afecble and moiſt Stomacke,69 2,4.,749, 
a. 735,0.1031,a.198:,k, 
To —_—_ a weake and feeble Stomacke, cauſed of heare, 
1270, 
To ſtay the watering of the Stomacke,549,a.1227,e. 
Againſt the weakfcs of the Stomacke, 317,2.998,2-733,8. 
To purge the Stomacke of fleyme and cuill huwors, 749,8. 
1027,n.1317,9. 
To conſume or helpe windinefſe and ſower belchings of the Sto- 
macke,895,a.8380,2,938,”. £44,2.616,c. | 
Good for the heate of the Stomacke, 765,9. 775,b.236, b. 269,2, 
941,d.11 20,c. 
To healethe pain and ache ofthe Stomacke,procceeding ofcho« 
' lergt17,a.554 2. 


- Topreſeruc the Stomackefrom obſtruftions & windines,1346,c. 


'To ſtrengthen the hot, weake and feeble Sromacke of ficke per+ 


ſons, 224,9.73 Joſe 
Good for weake and queaſie Stomacks, 1092 kr317,b, 


Torake away the gnawings of the Stomacke,procceding of a hot 


cauſc,z 2,b. 


Holſome for a moiſt andwarerie Stomacke,1 227,e. 


To coole an hot Stromacke, and helpcit when it is troubled with 
choler,z41,2.419,a,c.1 3 68,c. 

To cauſe the Stomacke brooke it meate,to723,C. 

Tocloſe vp the mouth of the. Stomacke,860,4, bh. 

To comfort and ſtrengthen the Sromacke, £49,4.829,e. 920. 
938,2,0.463,2.535 t.553,.725,9.732,0.101 3,9.103 1,a.1073,C 
108:,k1264,9 1264,b,c.1266,d.1324,f1352,4.1370,4.137 5,0. 

To alay the inflammation & hecre of the Stomacke,845,b.941,0, 

Good for a weake Stomacketroubled with choler,938,2.462 ,2. 

Singular good for the graucll and Dtone, 886,b.891,f, 4%6,b. 
$53,).1144,h.1182,9.12424c. 

A fingular compoſition againſt the Stone,45 4,0,c, 

A preſent remedie againſt che Stoneg1cg2h. 

To breake the Stone, 99249, 4244b, 428,c. 984,b,1c00a.to 35s 
1223,9.1206,e, 

Good againſt the Stone in the bladder,qzz 7,457%8. a87,0. 5726 
638,2.1066,c. 

Tobreake the Stone in the bladder and drive it foorth,to66,c. 

Exceeding good fer the Stone, 791,b.849,q 841,d 272,a.527;c. 
709,01140,2.1 147 2.1 2$2,2.1257,7.23,c.310,3,791,b#62,0, 

To afſwage the paine ofthe Srone,789,b,c 877,c,0. looke Paine. 

Good for the $rah of the kidneices, 775,0.845,0. 349,245 539+ 
1043,0.1066,b.1174,d.1 257,8-1328,n, 


' | To waſte or breake the Stonc,and drive itfoorth, 142d, 760,92. 


201. $64,b. $62,b.868,c. 424,b.473,2. \487,2.69 2,b.093,4. 
979,4.1133,m.1142,92.1154,4.1251,r,15 14,t,1375.0. 

Good far the Stone in thebe inning,8$33,0. 

To waſte away Stones in the kidneirs,1066,b.r097,8, 

To driuefoorth the Stone our of the kidneies and biedder,pab,c 
9794 984.b. 29.b. 142,0. 589,f.79 1b. 502,0. £96,4.87 4, 
1 


' To a9. ol hor ſwellings of che Stones, 14940-10730, 
| To ceaſe and cute the buzning heate or inflammations of the 


Stones,217,b89,c.198,c.:83 ,a.1037k, 10733 b, 
\ bladder, + —_ tt, 
428,c.546,2.979,2.1133 Þ. / 


Toprauoke tothe Dtole, {th 263,b,1007,4.108 
1184,d.2235,8. 


To. 


ks. 


A Table of the Nature Yertue aud Dangtry. 


| 
To voide by Stoole warerith & flimic humors $:0,2.718,0/724,9, A remedie for ſoft Swellings,736,a.rr6r;8,” | j! 
To purge cholerand fiegmeby theStoole, 738,c,743,2. 38 $52. To walterhe hard Swellimg chamile endplates, Bey 21074, # 
| 397133, To "take awaie the Snellings of the cods'or gennors, 908, v. e 
| Topungemichuly byStoole,7 13, | 035,4.12024c, kh 4L4F 
Good for Stoppings of the head,r 038, 7 | away any Swelling in the leg evra ap4 6.7 ns | N % 
Good avainit che Stoppings of the ſplcene,689,c.137,d.738,b,f "** d 


| 749f.868,9.869, b. 939,d, 394,342 p0e 3753047 ,0 Fh08, b. 
| Totake away Stoppiots,862,a.993,2, 
| , ToopenStoppingsof the —_ parts;846,d $54253.654,f1124,m 
Good againlt the | oY 2330.544h. 138,f. $66,>. $75,2, 
457 28-498,3, $3249. 5453355 Jul 6653i,69 3,3.1004z3.1052,i, 
1066,c.1192,c. 
A remedie againſ} rhe Strangurie, 198,c, 189,32. 762,2.3888,2. 
$91 ,2. $93,92.391,2. 497;0;0. 535. 551,b.979,a,1064,a,b. 
| Ii21,l.1182,b.i 86,12 $7,ki1276,e4303,b. 
| | _Tocofc the Strans uric, b91gf-891,0,333-8: 
| Lay; the Strangling and paines of the mother, $56,c, 
$822,tvb92,a. 
To ji * the Strangling of the Matrix. 92,6. 
Torecouer Dtrength,1174,Þ.1248,2, 
To reſtore Strength,1 33440, 
To hcaie Dtripes of the eres, 1037,0. 
An my oued remedic againkt Strummesor ſwellings in the throte, 


To AR the Sowma,or ſwellings of the throre,54,c.217,b.5 $0, 
9.1242 
To drawe 2 Dtubs our of any part of the bodice, 54,9.114,f, 
| |  Arcmedy againſt Stuffing ef the head, cthrou7hcoldues ofthe 
| | braines, 1110,d. 
| | Arecmecdic againftStuffiogofſthe lungs,770f $69,C.527,0,542,0. 
bee 693,5.1239,b, 
To cure the Dnifocation of the Marriz or mother,892,2.87 8c, 
looke Marr: s, 
To b-al: Suffaſtons ,1037,0. 
The vſcs of Dugar and howit is made,; by 
' Todefecnd from hurt ofthe Dun. 946,69, 
Torake away Sunburning,114,d. 7598765, h,227,b,250ji847,e 
380,2.445,d.696,h.920,e.722,b.1052,0.1158,h, 
To purge yellow Superfluities by licge,8 271, 
| _ Goodagainſta Surfet ,124,4.938,d.1 333.0. 
| | | A ſingular megicmne agiialt Surter,$48,0.502,, 
2 | | Topreſerve Mic {rom Surfciting,938,b, 
| - | | Tocaſcthedifficulticot Swallowing, cauſcd ofcold rhcames, 


465,a 
To prouoke Dwoeate,ss5 1,a849;h74.d. 195,f,359,c0.849,c.240,. 
b.897,f.377,2-457,4-557 13-6 17,8 190 p96 A009;5206h8 
br 218,b.1 282,x, 
Tocauſe Sweamg in agues;655,b. 
+ Toſtay Sweating,1o82,k, | | 
Good ayaiaſt or ro ditfolue ho: Dwellings char are newely be- 
gunii,60,c. 796.2.1270,Þ.1275.c.1 3044. 
Tocmreanddifilue al hard Swellings,8 54,2:869,2.397,2,463,Þ. 
$69,1,568,2.530,2.665,k,714,2.1035,2.12 38H. 
: Toconſume and waſte away cold and hard Sucllings, $52,c, 
| V694c,536, b.553,7.606,b,609,2 989,b.1c27,p.1064,a,b. 
| Toconſume or take away hotSweilags , $60,c, 6798. 689,b. 
1207,C1236 ,0. 
Todifolue all kinds of Swellings,627,b. 'F 
To take away th: hot Swellings uf the Almonds in ihe theoate, 
| 261,d.410,f. 1:63z1.13 26,c. | 
| '_ Toripen bard Swellings inthe groine,1170gb. 
| Towafte away hot Swellings of the kgrnels inthe fake, 7 36,4. 
| Forhot Swelling of the throate,r13Th,e.tz26,d) 
Todifſolue Swellingfof the beilie,1 238,c/ 
To rake the Swelling 19 rhe fplecac,r$ 54;b. | 
Toallwagethe Swelling of the yard,1052,m. v - 
To waſte away the Swellings of ketnels, 118040, | 


1635,2.1150,c. 
| TocuretheSwellings of the month, 1209,2,1 306,2, 


ok hard Swelings behindthe eares,1170,d, | 
for hor Swellings of the toong,1326,4. = 
| Te ee Og Snellings of the morher, 
; | £.1027,q.1035,b.11 99g. | | 
bu e Swellings of the throare,1 209,2. 
Gander hor Swellings of the jawes,1 326,byc, 
ToafFrage Swellings of che Rones,1052,m. 


« \ by 4 


| Toſopple or waite away hard Swellings of the rundament, 85H, 


Socrafatorigds Swelliags in the 1oints, go8,b, + © 

or Swelling of the kernels ynder the throate,43 14,c. oe 1794 
Jo helpe the $ of the Vanla,410,f13tagea326,4," 

Zogenvamonts Soy rurams Bobaneponey Cx PIES 4 

Fuſe hor Sweets arfe eel 

i to Swellingsto ariſe, rc Sd 
dat and in —_ I X 
Tobringhor $ RET 6 8 het 
Good againſthard Swelling»,689,c .54,c,749,c,568,0 hg 
To mitt 2r or coolt all hot Swclbags,u82 48.77 8, 8,5.79348. 23 wa | ' 
| 2$0,9.362,6.527,b.678;a.680,b, v1 SSL 2756 NE D407 ' af; 


* 


To mollite or ſoſten old bard Sw $B-124,6 | 

To take away old Swellings,581,c, - (SED © 
For hoc Swellings inthe mouth, r247,c.x326,b,c.; [© SID 

Totake away hot Swellings,60,b.1 24,e.501,a.860g*, 36346 408d. 
| da 495,A2, 676,a.t009,f, NT: ae (46h 1 210,4. TI 
12993. 

Todiiſolue Swellings,1207,). '; 


Arcmedy againſt the. hard Swelliags of the p > ie +0 

Tarn ripen bard Sucliings $5 b 37902445 Djpar79)b 

| T's 

To waſte and make ſubrile hard Svelingy 96,b. 1999, 397; 
984,4.1037,n.11 $0. f 239,0, 

To diticlue or take away hard Swellings,1 ekits.c 3onhg:6 
463,0.491,2.9 34,4. 105 2,b.ro64, a,b. 150,01 34254]: 

Towaitegway cold Swellings,929,b. 

Againſt the bard Swellings of the paps,198,c.ſee Paps. ( #; 

To mollfieand rake away hard S ours. 4 of the luzer 
188,c.790,8. 1998 1+ 

To cauſe hot Swellings to ariſe, 263,b; pas OW 


To mollife 26d ſofren Swelli 
Inns ANY 
42,e.616,b. 123944. - 


To conſume, difſol1e and 
| 856,229; ,c.*99,h.362,2.999,*.445 12 
in the bead eatled Yeriigs, $37,d, 


= I EI a -y- - 
> (2 IO Wyn” It 


Good againſt 
F46,f 720,c.1009,b.3184,b, | Fo 
Fo kill Dwtne, 259,462 2,<. | b 
Againſt Swounings,1 156, Mach 52d cdn 5 
Good for ſuchas are falleninto a Swoune , or 
| ſoounc,:$8,x.468,2. 599;b.732,c.356;6. 
A good Sp: ape co foftenthe belly and porgec 
Syrupe ſerurng for tnany excrilent | 
Syrupeto be vſed in rertjan 


2gues, 64,b. 
yrupe of the igfufien of Roſes withihe SY 
rope the CO NR 4 {4c 


" 
oo ian wont” TTY, a ns” RS A; REI PIP. ae , 4 
= bo - war petty , SEL: i 
Gs 12 Se 


C2236 - 


Elightfullro the Caſte.$79,9.1266/: X (f 
Dibgiton ofthe Cary vrodargs. | 
I oftop hollow Teer to 


Good for Teerhthat areſer on edge or efoakd ale bf, - 


Tofaſten looſe Teeth,845,a. 323,c.419;f57 1,1, 649,9.692,8- 
1092,i.1144,d 1263y3k.i306,2,1337,". | 
Toappeaſc or afſwage the paine of che Teerth,S 19;fa84.f0r9.d; 


e.9$9,1.996,c.1143,b.1173,4.1244,c:1292,h.1361,2, 
Togluc * TY ris , galkes, and cuts abeur the Tenions, 
114,23. 
'To —kcebitediwdechs Garten 


$4.©.97,3;145,2 190.0, 72,3 L973 G84 bg. 49G 
$4634.563,0.569,c,60.652,2.668,4.1076,y, 


To bring downe yoong Maidens Fane ROORe 1. E 

fo permeate Trrmnd hore ot. 9 $32,c.616,c.1194,9.892,9, 
En 202 341,c-389,g. 41940. LEY 
1150,2.1264,c. Wh Lewd 0 Lab 


'To ſtaic the oucrmuch womens Termes, 3 
Good for vomens Termes that pam ares Þ 


To _— lee Sos of Boon Tertian,r 34). x 
ro hoomoremes Torn ng 04h | 
Good for Tertians that 
To take or ſcoure away 
gig) ores or | 
_ 13d2,44376,b. 


Hiii > 


$: 


A cable of the MOEN 199944 © SITY 


Toki Tenexidbeourwdpars of hebodi 497 
| ous Letters,72,0.99 $ybe | | 
toule f; ers,504,4.1 zf. 


BY og cnd infame ations ofthe Thighes, 


709. 

Toquench Thirſ,66,b.44;b.768,2.341,n.845,b,f. $80,b.31d,d. 
47 1,4. 702,2.1031;2. ene toad. 1315. 13 17o8- 
13 24zC.136$,c, 

Toquench Thick ls ho buraing feavcra 12,d.1031,b, 

For theharr, 1160;c.logke Tremobng. 

foorth Th fixed iti any pant ofthe bodice, 34,4. 
$4:8-96,2. H14,ehgg,m. 445, 49 $14.637b. 1224 ji 


4 | 


nary wares 


tes bein 611 ofthe Thelkagonc, 
Good againſt pon eoget a Eweo: 938, mY 
36632,379,4.  -. | Hl | 
Goodagamit forenex ofthe Throre,g3 Sou3gh 7-4 
One agg laGing By og Eamon 
ponds nyt 
the Throte,5 4,6 


RT 
A p44 (rellings and * 


Gen on ad; ripen. harde (wellings i 
Kings em!!,65,c.293,c.1050,0, 


An ”—_—_ dreinedie againſt the 
le Srrume &> Scyophule,g7,c.5 $0,2. : 
To rake away the aſperitic or DD: 4 


of the 

a Throtezcalled the 
in x of the Threee, bas 
Pu ic Throty, , Tb 


261,0. : 
Ta helpe the ThzowWwes oc privy pine the belly i in women 
afrercheir childing;2942.178,g.53 2.24257 h. 
To _—_— thoſc that are ſtrangled wabeati 


 #gues,768,a.12659i., : 

Tocure thedifcaſeof che Tonguecalled | Jew, which wad 
gednesgblacknes, and drines, witha ſwelling, 5os,d, | 

'Taquenchioflammarions of the Tongueyt376,b., 

To cauſe ſteclked Toles rocur iron or Bone withour curning 
the edge, 5 14,c. 7 

To appeaſe the Tothach, 199,e.854.c$49,1.912,c 399,-344,2 
$42,4.581,£{665,i.,709,0.1172,k).1195,Y. 1287,c, 

Totake away the To6thacb, 749,4.779864,b. 287,c. $61.4. 
91 $5.39 $52.49 539.5604. 6o4;©-735%% 4; 996,b.1070,4.1 178, 
103 F.C. þ 

Agaioſt the inflammation ofche TonWg,t192,m. 

Hue ne pared the griping Tozinents of it belly,908,a.2076,4. 

EE of the gurs,862.,d. 50g ,f. 

Ce Tormentin womens bell ies after their cclive- 
rance,832, 

To Ts the griping rorments of Fo = 893 ,b.$75 b, 


+, Goodtoaffwoge the crueli Torments ofzhe Gour,509,e, 


Toccaſe the Serments of the bowels,5 <9. 
| Forthe Tozſion or gna 
To cauſe women ro 


744,2.7 62,3. 
Tocaſe or helpe women that hauc har 


$539k, 
ing paines of theguws, 1c76,7, 
uc ſpeedic 0 Lin childe bearing, 


Travel in childe hes: 


ring,and are ingreas extremitie, 76392. 291 ,4.898,1.599.k. 


 $63,b.569,c.695,e,f, ; 
okeepe 2 Er ler free merdiple,z, 2,f 
Tocauſe a Trauciler nor to feele, of to þ 
Tomnes,945,d. 1202,F. ; 
oinrwentfor a wearied Traveller, | 


pe him from cho. 


ihe hart, 890,h. 


| rey gererrs- : 
Good againſt T 

Terms Crencnoer cx deli an doula 
Cuud tes he. Te 4 


E's 

o 

EP 
z5 
MH 


Toa mT] Tumors in 


Tatake awaie the ( and paine of hot T f 
l's away pa umors $21. 


| all Lumors of the mouth and " 
To dilfolue Tumors,1 Fr 


To cane and driuc away colde Tumers,79e,g,t9,h 
949 
benfuyherd Sms] in afy partof Cnboghy 


UBDr5,54-C 


ens rey 
Tarcſolue,conci open Tumorz,60,g. 
Tadiffolue hard T called ademaie,1346,d. 
To moellife the hard Tumors ofthe wother,7 $7,c. 
Jo mollfie,vaſte,and conſume all Tumors, 1;28,v, 
_ ethe Tumors of the priuie members, 147,tna85, a. 
aic the beginning of Tumors,1 208,m. 
- foften all colde Tumors,44540. 
Tomollific and ripen Tumors behinde rhe carer, t3 13200, 
Good againſt the Turning of the head called Yerrago,5 27,0. 
Tahelperhe Crmaneg 14s 938.d, 
[qoRege the bellies of thoſe that haue the Tympanie, 3291,b. 


y 
Ns rogither ries, gaihes, and cuts about the Waines, - 


L14t,a.] | 
(depen _ Koppings ofthe Vaines,q63,d. - 
the Yaines of the hemorchoides, 13 TY 
611 the Vaines with naughtie colde humors,765,4. 
Tore Vaines of flegmarike, cholericke, corrupt, and ſu. 
$s humors,463,a.ſce Humors, 
qingender hot and roſſe Wapours, 149,1. 
a teprefſe Vapours he hinder ſlecpe,1 3 83,0. 
To abate '; of thirſt jn agues or-any diſeaſe wharſo- , 
er,1243; 
To irypro Wenerie, 35 c. r58,c,169,2.868,c 949, 1249, ſce 
bode Lf. x 


Good againſt Venerie,674,e,. 

Goes for thoſe that haue no appetire to Venerie,1000,c. 
aoeipecr cure thoſe that are buten with Uenemous beaſts, 
| $8,9. 140,d. $49,e, $48,9. 882. 266,b. 287, 3 16,2.924,0, 
| 355,3.95 234.3 85 ,9.42 2,0.45 750.49 534.52 9,f.738,e. 1009,Ff, 

Tocchft the bicings of Venemous beaſts, 49,4 looke Bitings 
of venemous beaſts, 

To expellftroog Venome,$62,c.301,e. 

Good 2gainſtall Venome, ' 787. 899,3.949;i. 6r7. 1069,2. 
107 5,p.1158,0.12 23,4. 1328,c. 

Good for the bitings of Venemous beaſts, x5 298 74,4. 133,c. 

| 149,b84342.677,d.695,b, 

To drive away venemous beaſts,$29,c.389,h. 191A.” 

Todriue away Qentoſitics or windines, $9 1,4.4%0,i. AY 

To drive away Ventofiries of the ſtomacke, 85 Fa. 849, dh. 

7,0, 

Tokeepe Uermine fromclochen and garments, | 941, 95 Ig. 
JIry ; 

Good or thoſe that are bitren ofUipers, $99 .bab5d665 4. 

Toure the bjtings of Vipers,959,2.964,2,1066,4.1190,f.1289,b, 

Ta be preſerued from being ſtung of the Viper,684,c. 

Tacure Uicers, 505," 53,2. 301,d.858,c. 911,b,33 1,c.667,a, 
| 6844c732,a.1082,7,1. 21,0.1186,b,1194,b.1335,) 

Toure Vicets of gre.4 &.fhcultje, or hard tobe cured, 288,y. 
| $51,4.340,9.576 ,d.684,2.705 Þ, 

Tocure oule, rorren, and ſtinking filrhie Vicers, $2,b, wo | 
| 259,0.4333>.4634b.579,2.668,c,721 5k. | ” 

To bring old Ylcers to maturation,790,g.11704c. | 

To drie vp moiſt virulent Vicers;ſtay the humor and heale thew, 
| 30,f.288,2.869,4.422,b.53 6,0) 

T6 afſwage and conſume corroſige Vieers in any partof the bo- 
| die,378,c, 

Good againſt orrocure old Vicers, 27 8;b. 285.2, 9 16043 $,c. 
708,2.1068,c.657,a, 219,32. £63,c. 7,b.,285,4, 288,y.878,c, 
| Cag,f.657,4.708,2.1059,2. 10994h.7 "70,0. | | 

To ſtay or keepe backe putrified Vicers, 72,9. bs f581,e. 

To.cure foule eating; creeping, or ſpreading Vicers, 87,c. 
| 133,82. 5O1,a. 41232, Ks phat + $0992b. 117%.b, 

' T194,b,1207,0, | 

Good to clenſe Vicers,x: 31 £4 Q1ogdavgogoa ev 


' 


[| 
| 


Good for or tocure hollow old and new Vicers, 91 3gh 34,8. 
660,d.706,b.1 190gk.1 235, 
To heal: old caring Vicers,1 33,2. 9 16,2.649,f£1099,b, 
To ſcoure and clenſe old ronuen vicers,35 $,c. 2 87,c, af i 35,2. 
' $$1,b.1133,n, 
To helpe alt ourward vicers,$63,a. 
To mundifie corrupr,foule,v% flchie Vicers,1 39. 6. —_—_ ,e 
365 3», For, b.698,c.1050,e.1133,n.1 207 
To appealethe rage of cankerous Vicers, $39.8: 
To heale greene or nes Vicers, 149,b. 115,48. 
To cauſe vgly Vicers,815,a, , 
Good againſt morrified Vicers,729,h.1052,h, 
To ſtay running oc cating Vicers, 687,3.105 2,g.1 OY WRT" 
1207,0 1194,b. 
To fill vp hollow Vicers withfleſh,698,c,1044,k, 1 050,e.1 180,f, 
 1199,k.1235,1.12449i.1247,b. 
To cure venemvus Vicers, 1944- 
For ruaning Vicers in the heads of yoong children, 1074,k. 


| Todefend maligne & virulent Vicersfrom inflammation, 49! ,9 


703,2, 
Tocure putrified Vicers,423.-.433 Þ.463,b.c81,e.r099,þ. 
Good againſt all bot burning and freeing Vicers, 413 ,0.509,4, 
For old venemous and malnious Vicers, 1133,n, 


| | To heale Vicers ofth: ſecret partes and tundamenrt,4 11, h,452,c 


$07,0.1102, 


| Tocure Vicers of the throte12-9,4, 

| Toheale Vicers in tender bodics,1 1785, 

| To ftopblceding Vicers,3 49d. 

| Tocure malignant and c<bellious Vicerr, 422,b.,709,2 Ga 


To heale Vicers of the kidneies,z 31,b,661,90. 


| Goodfor Vicers in the low gur,1 627), 


To mundike and make cleane maligne & cating Vicersg 312570, 
60,4. 


| 3 
| Toheale and fill vp the Vicersintheeies, 12470. 


- | Tofcoure,mundifie & heale old Vieers,259,b.295 0+ 30645970 


To curc hot Vicers of the mouth, 351,b.4194. 
To cure corrupt and rotten Vicers ot the mouth, 33 pu $07,d. 
581,f.1031,b, | 
To conſume hor Vicers,28z pg. 
Tocure Vicers on the nieens part of the yarde,z78 þ. 878,c 
$izC, 
Co malitious and venemous VIcers of the mouth, and al- 
mongs of the throre,863,n.841,c 708,9, 
A good medicine againſt Uicerations in the privic parts of 
man or woman,745,f.291,1.454. 
Tocure Vicerations of the marris,419,7, 
To helpe Vicerations of theyuts,419,c, $4 
Good againſt Vicerations of the lungs 5 62,9, 
Good againſt Vicerations of the 16 wh, gt 4 
To cure Vicerations of (he kidneits and (>; 
Tortake away the pajne of 5n Uncome, of 36, 
Good for ſuch as »re withouc Mnderftantint 
'Tohelpe or ſtrengihen Vaderſtanding,t 247, 
An Unguent for wounds, 3795. 
An excellent Voguent to incarvate or bring vp fic ti in derpe 
wounds,47 1 b.3249" L 
Tocure the dile:e called Polity Hemat: ve 3) $32. 
'Tohurr the Voice! 205,e, 
\'Tocleere the Voice,35,7. 
Good againſt hoarieues of the Vaice,178,e.1 3428. 
To ftaic ULoiyms of bloodys61,F,r099,c. 
Toproucke or cauſe Uomnte, 399.185 ,b,&.106,2. 4074.1 15,h. 
188,b,218,c.4c0,4.407,0.415,. 578,£639,4, 72090. 1219,2. 
1239,C. 
To preſs ouerwuch Vomiting of choler, 1243 ,dJocke Felonie, 
TON REig, 3 23z5:$60,3, $5332,1,736,2.1037,8. 12244. 
2$232,b,c.r 244,c. 1253.d,g,h. 1264,Þ, 1289,e, 1317, $337 .6+ 
134t,c,1368,2.1370,9.1575 0, 
Good for thoſe that Vomite blood, 624,9.1264,c, | 
Tobelpe Vomiting of blood, 505 ,b.4524A. 457,3.453, e. $53. 
916,e.1288,b. 
Tod cauſe one to Vomite flegme & ſlimie matter violently, 2992. 
Toſhie or take away the defire or readinesro Vomite, $40,0. 
$74,e. 349,d.692,4.728,9a,0.1 26; 
To ſtare Vomiting of women with c deyt3244h. 936,e. | 
 Tocauſc 8 defire ro Vomite, 269,2.445i.1249.9, 
| Goodfor them that vowire blood from rhe glecmegzh 
To ſtaie the inordinatedeficeto Yomite,$46,4. Fg 


",2&1 \d. 


29 Ds 
L 1317S 


A Taubleof the Nature, Pertue and FORuR | 


| 


T6 procure Vpwire F7,A.1133,t.11 7b. 
T6 ſtay the defire En the oy ; | 
Topurgeby _—_ 1133,g-Jooke Purge, | 

. againſt Upbzaidings of the tomacke,880,s. 
T provoke Ujineoutefhand, 261,e, 


Ta prouoke Vrine mightily, 689,0.54,8.57,2.37,2.135,b.140,b, 


prouoic Vrine, 3,3.29,b.40,a,f5,4.102,4.137,0.142,2441,c. 


Taps 32 £47494 9 302.429,4-1013,4,C-M 7456.15 FI, 
42,9d.178,b,-.188,c,0.186,2.190.e.73$,2,760,a. 76 2,475 55e, 


75 4930.77$,1.193.C.502,d, 520,0.557,0.201b. 864,92 rh | 
1 OY 


d62,2,0.882,3, $83,b. 886,b.$92,c.$93,9.896,6d. 295,32. 
66,b $68,c. 869,c.87 1,9, $7234. 873,b$74,d.875.,2.877,. 
73 ,2.879,9,5. 897,0 9974. 919,2 932 ,4.926,a. 34934. F50,n. 
#,4.422,d. 424,5.428,2.433,2, 4443©415z0.45 2.4.457,2. 
$932-463 #,470,C.5 24,4. 5 2930.53 5,4;e.53642.540,2. $42. 
4%,2.551,b. $57,C, $693,c571,2. 586,b616,a, 648,9.665,.. 
vs ,9.692,b, 693,4.7c9,0.964,t 934, kg 87,2.993,0. 190c0,2, 
009 ,C,10 19,2. 103530.1042,3.1044s" 2052,F, 1966,4.1072,a 
1076,»,1092,h.1108,£11 1146.1 123,0.1 142,21144,h3 154.0. 
1153, £1178,b.1182,2, 1184,g.1190,4.1192,c-1194,4.1412,2. 
1223,90.12 24,0, 1237;,0.1 244;k.1246,b,cf. 1357k,q.1266,2, 
1281,r.1333,0.1341,f.1349,9.1350,2.1352,4. 1357,0:137996 
Toproucke Vrine gently,23,a.880,2.425,b.463,a. 
Tobelpe the ſtopping of Vene, 22 2,3. 27 242.53 2,2. 
Topurge by Vrin wightily,r4,1, 
To purge much Yrine our of then thathauc the drop e, 426b 
148, 
Toprocure bloodie Vrine,7 | 
To Foote the Vrine veſſels of wogh and EY 
To play theſharpnes of Vrine,778,f. 1149,0. 117 4,0. 


Good againſt gripings ofthe bellic in making of Vrine 80a,h. 


To Flenlc naughtic humors by Vrinc,938,c, 


£ w 


Go" againft the wambling ofthe toamacke, 31 whge, 

Good againſt Wambling of the belly,457,b. 

To ſtay vending of womens ſtomackes that be with childe, 
1334, 

Totauſecragged wartesto fall away,915,2:266,c.z08,d. | 

To whe away Warrtesin any part ofthe bodic,227,c zor ,f, 728g 
1606,4.1328,h.136 1,8, 

Tokeepe a man that he benor ftong ofrwaſpes, 787,9, 10h5,6. 

Good againſt rhe ſtinging of Wazjpes, 7 86,2. 553,m. $6.8, 
1075,0.1223,k, 

To helpeone thatcannormake Water preſently, 9 22,2, 4 2,4, 

Againſt cifficultic or great paine of waking Water, ard ſtop- 

nz of the ſame,2 3,b.188,f.,76c,a., 261,9,f.252,2,869,d374,c 

8 TING 94942. 42242.45 5,2. 498,9,520,2, 549d. F48,e, 

640,9d.1174,d.1257,7.1276,e. 

Th auſe one to make Warer, 180,2, 8gr,a, 92,2, 175k, 
«[10976,y, 


- Aremedie for watering ofthe eies, 1 305,b. 


H2w to amend cotrupt Water at ſea,546,c, | 

A g9od Water to wath a ſore throte, mouth, and privie partes of 
man or woman, 341,f.34$,c.624,e.1092,i, , « 

To ws away lWaren kernels,1064,2, | 

Goqd againſt the Weakenesg ofthe lver,1033 a. | 


. AgainſdWeakenes ofthe bellie,1094,2., 


Gogd to reſtore ſuch as be Weake,79 5,b. 
A remediefor Weakenes ofrhe backe, 1378,c, _ 
ochok a wayfaring man to feele no 

1202, ", 
Toremooue Weariſomnes,944,2.946,4.617 h1223,d. | 
To take away Webgof the cies, 288,t.532,b.684,4.69 $AT96ge. 
1013,e,1035,d.11 20,8.1347zC.12 F34c. 
To thay: or keepe backe the Webin the eie,563,0,f.1 037,01 351,b 
To ſtay the Weeping of cut or burt finewes B63,c. 
To cauſe yoong Wenthes to looke faire and cherrie-like, 214, 


: 
f / 


, 944d. 


Tobring downe the termes of young Wenches, 237.0. Fig = 


553, 
Gedd: againſt wens. 689,c, (= Y 
Worn mem apa drtens 71g. n47þ.t 
B6942.463,b.568.2.1050,0, 
Toheale a of Wens called mY b 


EE Tar fe #5 


I deaf the Natare, Danger, and Vertues. 


Good againftnight Wheales,938,i, 

Totake away 
1133,r.1338.h, , 

Totake away th<painc of Whitlowes, | to healethem,863,d 
500,4.720,2. way 4 

Toltay orbelpe che Whites, 960,32. 55 2x 561zk. 563,c 665), 
6744Þ. 736,2.960,2. 1082,k.1083,c.1099,c. 1111,8.1158,b, 
1195,c.1 207,f.1227,0.1306,C.1309,0,1370,4, 


To hurt the YOundpipe,: 305, + 
yamngeye raiſe grofſe aad flimic bug 
Windpipeg84,c. 
To make ſmooth the roughncs of the 
Toconſume JOtnde in the'bowels,7 358. 
Toconfume winde inthe fides,9 3 5,c.460,d. 
Good for ſuch as be ſhorgyinded, 1992p. 318,c.380,b,95 1, a. 
$84,1.985,b.1065,2,1257,0.13 28,b.) | 
Againſt Winde in che tomacke and cotcke gur,865,a. 
Toingender Windegr178,b135 .138. F4 za. 
Toconſlume Windeof the Romacke, £ [2,0.317,2.735,0.895,2. 
908,bd. 
Good againſt Winde or windines, 17, $-462.b, $97,k.1073,.. 
Tobreake,expell and conſume Windeyt35 9b. 141,c862,b.843 ,b 
891,4. 866,b.868,9.87 1,6. 873,5. 874zc. 87 5.b.878,a,c. 879,b. 
880,23. $26.6. $732d. tre. 1341 -ol3 +,b, 
Tobreake Windines,1349,0. «i 
Todriue away Windines,}111,F,1199,H 
Todrive away Windinzs of the tomackse , 
317,057 2,d.897,a 926,42, $46,2.6 16, 
To breake aad ſcairer Windines of th 4; 
. _ 460,d. 
To breake or waſte away the Wiagi 
238,x,908,2, 
Tobrecd Windines,&5,4. 135,m.138 
To keepe Yoine from lowr1ng,t 386.9 
Moderate vie of Wine verie commodiy 


hors out of the conduits 


ndpipe;729.d. 


$55,2.$49,4,b.$91,d. 
: 202,09, 


dclbe and guts, 98,2. 
trol the matrix, 995,24. 
ib £14 $433;b . 

-® 2,d;ef,b,i.733,0. 


6.1 ? 

Tock Winetoyeeld a grace in drin ing,850.4. 

To reſtore Wine to his former goodnes, 1375,f. 

Immoderate drinking of Wine excecdij bg buretull, 732g. 736,l. 

Difference of Wiacs,732,k,l,m.733 9, 

For what perſons Wine is fateſt, 7338 |, and for what perſons 
nat, ibid, m.736,h. 

Choice of Wines,736,g,Þ,i,k,!. | 

Topreſerue a man from being Witch 2,Þ, 

Gond or available againſt Wichcraith A 

Tokill wolfeg,755,2.822,b.622,c, |} - 

Againſtthe Wolfesbang;1t035,0. 

Toclenſe the barren Wombe and mak 

Tokill the chulde inche mothers Wombe,rg 5,0.979,4.1224,w,. 

To curethe fluxes of the Wembe,514y E : |- 

Hurrtu!l co Yemen wichclulde,zo7,240,b684,). 636.9702. 

They Women ficke of the Mothee! out of rheir firs,  190,f, 
899,l. | | 

Good for the overmuch vomiringofWomen with chulde,7 36,e. 

To flake fveNings in womens breaſts, $2,c. 

To make women fruitfuil, 5 F5,h.1341,t.624,2, 

_ To make Women barren,979,b.979,4.1203,9, 

To bring downe the natucall fickiics of Wornecn, nk 891,b, 
422,245 55,blooke Sicknes, | 

Todifſolucchehardnesof Womens b caſts or paps,422, b. 

Tocauſe a Woman to bring foorth a man childeq3 ;$5,c, 

Gond for Womeu that have any greets or [welling of the matrix, 
1027, | 

Ts wine + - SB. ro bring-foorth female children,I 5b, 

To cure Womens diſcaſes,946,29. ! 

' Toprouoke Womens termes, ſee Termes,. 

Good for Women withclulde, 126;,Q1266,d. 


bearing,744,*.72,2.293 4.563 ,b.43 29 
Tocaulſe a os pas ro bring foorth 


Toning doune\ Womens flowers, 1 43,b. 195.0. 
To ftaic the Juſting or longing of Wotpenwith childe,728,a. 
Good for Women that be nor wll clenled after as 


 833,9,279,f,1039,b.1076,5, 


4 wag eravell abut | 


tromrbe face or her part of the bodic, . 


| To voige away Wormes of they 
T6 kill Wormes inthe belly and driue them foorth, M1,d.185,o, 


| To heipe faule Wounds, 
| Tocomfort Woundsan lin 
| Againſt Wounds of the 0 Poet $85,4, 

| For Wounds in bodies of a ſirong conſtitution. 39599. 


irc roconceiue,r 246d | 


| Tohrale greenc and freſh Wounds, 504,24. 259. 


To ſtaic theinordinatefluxe of Womens NR "LOR 
| continues many yectes,341,0, 
To _ downe the month!y caurie of Women,y7,c.ee Month. 
courle, 
Tadrivefoarth TWormes,195,0.465,0.1044,".1 
to kill Wormes in' young children with our remedies, 
3,C-141,6, 7b s 1bb,g. 2370. 926,d, SRI acdg, 
| T1 94401259, 
'To breede Wormes in the belly,60,2. 
For Ring. :Wormer57,n. 817,03 18,6457,2728.6, 
'Tq kil Wormes and drive themfoong49,>95%b41f,g4f9.. 
|  $19,b.526,vb.1007,0.1066,c.t259,0.1361,cC, | 
[To dou toorthlong and ropndWe Wormes,1 37>£7794. ' 


[Todrive foorth Wormes of the bellic, 2 50,1. 267,441 3,C. F22,2, 


To drive feorth flat and round Wormcs, 266,6.9770,a, 
ut$,93 8,c. 


18 8,8.770,1860,b.320,2,287,4.926,byc. 942,4. 


+ 437 
' $87,2. 668,9.1044,).11844m;125 2,c,i 252,y.1381,b, by 


Good agaimlt the Wormes an cjuldecn, 15 5,2.258,x,q47 9,b. 

To kl} Wormes m children, and drwethem foorthby fiege or 
| | yomite,1 73,9, 188,2.21 442, $27,9.k.9 26,b,c .949,04.1069. 

| To kill Wormes inchuldren very ſpeedily, 12 $9864 

| Tokall lmall Wormes of the guts,941,2. 

| Tobll and purge away allkinde of Wormes of the belly, 4r0,b, 


e57,f.648,d.,715,2 996,a. 1 172,Þ.1190gk. 7704,$20,a. 287,4. 
437,2-5 2448-55741 $6995-1 

To kill the Wormes in theearcs,s $74.11724i, 

Toki! late Wo:mes,r 186,g; 


| Tocloſe vp Wounds withaur perilof inflammation, 561 k.g15,2 | 


344,2-438,c,1327,C, 


Tocure Wounds, $95,4851,h.890,g. 2$7,f 238, .301,4, g11b. 


,919,b321,a.958,5. 4224d.422,0.431,2, 507,4,c.514,d. 536.2, | 
| $81,+,660b, 1,4.1102;2.1202,f, | | 


| To glew rogither preſently, & pcric Aly to cure greene Wounds, | 
791,a$52,0.344,4.410,4.435,c.1297,0, | 
To glew and conloldate togither n2w and bleeding Wounds | 
| | 3-b-758,8-795,4.291;h.508,2 514,c.1247,b. | 
| Tocurerthaſc that arc mortally Wounded in the bodie, 2914, | 


962,60"! 
To heake greene W ounds ſpeedily,z $,3.149,b.344,2,1026,b. 
3,@.1160,4.1253,C, 
ewie parts,491,a. 


Toheale Woundy, 60,1.797,3.802,2.851 agbyr plat. 22ggb.56 mn | 
$77,3.1052,0, 


To confound and glew togithcr great Wounds, 11448. 86g,8. 


| 34492.965 b. 
Fo keepegreene Wounds from inflammation, er ficric freliogs 
91 5,a.678,2, | 
Gond to ſemen deepe and coions Wounds wich,1.47 
ots,o. 
291,0,C,916,2.329,9.410,9, 4350.43 6,b.433,c. 6558. 661,b., 
1120,f.1133,0,1179,C.125 9,f,1298,g.1335 13 468, 
To ne Wounds of the inward parts, 505,C.841,d,291b.z 31h 
$07,M61,1, 
Good for Woundzreadie to fallinto Apoſtemarion,497,c. 


| 'Toſtannchthe bleeding of Wounds, 754,c.803,42. 349,09. 358, b, 


339,t.41 1,h,43 $2b.674,C.1 375,c. 
To heale and *km Wounds of the head,r207,0, 
' Good for or tocuregreene and bleeding Wounds, 193,3,19449 
796,9.8c9,2,d. 388,0.435,b.215,b. 389,f. 411,h.435,b, 9.9. 
| 259,b.327,3.2958. 3 29,C. 362,09. 38845. 436,b, 569,d. $4.6. 
758,2.841,0.389.f436,1.448,c. 560,C. 12750 
To defend Wounds from fw-liing and rankling,445,0-497,6 


| For inflammations mprecne Wounds, 679,24, | 


To preſecue rg greene Wounds fromall manner of acs 
cidents,799,0.581,b 


| Tohealeko nerd Worndz793.bb; 5,08arl5brhgrs,g65t,5 


Good for Wounds made with any neg. 65 3,6, 
| 3020, | | 
Good for Wounds of the dugs,#f.794,2. 

Good for Wounds of the ſecrec parts,794,0841,0. 

To ſoder freſh and old Wounds,504,2,869,a. | 

To heale Wounds in the Gnewes,218,d. 331 bo 58,0. 

Good for or to cure al outward and inward Wounds Tant'3 > 


433,b.$07,b.50%a.s 1492-57 $0643 hs > 


-- HS e—ebo ene iu SHA Ce ads +> 1+ > 9 . —— 


| 
| 


| | A Tableof the Nature, Pertue and Dangers. 


o take away,or to ceaſc the burning heate ia Wounds, 845,23, 
$$1,b. 

Greeuous and dangerous Wounds,cured by the Author, 348,2, 

b52,2,b.853,c,6,c, 

ood againſt Wounds made by venemous beaſts.227,k. 

lo cure deepe Wounds, 2 $8,2,2.433zc,0. | 

otake away inflammations and greeuous paines in Wounds, 

+ and keepe thery from corruption,291,h. 58 1.b, 

6 helpe grear Wzenches of the aykles,1144c, 

'otake away JPztnckies,1 49,d.7204c. 

ohelpe the YOungings of the bellie,zo1,c. 

ood againſt the Wringing of the guis and bowels,5 09,f. 

againſt the Yuula,7 45 ,f,638,h, 

0 helpe the Vuula, 123 5,k. 

gainſtthe rumors and ſwellings of the Vuula, 190,9. 410,f. 

5 


-b. 
Good againſt the falling and cxcoriation of che Yuula,g36,b. 


- 


) | n:1-N V6 


4a) 


"MC Tmprinted at London by Edm.Bollifant, 
| "+ | for Bonham and Iohn 


Norton. | 
M. D. XCVIL 


f 06550) waall IC SE pion LHOANES > 
BOTS S032 C0 NESS Es 

| 4 DO fa ry » RR AEOIES, \= ; 
me NS ary A ED EY Ars; | 


Good —__ the inflammation ofthe Vuuls,366,a. 577 ,b,702,n 
1180,4. | 
Tocure the looſenes of the Vuula,g14,d. 


Y 


O cure ylkcers on the head of the Parde,291,i. 

To remooue hot ſwelhnys of the Yarde,1 49,c, 
Againſt excoriations of the conduit of the Yarde,22 2,9, 
To cure the inward excoriations of the Yarde,91 5,c. 
Good againſt che painesof the Yarde,z41,g. 

A remedic againſt Pellownes,734,c. 
Totake away the Ycllownes of the skin,444,2, 
Toclenſe the Pawoning of the cies,5 52,8. 


To ſtay/ or helpe the Peoxing, 891,5.872,. 878,42. 880,b.5 531. - 


9799. 
Good againſt Yexing.3 18,4. 


\ | . —<* p » ——_— 
A we 


» "a + 4 « 
y — — 4 »s wh S 


DG 


»: 


| 
| 
| 
| 


+>, 


