1/37- REGIMENT of healthe [etc]
1625 - 1682
3322
Manuscript 1640 - 1690
Astrology Medicine
302

MS. No. 674.
WELLCOME
HISTORICAL MEDICAL LIBRARY
ACCESSION NUMBER
52783
PRESS MARK





2d Aprilis 1640 Henricis Stapleton armig, et Ioan...
Goldsmyth personaliter, appa..ere locamEliz Eliz Hold...
in oppido St Albans ad presuadendum de stintre
Londinensi in proxima .e..meda Pacchatis d..
Iovi ......
52783






149

Medical





Manuscript - An early collection
of Receipts in Cookery, confectionery
&c. written in or about 1640

Vellum wrapper

Some of the recipes are very
curious and illustrative

M a cente 38 fr





13

Almightie God ffather sonne and holie ghost three personnes
but one divine essence by his omnipotent power did in the
begining make all thing of nothing and prepared whatsoever
was in the world for the vse benifitt and comfort of mankynd:
as Beast, Trees, Plantes, herbes, ffrutes and spices which live
vppon the earthe, and springe out of the same, stones and minerall
which are digged and drawne out of the bowell of the earthe; ffowles
of sondrye kynd in the ayre, ffishes innumerable sortes in the
waters and also made him Lord over all his creatures &
gave him free election to take the best and leave the worst.
only the forbidden ffrute of Paradice excepted; And did
alsoe give him knowledge to know and vnderstand the
motions of the superior and celestiall bodies, that is to saye
of the Seaven Plannet. and the Twelve Signes, Soe as
philosophers and wise men have studied and endevored to provide
remedies for the sicknesses and infirmities of mens bodies
according to the observation of the heavens. Learned men affirme
that the naturall course of tyme dothe changethe fower tymes
in the yeare, whervppon they devide the yeare into fowre part
To witt the Spring, Sommer, harvest, & the winter: And in
eache of these quarters they foverne them selves as the
season of the yeare requirethe & as that variethe the change
they ther manner of dyett. ffor the meate that is good & holsome
in Winter may be hurtfull in Sommer; and that which is profi-
table in Sommer may be contagious in Winter. And for to
know the alterations of the tymes the better, these learned
doctors doe consider and observe the course of the sonne by
the Twelve Signes of the Zodiack, sayeinge that everie
Quarter of the Yeare endurethe Three monethes, and that the
sonne passethe by Three Signes, namelie in Pryme tyme
by Piscis, Aries & Taurus, which reigne and governe in ffebru-
arie, Marche, and Aprill, at which tyme the earthe is clothed
wth





wth greene herbes and grasse, trees doe then florishe wth
greene leaves, soe t it is a greate beautie, wher wth
the earthe is then adorned werit pleasant & delectable
for the eyes of man to behold And this quarter of e
yeare is of the nature of sanguine complexion, hott
& moyst In sommer e Some passethe by Gemini Cancer
& Leo, wch have their dominion in the Montthes of May
June & Julye, and then corne, Grasse, and ffrutes
of the earthe doe growe and waxe ripe. and this season
tis of the nature of the colerick complexion In Autumne
or hare oft the some passethe by Virgo, Libra & Scorpio
wch have their dominion in August, September & October
in wch tyme fflowers fade leaves fall and frutes are
gathered In Winter the some passethe By Sagitarius,
Capricorne & Aquaries wth governe in the monethes
of November, December, & Fanuarie & then the Earth
waxethe bare, Trees wthout Leaves and all becometh barre
of a melancholie complexion According to wch seasons
they saye that ther are fowre ages of mans Life to wett:
Juvenilis a'tas or youthe. virilis a'tas his perfect age or
stenght, stueltas his old age & a'tas decrepita his
decrepit or decayee age. all wch have a lieknes ovre
semblance vnto the ffowre seasons of the yeare, as
youthe may be liekned to the pryme fyme, that is
hott and moyste, and as the hearbes and trees doe
florishe and growe in the spring tyme soe dothe growe and
increase in bignes, stength, and beawtie vntill hecome
to the age of pp... yeares. After this he is liekned to
sommer wch is hott and drye, and then is man in hillfull
force and stringth and endurethe till he be  plvtie years old
Old age is compared to hurvest tyme wch is cold and  drye,
and then mans strength decayethe and he wapethe weake

and






and feeble and then it behoved him to spare and gather
least he want when he comethe to stoopinge age and his pte
of mans life conty nuethe to Lve  yeares, after wch yeare
he still declyning, comes to stoopeinge and docrepite
old age, wch may swell be compiared to the winter season
cold and mayst by reason of abundance of humors tt an.
cold and thorought desert of naturall heate at wch tyme
man spewethethese goode which he gott in his youthe and
tt he hathe spared and Layed vpp nothing agaynst that tyme
then he remaynethe poore and maled as the earthe and trees
doe in the tyme of winter and this tyme of mans age
endure the vntill lebelpy or more in such men as have by
nature stronge constitutions By this wch hath bene sayd
may be knownt that he Spring or pryme tyme is hott
and muyst, of he nature of the ayre, and of sanguine complexion,
wch is freshe blod wch ingendrethe in the liver .
long lieke the ayre , and reignethe in May, September
& Jannuarie when the mane is in Gemmeni, Libre &
Aquarius wch signes be orientall Aeso Sommer is
hott and drye of the nature of ffyre and of colericke
complexion, masculyne, & raiguethe in Marche July and
November when the Moone is in Aries Leo and Sagitarius
wch signes be orientall, Syervest is cold and drye of e
nature of earthe, and is of melancholie complexion
and feminine kynd & raignethe in Aprill August and
December when the moone is in Taurus Virge & Caprcorne,
wch signes are Merioiall ..ne winter is
cold and moyst of the nature of water and of
ffleg matipe complexion, and raignethe in June, Ootober
& ffebruarie when the moone is in Cancer Scorpio &
Piseis wch signes be Septentrionall signes of the northe
Of these fower complexions everie man is made, composod

&





V6
and man hath alsoe fowre prime qualities in him to witt
moysture and drynes wch are contrarie, heate and cold, wch
are alsoe contrarie and cannot stand togither wthout a meanes
for moystnes bynedthe on the one side and drynes on the
other. moystnes is cause of everie thin substance and
drynes is the cause of everie thick substance, moystnes
is the cause of everie sweete tast and drynes of sower
tast and unsavorie. Hottnes is cause of redd coler and
large quantitie and on the contrarie whitnes is caused
by coldnes and smale quantitie. Now these fower pryme
qualities combyne and knitt togither doe yeald fower
kynd of elements viz. The Ayre wch is Hott and moyst
The ffyer wch is hott and drye, The Earthe cold and drye,
The water cold and moyste. The Ayre and the Earthe are
two contraries and cannot ioyne togither, but that the fyre
byndethe them in on one side and the water on the other,
And liekwise the fyer and water are two contraries that cannot
ioyne togither but as the Ayre byndethe them in on one side &c
and the Earthe on the other side. And soe the fowre Elem
are combyned togither. The Ayre and the fyre are swift
subtile, sharpe, comfortable and moveable, the water and
the earthe be corpulent and dull. The water is moueable
The Earthe is vnmoueable. And like as an Egg shell covereth
the thinn skin, and the skin coverethe the white and the white the
yolke and in the midest of the yolke is a little round hole,
even soe the fyer overgoethe the ayre ten times more then th
ayre overgoeth the Earthe In the hart of the earthe is the Center
of the world tht is to saye the middle poynte and in t myddle
poynt of the Center is a hole and directlie aboue that in
the ffirmamt is the ffyer of the starres, and aboue that is the
Christall heaven and waters of all Blisse devided amongst
the nyne ordres of Angell. Then is Heaven in the hiest pte
of all, and is most bright, and hathe most rome for it compasseth
about all the Element.





17
And as ther are fowre Element soe ther are fower complexions
accordinge and agreeing in all manner of qualities to the said
Elements viz. Sanguine, Colerique, Malencolique, flegmatique

The sanguine man hath his nature of the ayre and is hott and moyst
and hathe freshe blood growinge in his liver and he is of statare large
loving, ientill, hardie, pleasinge, seemelie redd of colure,abundant
in nature and may performe the workes of nature plenteouslie.

The Colerique man hathe his nature of the fyer, that is hott and drye
for Coler ingendrethe in the gall, and naturally he is leane slender
Covetus, irefull, hastie, backbitinge, brawling deceytfull, Subtill
of Venus but little he is able to pforme.

The fflgmatique man hath his nature of the water whch is cold &
moyst and fleame  engendrethe in the lunges, and he is naturally
disposed to be heavie, sloathefull, lumberinge, sleepeinge & ever
spittinge, dull and hard to conceyve pale visaged and hathe
little desire to Venerie, but it able to pforme muche.

The Melancholie man hath his nature of the earthe whch is cold and
drye and he is disposed to be lumpishe and heavie. malencholie ingen-
drethe in the mylte lieke to the dregg of blood. He is by nature
Covetous, malitious, envious, dreadfull froward & fastholdinge
he is of claye Color. And he delighteth not soe little in fleshlye
lust but as little he may performe he is soe drye and cold.

After the deluge and greate vniversall fflood of water whch drowned all the
world save Noe and his sonnes whch by the devine providence and power
of God were preserved in the arke whch he had made. Noe seatinge
him self vppon the land planted vynes for his comfort whch would
in noe wise bare any frute vntill he had taken the blood of ffowre
beastes and powred it at the rootes of the vynes whch made them to bear
plenteouslye: and that was wth the blood of an Ape, of a Lyon, of a
sheepe, and of a Swyne, and vnto this daye the operation of the
wyne accordethe to the nature of these beast, in men of  severall natur..

The





The sanguine man in takinge of his wyne resemblethe the Ape
for the more he drinckethe the merryer he is amongst companie
and he delightethe to weare highe colored clothe.

The Colericke man in takeinge his wyne resemblethe the Lyon
for when he is droncke then will he reddilie fight brawle and
chyde and he lovethe to weare black cloathe russett and graye.

The fflegmatique man takes his wyne of the Sheepe for when
he hathe druncke hard then he thinkes him self the wisest in
all the companie and he loves to weare greene Coler.

The Melancholie man in takeinge his wyne is swinishe for
when he is well whittled then he desirethe to sleepe, and he
delightes in black colers in his garment.

A Question wh the answere thervnto. viz.

Whether a man shall contynue all his lyfe in the same
complexion wherin he is borne or noe. Or whether
a mans complexion may be altered by misfortunes
& sicknes &tc.

ffor the disssolvinge of this Question it is to be vnderstood that a
man hathe two complexions a Naturall and an accidentall.

1The Naturall never changethe from the tyme of a mans
byrthe vntill he dye. and his complexion comethe of humors
that be in a man, that is to saye, of his bones, Senewes and of
his other members.

2The Accidentall complexion may be changed for it comethe of
the fower humors before specyfied & they may be changed in two
manners, Eyther naturallye or vnnaturallye.

1 Complexion may change naturallie fowre tymes in a mans lyfe
for when he is borne he is of sanguine Complexion hott and
moyst, of the nature of the Ayre, and disposition of ver. the
springe or pryme tyme, wch is in februarie, Marche &
Aprill the first quarter of the yeare. In wch complexion
he endurethe vntill he xxv. yeares old wthout alteration.

The





The second tyme complexion alterethe is when a man entrethe into the
Colericke Complexion whch is hott and drye of the nature of ffyre
and of the disposition of the Sommer whch is May June & July whch
is the second qter of the yeare and endurethe vntill a man
be xl years old before he change his complexion.

The third tyme Compexion alterethe is when a man entrethe into
melancholie that is cold and drye of the nature of Earthe and
disposition of Harvest viz. August September & October the third
Quarter of the yeare and this endurethe vntill a man be of the
age of Lvj. before he change Complexion.

The ffowerthe tyme that Complexion dothe alter in a man is when
he entrethe in to the flegmatique Complexion whch is a constitution
cold and moyst of the nature of water and dispostion of Winter.
whch is November, December & Jannuary whch is the ffowrethe
and last quarter of the yeare, and contynuethe all the reside
of a mans lyfe. And thus these Accidentall complexions doe
change naturallie wthout fallinge into sicknesses.

2  A mans complexion may vnnaturallie be changed and then
it causethe him to fall into a fevor or other sickness. And it
may be changed diverse and sondrye wayes. As in changing
of dyett in meate and drinke. or in changinge the place wher
in a man hathe bene brought vpp. alsoe in takinge meate
or drinke eyther to much or to little, eyther in muche sleepe,
or watchinge, studdie, Travell, rest, Sorrowe, ioye, anger, heate, cold,
Thirst, dronkennes, any of all these may alter and change a mans
complexion, for the excesse or superfluitie of any thinge maybe
hurtfull and contagious vnto man Wherfore moderation
is one of the best preservitves that can be for the healthe of
mans bodie.

That meates and drinckes will change the complexion of a mans
bodie into such nature and qualitie as they be of themselves is most
evident: ffor hott meates and hott drinkes drawe a man from a
cold Constitution to a hott, and on the contrarie cold meates and
drinke bringe a man from a hott temper to a cold, Soe liekewise
moyst meates drawe a man from a drye, and drye meates from a

moyst






20 a moyst complexion. Wherfore to observe a meane and a moderation
in these thing that a man shall eate or drinke is the best
rule that can be given in naturall Phisique for a man to
keepe his bodie in good healthe and temper.

Now as Almightie God hath given vnto man the knowledge
of the motion of the superior and celestiall bodyes as of
the vij Plannetes and the xij signes of t Zodiack &c.
Soe it is especyallie requisite and expedient for all practi-
tioners in Physique and Chyrurgerie in their administra-
tion of Physque and application of medycynes, in giveinge
of purgations and in Phlebotomie and lettinge of blood &c.
to have the perfect knowledge of the true aspectes of the sonne
& Moone. the coniuctions, oppositions, Motions, revolutions,
Period, Quartils, stations retrogradation, risinge & setting
of the Plannett, and to know the operations, nature and
qualitie of the xij Constellations of starrs or signes in th
Zodiack. to vnderstand in what signe, in what degree of th
signe the sonne or moone settethe everye daye in any of the
xij signes. and comparinge Cosmus the greate world wth
Microcosmus the little world man, to observe and consider the
twelue parts of mans bodye (a thinge soe observed and affir-
med by learned and wise men) wch are ruled and gouerned
by the said xij signes. as it vsually appeares in the Anatomie
of mans bodies in t begining of euerie Almanake:
ffor sure ther is nothinge more profitable, nothing more sure &
certayne to guide and direct them in their practise, then
the true and perfect vnderstandinge of these thinges (yf
soe be the witt of man can attayne to the perfect know-
ledge of them) for is most certayne and apparant, that t
sonne, Moone and starrs and God instruments by secondarye
causes by wch he workethe according as best seemethe to his
divine wisdome and power. /





21

Now as the sonne passethe thoroughe all the xij signes in the space
of a yeare, abyding in a signe thirtie dayes, Soe dothe the moone
passe thoroughe all the xij signes in xxxtie dayes, abyding in a
signe .. howres. And as the moone amongst all the Plannet
is nearest vnto the Earthe soe she hathe greatest affect in working
in Earthlie thing after the disposition and nature of the signes tht
she hath hir course in. And therfore it is requisite and necessarie
to know trulie the state nature and course of the moone for
therby a man may know when it is good to begin thing &
when to ende. And alsoe what weather is lieke to fall after
the nature of the signe whether it be drye or moyst, hott or cold,
It followethe accordinge to the nature of the signe that she is in,
In diverse coniuctions of plannet that she is ioyned wth and
therfore in ordre naturallie I purpose I purpose to declare th
nature and the state of everie signe.

In Gold Smith
In Gold Smith
Gold Smith

Of the twelue Signes of the Zodiaque.

Aries is the Signe wch governeth in the head of man and
woman, therfore if the moone be in Aries beware of cuttinge
in the head face or any veyne belonging vnto them. Also
it is dangerous in the the begining of Aries to take any head-
ache, or hurt in the head for it is a token of longe contynu-

ance of the same or of deathe. It is not soe dangerous
in the ende as in the begininge, for in the ende of
Aries a man may soone recover and be made hole yf he
be of good govermt. This signe is Orientall, hott &
drye, Colerique and of masculyne kynd, and is attractive
and raigneth from the middest of Marche, to the midest of
Aprill, He that is borne in this signe shalle of good witt
and shall not be to riche nor to poore. and he shall have
damage by his neyghbours. And he shall have power of
dead mens good. He shall be soone angrie and soone pleased
he shall have diverse ffortunes and discord. He shall love
eloquent people, and shall be excellent in many degrees.

He







22

He shalbe vnstedfast of his tong and Carriage and will
take vengeance on his enemyes, And shalbe better disposed
in all thing in his youthe then in his age, He shalbe wed-
ded at xxvtie years of age, if he be not he shalbe a forni-
cator, He shalbe a mediator for soome of his freind He,
shall have damage, a signe in his head in his shoulder
& in his bodie, and shalbe inriched by dead mens good
His first soone shall not live longe. He shalbe in danger
of ffowre footed beast. He shall have great sicknes
at xxiijtie years of age. And yf he fortune then to escape
he is lickelie then to live Lxxxv yeares after the course
of nature, yf he governe well him self.

The woman that is borne in Aries shalbe yrefull and suffer greate
wrong from daye to daye, she wilbe verye prone to lyeinge
She shall loose hir first husband, and shortlie after marrye a better
She shalbe in dread of deathe at xxvtie yeares of age & at xliij yeares
and shall have greate payne in hir head. The dayes of Sol and
of Mars shall be good for them but the dayes of Iupiter shalbe
evell dayes for them as well for the man as for the woman. And
they may be liekned to the sheepe that everie yeare loosethe his
fleese of wooll and in short space recoverethe agayne. The 15,
16,19 dayes of marche be dayes of perill to take sicknes or
to surfett in.

Taurus is the signe that raigneth in the neck and throate. It is
dangerous to be ventosed or cutt in that place whiles the signe
is in Taurus or to take any disease in the throate, and it is more
meridionall perilous in the ende then in the begininge. This signe is meridio-
nall that is of the southe pte whch is cold and drye malencholie
of the complexion of the earthe retentive and of the ffeminine kynd.
note In his signe it is good to begin to builde.

The man that is borne in the signe of Taurus from the mydest of Aprill
tilll the mydest of May shalbe stronge hardie and full of streghthe deli-
cious and shall have good  given him by other men. What he would have
done shall have a speedie dispatche in that wch he will enforce himself
to finishe , in his youthe he will despice everie man. He shall be irefull,

and






23
and goe on pilgrymage. and shall leave his friendes and live amongst
strangers He shalbe put in Offces and execute them well He shalbe
riche by weomen. He shalbe ingratefull, He shall come to good estate. He wilbe
revenged on his enemyes, He shalbe bytten of a dogge He shall have
iudgment of discerneing the diseases and sicknesses of weomen.
He shalbe mache greeved wth sicknes and wth venim. at xxijtie
yeares of age. At xxxtie yeares of age he shalbe abundant in riches
and shall ryse to greate dignitie, At xxxtie yeares of his age
he shalbe in pill of water. He shall live lxxxv. yeares and three
monethes after the course of nature, and shall see his ffortune
sorrowefull.

The woman that is borne vnder the signe of Taurus shalbe effectually
laboringe she shalbe a greate lyer and shall suffer greate harme,
she shall ioye and reioyce at the prosperitie and good of hir friend she
shall have many husband and many Children, she shalbe in hir best
estate att xvj yeares of age she shall have a signe in the midest of hir
bodye. She shalbe verie sicklie, and if she doe escape she shall live by
the course of nature lxxvi yeares She ought to beare ryng and pretious
stones about hir. The dayes of Jupiter and Luna are good bothe for e
man and woman, and the dayes of Mars are contrarie. They maybe
liekened vnto the Bull t laborethe the land and helpethe to sowe the seede
and when the corne comethe into the barne, he hath nothinge but the
straw only for his part and the Corne cleerelie taken from him. Soe
shall they t are borne vnder this signe keepe well their owne and
it shall not profitt them nor any other, and they shalbe reputed vnkind
The 10. & 21. of Aprill are contagious and dangerous dayes for
them to take any sicknes.

Gemeni raignethe in e hand of a man and is dubble bodyed
Occidentall t is of the West parte of sanguine Complexion that
is hott and moyst of the disposition of the Ayre, Digestuie when
the moone is in Gemini beware of Cuttinge in the Shoulders, Armes
or Handes, for whosoever takethe sicknes or hurt att that tyme it is
greate mervayle yf he escape, and much more pill in the ende then
in the begininge for then it is a verie greate token of deathe
It is not good then to shave yo beard or pare yo nayles.

The man.





24

The man that borne vnder Gemini from mydd May to the
midest of Iune shall have many wound He shalbe gentle
and mercyfull, He shall leade an open free and reasonable
lyfe, He shall receyve much money, He shall goe in knowne places
and goe many Pillgramages. He shall love to prayse him
self, he will not abyde wher he was borne, He shalbe wise
but negligent in his workes. He shall come to riches at
xxvjtie, yeares of his age, his first wyfe shall not live long wth
him, and he shall marrye a contentious woman, he shalbe
in yeares before he marrye, he shalbe bitten wth a dogg and
shall have a marke of yron or of fyer, he shalbe troubled in
Water, and shall passe the sea and shall live a hundred
yeares and Ten Monethes after the course of Nature.

The woman t is borne vnder Gemini shall labor verye hard
& paynefullie and shall come to greate honor, and be advanced
by other mens good and be accased of a false cryme. She shalbe
marryed at xiiij yeares of age and then she shalbe chast &
eschue all pill. And by the course of nature she shall live
lxx yeares and love and honor God. The dayes of Sol &
Mercurie be to them verie good and the dayes of Luna & Venus
are to them contrarious, And as well the man as the woman
shall heape vpp and gather to gyther greate store of good and
riches for their successors but will skantlye have the vse or
benifitt of them their owne selves they shalbe soe covetouslye
mynded. The 7. ♋︎15. &20. dayes of May be dayes to take
sicknesse or harme in.

♋︎  Cancer is the signe whch raigneth in the brest e sides and the Sto-
make, e mylt, e hart, e liver & the gall yf any man fall sicke
when the Signe is in Cancer it is mervayle yf he dye not for
it is perilous bothe in the begining & in the ende. The Signe
is of the Northe pte Septentryall cold and moyste of the nature of
water fflegmatique of Complexion the howse of the moone,
Expussative. When this signe rulethe it is good to take a
iourney toward the Northe pt When his Signe governethe
it is good alsoe to take laxatives & receyve potions, and indifferent
for bleedinge wher in those places wher the signe governethe:

The man.







25

The man that is borne in this signe of Cancer that is from the midest of Iune
to the mydest of Iuly shalbe very Covetous and of equall ffortune he
wilbe merrye and love well weomen t be courteous, wise and well favored
he shall have damage by envie. he shall have other mens good in
governement. ther shalbe discord and stryfe betwixt him and his
neyghbours. He wilbe revenged vppon his enemyes, many shall
mocke him & deryde him by his pryde and arogancye. He shalbe
in danger of water often tymes. He wilbe merrye wthin him
self, he shall feele greate griefes and paynes in his bodye,
He shall fynd money that is hidden, and he shall have trouble
about his wyfe. He shall see his perrill in some certayine yeare of
his lyfe but whch is best knowne vnto God. At the xxxiijtie yeare
of his age he shall passe the seas, He shall live accordinge to e
course of nature Lxx yeares, And shall have ffortune, fovorable
vnto him.

The woman that is borne vnder the signe of Cancer shalbe furious, inconti-
nent, angry and soone pecefied, she shalbe wise, serviceable, and
ioyfull,and shall suffer many pilles, she shall paye trulye that
she owethe, she shall labor sore and take greate paynes til she be xxxtie
yeares of age and then she shall have rest. She shall have many
sonnes and she shalbe, marryed at xvj yeares old. honors and gyft
shall fallow hir. she shall have wound in many places and
be in danger of water and the bytinge of a dogge. and shall
live after course of nature Lxx yeares. The dayes
of Venus Iupiter & Luna are good bothe for the man
& woman. and the dayes of Mars are exceedinge evill.
But they shall have good ffortune & victorie over their
enemyes. The 9. & 7. dayes of Iune are dangerous
dayes to take sicknesse & hurt.

♌︎  Leo is the Signe t rulethe in the back, sydes, senues, bones and
the gristles of a man. and when the moone is in Leo it is dange-
rous to be Cutt lett blood or hurt in any of theseplaces and it is
greater danger in the ende of Leo to take any sicknesse then in the
begininge for then he may recover yf he observe a good dyett and
governe him selfe well in his sicknes ffor this signe is stedfast

and





26

Trientall hott and drye, Colerique ffyerie attractive and of
the masculyne kynd. When this signe bearethe rule it is
good to speake and have conference wth greate king
and Lord and doe any thinge that is wrought wth
fyre It is not good at that tyme to applye any medycyne
to the hearte e stomack, e Liver or to any of the entrall
nor to give any inward potions for feaare of vomytinge
of blood.

The man t is borne vnder Leo from mydd Iuly to myd August
shalbe bewtifull valiant, mercyfull and eloquent He
shall weepe wth weepers, He shalbe arrogant in word
At xxxtie yeares old he shall have some displeasure wayghted
him and be in pill but he shall eschue the danger. he shall
bestow his benifitts vppon ingratfull persons, he shalbe hono-
red of good folkes and obtayne his desire and pleasure
and he shall have good by temporall service. He shalbe
greate and puisant and shall have chardge and com-
mand of the communaltie. And shall bothe Loose and
Wynn and aspyre to greate dignitie, and have three
wyves and goe often on pilgrymage. He shall have payne
in his sight, have hurt by a fall and be in danger of
water, and shall fynd hidden money. At viij yeares of
his age he shalbe sicke, and he shalbe in danger of a
greate Lord, and at xxxvjtie yeares he shalbe bitten wth
a dogge and be made hole agayne wth greate payne,
And he shall live Lxxxiiij yeares after nature.

The Woman that is in this signe borne shalbe fayer well
spoken, pleasant, mercyfull, meeke, & a greate Lyer, Hir
first husband shall not longe Live, she shall have payne
in hir stomacke, and be much respected by hir neyghbors
when she is xvij yeare old, and beare Children by three men
and grow to greate riches, be bitten with a dogge, be in perill
of a fall, And accordinge ^to nature she shall live Lxx yeares. The dayes
of Sol. Mars, & Mercurie are right good bothe for the man and woman.
They shalbe greate quarrelors, hardie, and mercyfull. The 15. & 20 dayes
of Iuly be dayes of pill to take hurt or sicknes.





27

Virgo raignethe in the wombe the mydryffe the gutt and sometyme
in the stomake the liver and the gall and the mylt but chieflie
in the entrall about the mydriffe And when the moone is in this
signe beware of cuttinge in any of these places and it is alsoe
dangerous to take any sicknes in the begininge of his signe, and
worse then it is in e latter ende. This signe is dubble bodied
meridionall of the Southe and of melancolique complexion that is
cold and drye lieke vnto the Earthe and of ffeminine kynd retractive
And when the moone is in Virgo it is not good to marrye a mayde
least shee be barren all hir life. but then it is good to plant &
graffe trees.

The man that is borne in his signe Virgo that is betweene the myd-
est of August to the mydest of September shall gentlie love his
wyfe and be a greate husband, ingenious, and verie carefull
about his busines and will earnestlie endevour to attayne
greate skill and cunninge in the facaltie he dothe professe.
He shalbe of greate Currage and yet bashefull, he will be
soone angrye and strive much to suppresse and surmount his
adversaries. He shall not have his first wyfe to live longe
wth him. He shalbe fortunate xxxiij yeares, and will not hyde
his substance. he shalbe in pill of water, and have a wound
wth yron And shall live after nature Lxx yeares.

The Woman that is borne vnder this signe Virgo shalbe
bashefull and ingenious and shall take paynes for hir
livinge and will be marryed verye yonge but shall not long
contynue wth hir first husband. but hir second husband shalbe
of longe lyfe and shall have greate substance by another
woman, She shall be in pill of a hurt by a fall and be in
ieoperdie of hir lyfe. She shall endure greate dolor and payne
at Tenn yeares of age and yf she escape all these dolors
she shall by the course of nature live Lxx yeares. She
shall bringe forthe virtuous frute and everie thinge shall
enclyne to favour hir, she shall reioyce in diverse ffortunes
The dayes of mercurye and of Sol shalbe good as well for e
man as for the woman, but the dayes of Mars shalbe contrarie.

and they





28

and they shall suffer many temptations whch wilbe be verie
hard and paynefull for them to endure vnlesse good prayeres
doe resist them. They shall delight to live in Chastitie
and suffer much tribulation. The 19 , and 20 dayes
of August are dangerous dayes to take sicknes
or hurt.





29





30





31

A Treatice of medicynes good agaynst he pestilence,
devided into Three part. Wherof the first declarethe
how a man should ordre and keep him self in the tyme of
the Pestilence t he fall not into the said sicknes. The second
expressethe how this sicknes comethe. And the third part sheweth
what medycynes are good and fitt to be vsed agaynst this conta-
gious disease.

Caput.1.

It often fallethe out t thoroughe default of observinge good ordre and govermt
in dyet, eateinge and drinckinge they care not how nor what men
doe fall many tyme into the danger of his sicknes. Therfore when
the pestilence dothe raigne it behovethe everie man to observe a
good dyett and keepe him selfe from excesse of meate and drincke,
To vse noe bathes, nor sweate to much, for all these open the powers
of the bodye & cause infectious ayre to enter. and they destroye the
livelie spirit in a man and doe weaken it verie muche. And
princypallie to eschue and avoyde the often vse of Venerie, for that
enfeoblethe a man and wastethe nature and soe openethe the powers of
his bodie that evill ayre may enter in and soe weaken and decaye a
mans spirit. Alsoe in the tyme of Infection vse to eate noe frutes
but such as be tarte. Alsoe abstayne from Garlicke, Oynions, Leekes
or any meates that bringe a man into any vnkynd heates. drincke
measurablye to slake thie thirst or heate. The best drinke were cold
water mixed wth vinegre, or Tysen for that drincke is verie good for
them that are of Cholerique Complexion, for they be hott and drye and
leane of bodye

Caput .2.

In a man are three princypall members. That is to saye the hart, the
Liver and the Brayne. and everie of these have their clensinge places.
wher they may put out their superfluities and puryfie them selves.
The heart hath his clensinge place vnder the arme holes. The liver
hathe his clensinge place in the flanckes of man or woman. And
the Braynes have their clensinge place vnder the eares and vnder
the thoate. Then by reason his sicknes comethe when the powers
be open, and that the ayre may speedilie enter into the bodie , and
mixe it selfe wth a mans blood and soe it runnethe to a mans harte
wch is the roote and ground of lyfe and soe it destroyethe man kynd &
killethe him in short tyme. Soe t the harte being thus infected, infec-
teth and destroyethe what soever is obvious vnto it, strivinge to

expell





32

expell his contagion at his clensing place, wch yf it fynd soe stopped
t it may not passe furthe, then it remaynethe still wth in the bodye
and soe dothe infect t principall part wch is next vnto it.
wch is the liver and destroyethe it. the liver haveinge recey-
ved infection from the hart indevourethe to send the same
to his clensinge place, wch yf it fynd the passage soe stopped
that it may not ysshue forthe, then the contagion passethe
to the third principall part, the Brayne and t send it to
his purginge place viz. to the eares or the throat and yf it
may ^not goe out ther it is greate mervayle yf it rest stedfastlie
in any place. And yf his contagious venim passe not out
wthin twelue howres after it is receyved wth bleedinge
then it abydethe in some place or other and makethe a botche in
some one of the three clensinge places aboue said.

Caput .3.

Whosoever feelethe him self infected wth the plague or
pestilence he shall know it by the shootinge and prickinge
in his bodye, wch is a manifest token of the Sicknes wherfore
he should bleed as speedilie as he can and yf he bleed not wthin
xii howers, then lett him abstayne from meate and drinck vntill
he doe bleede but defer not bleedinge aboue xii howers for
lettinge blood in tyme (as shalbe declared hereafter) is a specyall
meanes of cure. And the matter is then hardned and gathered
togither when it will not passe out of the vayne thoughe it
were cutt wth a sword. neverthelesse yf a man doe bleede
it cannot hurt him, neyther is he sure t it will helpe him after
the contagious matter is hardned and collected togither. And
if the matter have gathered to a head vnder the armehole
it comethe of the veyne that is called Tocall and then it is ex-
pedient to bleed in the same side tht the sicknes appearethe
otherwise it bringethe a double harme: One is that yf you bleede on
the hole side, the good blood on that side is not corrupt and ven-
nomed and then the evill blood will corrupt that place fro
whence the good blood went and soe the bodye becomethe the feobler
for want of good blood to comfort natuer: the second harme is
greater for then the corrupted blood will passe over the hearte
and venome it, and soe bringe deathe vnto the partie soe infected
And yf the sicknes doe appeare betweene the thyghe and e belly
then it comethe of the liver, and then yf the matter appeare in
the inner side by the privie members, then lett the ptie blood

in e





33

Betwixt e height of
e foote & e greate toe
ther is a greate veyne
wch is e best to be lett
blood in for diverse
causes diseases & ma-
ladyes as e pestilence
wch is suddenlie taken
by greate abundaunse
of humors but it must
be cut wthin e space
of 24 houres after
on feelethe him selfe
diseased, before
any fever come
for everie disease
beginethe or endethe
wth a fever.

in the foote on the same side and on the veyne betwene the thumble Too &
the Too next thervnto, and yf the botche arise ther, yf you bleed on the
arme all the corruption will drawe vpp agayne vnto the harte and
kill it. Alsoe yf the matter be more upward or outward to the side
further from the privie place, then it is best to bleed on the veyne
betwixt the ancle and the heele, or on the veyne t is vnder the ancle
wch is called tophia, or els be ventosed on the thyghe with a boyste beside
the botche And yf the botche appeare in the clensinge place of e
head & of the brayne then it is requisite to bleede on the head veyne
on the same arme that is called Cephalzia that is the veyne that lyeth
aboue e bodie veyne wch is called Cordiuea Focall in the bout of
e arme, or els bleed in e veyne that is about e hand called vena llliea
vel Vena Pulsatilis or els to be ventosed betwixt the shoulders
wth a boyst till the blood be drawne out. And soe the princypall
members beinge thus clensed the hearte shalbe comforted wth
cold electuaries to temper the greate heate therof, and then it
shalbe requiste to have water of these herbes That is to saye:

The water of dytanie , Pimpernell, Tormentill, and scabious,
and this a verie good medycyne for the sicknes yf a man be well kept.

But whiles a man is in this sicknes he ought to be carefullie and measurably
dyetted by the reason of the sharpe fevor wch all ^wayes accompanethe this
sicknes, and while a man is in his accute fevor he must eate but
little fleshe except some smale chickns sodden in water or els
freshe water fishe rosted on the coales to eate wth vinegre. Alsoe
it is good to eate pottage of Almons and drinke Tysen or smale
old ale and thinn And yf the patient desire to drinke redd wyne
give him in steede therof vinegre mingled wth fayre water, but
Reinshe wyne is much better then redd wyne yf the patient drinke
measurablie therof

And it good to lake the poulder of these herbes followinge wch is
verie comfortable agaynst infection and Venom:

Take Dittanu, Pimpernell, Tormentill, Scabeous, Bollarmo-
niack and Terra Sigillata: Braye all these herbes seulye by
them selves and the Bolar and Terra sigil. liekewise by them
selves and put it in Wyne or ale and drinke it and it will
drive the venome out wher it did enter. To conclude keepe
him from those thing recyted in the first chapter wch are thing
that Doe further the sicknes. And lett him that is infected
bleed betymes as is expressed in the iij. Chapter. And yf he ^be ruled
and ordred accordinge to this pscription by God grace he shall
be made hole and delivered of his sicknes for ever.





34
A Medecyne for Plague wch king Henrye
the Eyght did vse in e first yeare of his raigne
wch healed aboue eyght Thousand persons
the same yeare.

Inprimis Take a handfull of herbe grace, of feverfewe, mary-
gold, Sorrell the lieke quantitie, of Burnett a quantie,
of the topp or roote of Dragons a quantitie, washe them
cleane and seethe them softlye in a pottle of runninge
water from a pottle to a quart of liquor Then let it
stand from the fyre till it be almost cold. stayne it wth
a fyne cloathe and drinke it, and yf it be to bitter put
therto a quantitie of Suger Candie And yf it be dronken
before any purples or flowers doe arise ther is noe perill in
the patient by God grace ffor his medycyne is well pved.

Another sovoraigne medycyne for the plague

Take of Sage of Vertue, of herbe Grace, of Elder leaves
of Bramble leaves, of wormewoode of eache of these a handfull
Stampe all these togither and straine them thoroughe a cleane
clothe, wth a quart of, whyte wyne, and put therto a quantitie
of white ginger and drinke therof everie daye a spoonefull
Nine dayes togither, and after the first Spoonefull you shalbe
safe from the disease all e yeare after yf you be not infec-
ted before you drinke it. Neverthelesse yf a man be inifected
before he drinke this medycyne, Then lett him take
water of Scabious, water of dragons, water of Byttenie
of eache a spoonefull and a good quantitie of Treacle
of Geene and mixe them togither and drinke it:
And it will cause e venome of the plague to growe to a
sore. And when the sore dothe appeare.

Take Bramble leaves, Elder leaves, muster seede and
stampe them altogither and make a playster therof and
laye it to the sore, and it will by God grace in short tyme
drawe out the venome and heale the Sore. yf the sicke
man be well governed and close kept for this hath
bene well pved.





35

Another one of the most holsome preservatives agaynst
the Plague.

Take Carduus Benedictus and hange it in a howse xiiij dayes
or more till it be drye, then lay it on a fayer clothe in the sonne
and when it is thoroughe drye braye it and make poulder therof
And yf one feele any grudinge or prickinge of the plague, then
take of the same poulder wthin xij howres after the pricking begin
or sooner the better, the quantitie of a wallnutt or more and as
much Treakle, a spoonfull of water of dragons and mixe m
togyther and take it vpp wth a knyfes poynte and eate it wthin
xij howres after, and it will cause the sicknes to breake out
in diverse places. And this Medycyne is as pretious
for poyson, Keepe this poulder for it is worthe gold and proved

To make a salue for Botches

Take Perosine white Insence and sheepes Tallowe of eache a lieke
quantitie well melted puryfied and mixed togither and stirr them
well, Then strayne them into a cleane vessell Then put therto
the iuyce of Walworte as much by wayte as it is of one of the other
and myngle them altogither over a softe fyer till it be well then
lett it coole and make it vpp.

A good water for the Plague

Take ffemitorie, Scabious, Rodes, Pimpernell, Pettemorrell
Hearbe Grace, Tormentill, Millefollie, Maythe of everie
one of them one handfull, Two handfull of Columbynes and
ffennell wth the croppes wch be seeded, gather them betwixt viij
& ix. of the clocke in the morninge, and washe them not but
make water of them by distillation altogither wthout any other
thinge.

A good drinke for the Plague.

Take Aloes a penny weyght and put it in half a pynt of
Malmesey and put therto halfe a spoonefull of Aqua Vitae
and drinke therof Two spoonfull in Marche Three spoonefulles
in Aprill fowre in Maye when you be fastinge and that
yeare you shall not be infected.





36

Another good drinke for the Plague.

When you perceyve on infected wth the sicknes,
Take ffive spoonefulles of the water of dragons, Two
spoonefulles and a halfe of good vinegre. & as muche runninge
water, and the quantitie of an hasell nutt of fyne
treacle, mixe all these well togither put therto a quantitie
of the poulder of Egg shell or poulder of Brymstone as you
thinke the patient may beare. Make altogither luke warme
and give the patient to drinke and it will expell the venome
and by god grace save his life. Bene Probatum.

To make water Imperiall good agaynst venome
& infection

alsoe put therto
Bitteny, Scabious,
Sorrell, Dragons,

Take tormentill, Scabious, Dictamu and pimpernell of eache of them in
like quantitie and make water thereof by distillation for it is e most pretious
water that canbe devised by phesitians, good agaynst all poysons but specyally
agaynst the plague. ffor as they affirme it is impossible that any man should dye
of poyson or of pestilence that vse to drinke his water next there hearte And it
is called water Imperiall because Emperors and greate Lord in other
Cuntryes doe vse to drinke of this water for feare of poysoninge wherfore
keepe it for a Soverainge thinge

A good drinke agaynst all venom

Take Dictamum Philependula, Saxifrage, pimpernell, Tormentell
Balearmomack & Terra sigillata Braye the herbes and make poulder
of the residue, and drinke it wth beare or Ale and it will put out the venom
and make one whole.



Take a Redd oynion and Cutt it beneathe and Core it and fill it full
of Trecle of Iesie, and rost it in the Embers, afterward stampe it
drincke it wth the strongest Ale you can gett, And this will suffer
noe ill thinge to remayne wthin yo bodye, or els drinke it wth planten water





37

Another Tretice of the plague or Pestilence

The preface.

Considering yt is requisite & necessarie for all practitioners
in Phisique and Chirugerie to have a tender care and conside-
ration of the common good and healthe of the kyng liege people
how they may be healed comforted and cured whch are infected or apt
to take infection of the Plague or pestilence: A worthie, noble &
learned Doctur of Divinite, that was prof0undlie and substantially
learned and seene in all the seven Scyences, devised by his learning
his Tretice followinge. moved and induced thervnto thoroughe
a greate desire he had to doe good to everie Christian man & woman
thinkeinge him self & all other Christians bound by the bond of
Christian Charitie, to helpe others in tyme of necessitie and danger.
And as the purpose and intention of the author of this worke was
verie good to witt the prayse and glorie of God and the helpe
and comfort of his Christian bretheren in tymes of their
great pill and danger: Soe noe doubt exceedinge much
good may be gotten herbye for every man may learne to
be his owne Physition in tyme of neede agaynst the vengeance
and deadlie corruptopn of the pestilence when it raignethe.
Now this worke of the pestilence is devided into three parts The 1:
declarethe diverse reasons how and by what meanes e pestilence
may be ingendred.

The 2. shewethe how a man may be preserved from it

The 3: Demonstratethe e remedie helpe and  medicyne agaynst
this contagious disease.

Cap:2

The ground and occasions of ingendringe the Pestilence

It is found in the writing of ffowre Principall doctors of the Churche
of Christ and Chiefe pillers and vpholders of the Catholique faythe
namelie St Augustine, St Gregorie, St Jerome, & St Ambrose, in such
places wher they speake of his contagious disease. That Sinne
is the Chiefe originall cause therof when it raignethe amongst e
people, especyallye when the governers of the Churche of
God, and the expounders of the word, and Law of God doe
transgresse and swarve from ther dutie, therby causing not only
plague and pestilence but many other sicknesses infirmities
and most grievous miseries to be (as tokens of God manifest
wrathe and indignation) inflicted vppon people.







38

It is written in the second booke of King and 24. chapter That
for king David sinne God sent his Prophett Gad and gave
him choyce of three thing viz. Famine for the space of
seaven yeares, or to pursued of his enemies for Three monethes
or els to give the plague of pestilence to raigne vppon
him and his people for the space of three dayes and three
nights: Whervppon Kyng David toke such inward grefe &
remorse of conscyence for his sinne and did soe repent
him for his abhomynal wickednes. That he wth exceeding
greate devotion and wth an humble and Contryte harte
cryed Peccavi, and in greate sorrow and anguishe of mynde
powred forthe his prayers before Almightie God, desie-
ringe pardon and remission of his sinnes att his
handes. And of these three chastisements he maide choyce
to endure the pestilence: Considering t yf hunger shold
be amongst that himself was then the liekeliest to be
pserved and in battle he should be rested and saved yf
it were possible but as for the pestilence it was as
lieklye to infect him as any other. But in his greate
strait that David was put vnto, his chiefe ground and motive
in his choyce was the mercye and goodnes of God whereon he relied
and therfore did chuse to fall into his handes. Soe the lord
sent the pestilence in Isarell from the morninge even to
the tyme appoynted; and ther dyed of the people from Daniven
to Bersheba seventie thousand men. And when king
David did perceyve that God did take soe sharpe vengeance
on his people for his sinnes , he repented, prayed to God
for grace and favour, and he obtayned his request and
the plague ceased. And therfore let everie one endevour
to leave and forsake his sinnes and strive to live and lead
his life agreable to the comandemts of Almightie God
for t is the most Specyall medycyne and best preser-
vative in the world against the plague, and the Chiefe
meane to put and turne awaye the vengeance of God
& the plague and pestilence.






39
Some men hold an opinion that the infection of the plague ingendreth
and proceedethe from the corrupted & infected ayre and vapors of e
Earthe: It may well soe be for accordinge as the people here on earthe
are disposed, soe are the heavenlie bodies aboue inclyned, wherby
you may by good reason pceyve, that of good and vertuous livinge
comethe grace and goodnes, and contrariewise of a sinfull and
wicked life comethe shame, Sorrowe Sicknes and Vengeance;
As appeared at the deluge of Noes flod wher all the world
was drowned for Sinne except eyght persons What man
liveinge can remember t ever sinne was vsed in soe greate
abyomination, soe supported clearelye wthout correction as
now, insoemuch as it is verie offensive and destable to all
good people that feare & love God. And therfore noe mer -
vayle yf the wrathe of God be powred downe from heaven
vppon men, and t he doe visit them wth the infection
of the plague and many other infirmities and miseries since
that men by their transgression doe daylie pvoke him
to anger It is written in Libro Interpretationis, that
all the fowre Elements and all other inferior thing that
are coumpounded of them are ingendred by the course and mo -
tion of the Plannet wch are aboue and that all the inferior
bodies haveinge life, have their beinge, their health, their
sicknes by the moveinge and operation of the superior
bodies.

The second Chapter wherin is declared how a man
may preserve and keepe him self  frome infectio of the
Plague. And how a man may know from what pte of e
bodie the infection dothe pceede.

The firste and princypall preservative agaynst the plague
Is wiselye and carefullie to governe himself. to eschue such
meates and drinkes as may cause him to surfett, and may
ingendre in him grosse and evill humors, wherby a man may fall
into a fever. Viz. Goose pigeons, Mallard Venison, Lamprey
Scate, Eales & such other slymie meates, alsoe Oyneons,
Garlicke, Leekes frutes wch be contagious, and doe ingender
vnnaturall and vnkynd heates, and bringe a man by vnkind
heate vnto an Ague. Alsoe Bathes, Stoves and much sweating
open the powers of mens bodyes, and makethe venemous ayre

to enter






40
to enter and to infect the same and to corrupt the spirituall members
and destroye all the vitall spirits in a man.  It alsoe requisite and
behovefull  for a man in the plague tyme to eschue the voluptuous
lust of the fleshe for they doe not onlye open the powers of the bodye
but alsoe destroye the naturall strengthe and vigor in a man &
infeeblethe the spirituall memberes and the vitall spirits.
In tyme of pestilence also it is good for everie man to abstayne from
vnmeasurable drinkinge and drunckennes, but to drinke moderately
to allaye thirst and noe more. And the vse of these drinkes and
waters viz. Tysen mixed wth vinegre, water of  Burrage, of Endife,
of Lettuce, of violett, of Roses, Scabioius, Tormentill, dictanum
myngled by even portions or druncke by them selves are verie good
and profitable agaynst the pestilence in Sommer tyme, especyallie
for them that are of a Colericke complexion, for they are hotter and
dryer then others are. It is verie contagious alsoe to come into
corrupt ayres in the morninge, before one take e ayre of the fyre.
Stinckinge gutteres, uncleane standinge waters, draught and other
evill savours may be an ocasion of the plague, wherfore it is
good for one in tyme of infection to keep his Chamber daye and
knight fast closed agaynst the East and Southe, and to have a pann
of Coales in his chamber and to laye theron baye leaves, and rose -
marie dryed and frankencense, and to keepe a good fyre in
the Chamber night and daye is verie good, with the vse of good fumo -
sities of ffrankencense rosemarie and other such good thing as
hath bene said for corrupted ayre hathe an attractive power
in it drawinge from the livelie spirits and spirituall members
their vigor and bringethe infection and venom overthwhart e
veynes of the hart, wch infectinge it, hastnethe a mans deathe.

See in the 2 Chapter of e
former treatise of e plague.

How to know from what part of the bodye the infection dothe come and
pceede viz. from wch of the princypall members of mans bodye.
ffor as hathe bene said in a former treatise ther are iij principall
Members of the bodye the Hearte the liver and the brayne wch
have their severall clensinge places wherin they expell and send
forthe their venome and infection yf they have receyved any:

The hearte hathe his clensinge place vnder the arme holes,
and therfore yf any tumor or botche be ther it is a signe that the hearte
hath sent his contagion thither

The clensinge place of the liver is the flankes and therfore yf
ther appeare any matter in the share besides the privities then it appeareth
that the infection is sent thither from the liver

The braynes have their place of clensinge vnder the Eares and vnder the
throate, and therfore yf any swellinge or botche doe ther appeare it is evident
the infection comethe from the Brayne. Now of the Cure vide Cap: sequenti






46
The third chapter wherin is declared what remedie and medycynes
are best to be vsed to avoyde the danger of this most contagious sicknes
of the plague or pestilence. /

How a man may know in tyme of the plague or pestilence that he hath
receyved the infection hath bene declared in a former treatise
viz. by the extraordinarie shootinge and prickinge that he shall feele
in his fleshe. Now for the cure as it is ingendred by some naturall
causes and pceedethe from thing (wch vsed by God as secondarie causes
and instrument for e punishmt of sinne as hath bene declared) have
their source and beginninge from nature. Soe noe doubt Almightie
God of his greate mercy and goodnes, takeinge commiseration
of mans infirmitie hath appoynted and given vnto man naturall
helpes and remedies for the same, as well as for other sicknesses
and diseases. Soe that Avecine in his commune Treatise De Cura
Febrium saythe verye well: That ther is noe sicknes that fallethe
to man pceedinge from naturall causes but ther is a naturall
remedie and medycyne pvided for the same. /

The first meanes therfore that hathe bene thought the best and fittest
meanes of remedye after the infection receyved, by learned men
in the secreet of nature and in physique is lettinge of blood
and t wth as much speede as may be, wthin twelue houres
andt the furthest and that in fittinge and convenient places
accordinge as the infection and corruption shall appeare
and manifest it self for (as hath alreadie bene shewed yf that
any corrupt matter appeare about the share and privie members
then it is an argument that the Liver is infected and then the
partie soe infected must be lett blood on the same side in the veyne
that is betwixt the greate Too and the next vnto it, and in noe
wise lett him bleed in the arme, for that would drawe vpp the
infection agayne vnto the liver and soe to the harte and
kill the man. But yf the botche be more outward toward
the side and further from the privities then lett blood on the
Veyne betweene the Ancle and the foote and e heele or
els in the veyne that is vnder the Ancle called Sophia
or els be ventosed speedilye beneathe the botche, wch thoughe it be

Vide cap. 3m
in e former
treatise

verie paynefull yet in case of necessitie a man will endure
much to safe his lyfe. Yf Corruption appeare vnder the arme hole
it is a signe the same comethe from the hart, and in that case it
is expedient to bleed on the same syde the sicknes dothe appeare
otherwise to bleed on the contrarye side bringeth a double harme, as is
formerly declared. v cap: 3.o of the former treatise /

But yf





42
But yf any sore doe appeare vnder the Eares or vnder
the throat then it evident that the infection pceedeth fro
the brayne as is allredye specyfied, and for remedie
in this case, a man must bleed on the same side the corruption
dothe appeare, and That eyther on the veyne vnder the tounge
or on the head veyne on the arme called Cephaliea wch veyne
lyethe next aboue the bodye veyne Carduica lyenge in the middle
of the arme right vnder the bought of the arme or els on the
Vena Illica head veyne wch is betweene the Thumb and forefinger. Or els
pulsatilis./ be ventosed betwixt the shoulders till the blood be exhaust.

But whensoever any is lett blood in any of these veynes, he must
take heed that he sleepe not in xij howres after his lettinge
blood. And it is verie good to carrye a Pommander in ones hand
contynuallye to take awaye the evill ayre of the infection
and to Comfort the brayne and spirituall members of e
bodye. Whiche is made in this manner ffollowinge.

To make a Pommander to carrye in one hand
in tyme of infections of the Plague to take awaye
the evill ayre.

Take Laddanum puryfyed one Ounce Storax Calamint disolved, Roses
Cloves, mace of eache three halfe pennie weyght, and a Penny weight
of chosen Amber and Muske make poulder of them that will make poulder,
Then take a spoonefull of Oyle of Bayes, an ounce of Virgin waxe
and disolve them, and when they be disolved mingle them altogether
vppon the fyre, and when it is cold make Ball therof the quantitie
of a Wallnutt. And this is the true makeinge of a Pommander
the sent wherof dothe comfort the livelie spirit of a man

2 Next after the corrupt blood is drwane out accordinge as hathe
bene sayd, and the princypall members ventosed yf ther be any fevor
or Ague annexed wth the Corruption the harte ought then to be
comforted and refreshed wth good Electuaries and wholsome stilled
waters, that will wthdrawe vnkynd and unnaturall heates
as Conserve of Violett, Burrage Conserve of Buglosse drawne
wth sugar decocte. And these waters, as water of Endive, Roses,
Tormentil, Burrage, Violett Scabious Dittanye, and of lettuce
drunk wth Renishe wyne or wth wyne of Rochell, especyallye
whyles the vnkind heate dothe remayne And washe the Temples
wth the water of Roses and of Bittenie and yf the violent
heate of the ague be vppon one lett him wett a lynnen clothe
in the water and laye to his forehead and Temples fowre tymes
double, And lett him applye an other clothe to Coole his liver, and

alsoe






43
alsoe put vnder eache arme a clothe wett in the said wateres and
in this a man shall fynd verie greate ease and comfort whither
he be curable yea or noe But the most needfull and expedient
thing of all other is, yf the Sore or botch doe outwardlye appeare
to drawe by art and skill the corruption from the clensinge place
as farr as may be from the harte. And this medycyne following
hath bene approved verie good therfore. viz.

A medicyne to drawe e
Plague sore
farr from e hart.


Take an hearbe called Oculus Christi, Vervayne stampe them
and laye a playster therof two fingeres of from the sore, and when
it hath lyen ther a good whyle, remove it agayne to another
place and lett it rest ther an other whyle. Soe use it till it come
to the place wher you would have it and then breake it.

A good medycyne for the plague.

Take a handfull of Rewe & of Marigold Scabious ffetherfewe,
Sorrell and Burnett of eache a handfull, a quantitie of dragons
eyther the rootes or toppes, Then washe them cleane and put to them
a pottle of cleane runninge water, and lett them seethe togither
to a quarte and when it is almost cold straine and drinke it
everie morninge and eveninge fastinge. This, medycyne is e
better yf you put to it a little Sugar Candie and if it be
dronke before the purples appeare it will helpe God willinge.

An other Medycyne for the Plague.

Take nyne Sponefull of runninge water agaynst the streame
and a C. Sponefull of Red vinegre ii Sponefull of Trecle of
Iene, Seethe all these togither and skim it cleane and yf the
patient be aged let him drinck it blood warme, a Child as hott
as he can suffer it, and lett him fast longe after it.

An other Medycyne for the Sicknes and to breake the Sore

Take fetherfewe, wormewoode, Sorrell, Muggworte, Marygold Rewe Scabious,
and dragons the Cropes or the rootes of eache of them a handfull, and stampe
them and take the uiyce of them, and a pynte of Ale or Malmesie, and lett them
boyle togither. Then take ij sponefulles of treacle of Iene & put to it & lett
it seethe togither till it be well sodden. Then lett the patient drinke it
and keepe him warme, And yf  he take it in tyme it will drive the cor-
ruption out; And yf the sore doe appeare Take ij greate oynions and rost
them in the fyre, and a handfull of night shade and braye it Small and take
the iuyce, and put them to a penyworthe of Aqua vitae and put it all togither
and all cold put it in wher the sore is & it will breake it. You must beate
them altogither in a Morter, and then it wilbe like a plaister







44
An excellent Powlder verie good for many diseases
and to carrie w one for it hathe holpen verie
many men.

Take Licoris Anise seede and fenell seede all in verie fine
powlder, an ounce & half of Graynes, longe Pepper
Saffron Synamome Ginger of all these in powder an ounce
Put all these powders togither, but not the Sugar Candye
but when you will eate of it put Sugar candie to it for
this powder dothe preserve the hart from diseases and yf
you put to it a little powder of wormewoode seede and
Sentuarice seede in powlder it is pure good for the
Stomake.





45
A Treatise or worke called the Regiment of Healthe
devided inte Eyght parts or Chapteres wherof the first
entreatethe of the commoditie and profitt that comethe by
keepeinge a good ordre and governement. The second
what is be done everie morninge t a man may preserve
his healthe, The Third showethe the good and benifitt that
of honest and vertuous excersices of the Bodye, The
fowrethe declarethe the diverse kyndof bodelie exercyse
wch are to be vsed accordinge to the diversitie of complexions
and Constitutions of men. The ffyfte teachethe how a
man should ordre and dyett him self in eateinge and
drinkinge. The sixt what meate may be best for e
sustentation and comfort of mans bodye. the seventhe

Galen that profound Clarke and excellent learned  physition sayethe t
it is verie expedient for a man to learne good and holsome rules
instructions for the preservation of his healthe wch beinge well obser-
ved aman may preserve his bodye in good state free from sicknes
vntill he come vnto decrepit and impotent age. He sayethe of
him self that he never had any sicknes vnlesse it came eyther by
over violent travelinge, or labor, or by liveinge in unpure and cor-
rupt Ayre, or by visitinge of Sicke and diseased folkes, wherfore
he affirmethe that noe man can observe a good dyett or keepe a
holsome Regiment of his healthe, That is constrayned to travell
night and daye to gett his liveinge, and may not make choyce
of the place and ayre wher he would live: for that man that will
live and keepe the rules and ordres that tend to the preservation
of healthe must have so plentifull an estate as that he may live
wthout labor, and have all such meanes and helpes as will
mayntayne and preserve a man in good healthe.

Ad gubernationem sanitatis to holsome governement of a mans
healthe ther are Eyght necessarie things required.

1 The first a discreate choyce of such thing as shalbe eaten or dronken

2 The Second bodylie exercyse before meate, wch must be ad ruborem
non ad sudorem till a man begin to sweate or the wynd begin
to waxe short.

3 The Third. That the meate you eate be well chewed.

4. The ffowrthe To eate noe meate till you have a good Appetite.

5. The ffyft That a man sleepe in the morninge till he wake of
his owne accorde.

The Sixt





46

6 The Sixt, to eate yo meate wth myrthe and gladnes, for that
makethe good digestion.

7  The Seventhe, Keepe yo self from Cold in the winter and in
the Springe.

8 The Eyght, Vse to eate Saffron sometyme in yo meates
for it helpeth digestion and comforteth the Stomake, and
gladethe the harte, and keepethe the humors from rottinge.

It is reported in Storye That ther was a certayne kinge
wch demanded of Three Physitions of his wch were of
three sondreye Nations This Question, viz. What were
the best thing to be vsed for the bodelye healthe of man.

1 The first wch was a Grecian sayd, Take everye daye in
the morninge yo mouthe full of warme water, and you shall
never neede other medycyne.

2 The second wch was a Mede answered, Eate Grommell
seedes everie daye fastinge.

3 The Third and last wch was an Indian, said Sleepe in the
morninge till you fynd noe heavines in yo bodye of
the meate you eate over night.

But Aristotle saythe Eate everye daye one and twentie
sweete Raysons, for they helpe flegmatique diseases, and the
fevor quarten, they refreshe a mans mynd and his under-
standinge And that daye that a man eatethe figg wth
the Croppes of hearbe Grace, ther shall noe poyson hurt
him, wch is soone tryed.

Gallion & Constantyne affirme That measurable Abstinency
is the most pfitable medycyne to eschue Cares and pen-
sivenes, hevines and dulnes, wrathe and anger, wch doe
muche trouble and annoye cholerique psons. Vse noe
late suppers, nor vnder meales or beavers. Walke after
meate, vse noe stronge drinke, hold not yo water, nor
force or constraine yo self to  s.ege, keepe yo hart merrye
and yo mynd ioyfull. Travell in measure, Take noe
excesse in meate or drinke, In Winter eate moderatlie
of holsome meate, In the Springe tyme drinke not to much
for then Children are best in healthe. In Sommer wett yo

meat.







47

meates well for then old men are best at ease.  In winter young
men are best at ease. in August vse to eate not frutes.

Allexander sayethe That he wch dothe well observe this excellent
ordre of good goverment of his healthe Shall neede neyther
Physition nor Chyrurgion, vnlesse it be by accydent, or by
vrgent causes of Stripes and woundes receyved in ffrayes
or Battell.

The Second Chapter shewinge what is best to be done in the morninge
after that a man dothe awake from his sleepe.

First after that a man hath performed his dutie in his devotions toward
Almightie God, it is good for a man to Clothe him self in sweete clothes, To
Combe his head, washe his handes, open the powers of his bodie, that the vapors
may assend vpward from the Stomack to the head, ingendred in the Sleepe
And then assaye to put out e Superfluitie of the bodye, by Cougheinge, Spettinge
washinge yo handes, makeinge of water and emptieinge the entralles downe-
ward. In Sommer tyme washe yo handes and face wth cold water, and in
Winter, wth warme water.  Then walke a whyle in some holsome ayre, and
stretche out yo limbes. And servinge God contynuallye in his feare be
honestlye merrye. Flye Anger and Idlenes, ffor myrthe and quiet of mynd
wth moderate exercyse doe much comfort and glad the hearte, and waste and
consume evill and grosse humors in the bodye of man.

The Third Chapter of the good and comoditie of temperate exercyse.

He that will use exercyse that his holsome and good for the healthe of the bodye
must doe it moderatlie, and soe in his voluntarie labors he must avoyde excesse
Before meate to be walkinge or rydinge in Cleane places, and highe, and in
pure ayres, and not to come amongst Muckhillor Marishes, and soe to
exercyse the bodye till it begin to sweate or waxe warme, and then rest, for yf you
should make any greater labour of it, it would be paynefull and bringe fayntnes
and soe yo labour would be immoderate and troublesome lieke the laboures
of Marchant, Artificers, Ploughemen Carters and such liek, for neede
constraynith them that they cannot leave, when they would. And therfore
Plinie saythe that moderate labor may much benifitt a man in the
preservation of his bodye in healthe, for it increasethe naturall heate
wch is the cause of strengthe. wherby alsoe the facultes attrac-
tive, retentive, digestive and expulsive, togither wth
the five bodelie sences of hearinge, seeinge, Smellinge, tastinge
and feelinge are holpen and Cherished. And in like sort also
the Three interior Sences properlie belonginge to man, namelye

fantsie,







48

Phantasia seu Imaginatio the Phantasie or immagination
Judicium suie sensus communis the iudginge or descerninge
facultie, & Memoria suie Recordatis the memorative
facultie, is holpen by moderate Labor, Soe that men
did not erre in their Labors and exercyses in their extreemes
but could a due measure and moderation in them, ther
should never neede any other medycyne for a preserva -
tive of the healthe of man.

Now ther are two thinges required in moderate and discreete
Labor. Viz. That ther be not when a man dothe labor or
exercyse to greate repletion or to much emptined of bodye
for bothe of these doe exceedinglye weaken and infeeble the
bodye. The second is mode exercyse wch Supplyethe the
defects and want of bleedinge, Bathinge, and such other
Wherfore Labor is a medycyne that is not bytter, nor
dreadfull, nor chardgable in causinge great expence but
is a verie good recreation fot the bodye yf it be done in
Sweete and drye places and holsome ayres, wher a man
may take pleasure and delight to see goodlye trees and
Plantes pleasant Countryes, delectable field medowes
and pastures, delightfull streames of running waters,
and especyally in such places wher he may take the Sweete
sent and odour of most flagrant & odoriferous flowers;
and most holsome herbes in well tilled, dressed and manured
land and by the viwe hereof and by the delectation and
Sweete contentment he shall receyve herby, his mynd
may contynually be stirred vpp to give laud and prayse
to our good and gracious lord God and Saviour who hath vouche-
safed to bestowe these excellent benefitts and blessing
vppon vs. Fulgeus the phylosopher saythe that moderate
exercyse in any good Scyence, facultie or honest busines & good
labour is the most perfect preservative of bodely health and
wastethe the Superfluities of Choler and grosse humors, it increaseth

otiu tollas periere
Cupidinis arcus Contemptaeq iacent
& sine luce fasces.

good blood, strengthenethe the Sinewes, comforteth the veynes, It avoydeth
Vice, puttethe awaye pensivenes, thoughts and Cares/ It keepes
a man Lustie and in liekinge, It ingendrethe ioye comfort
and Consolation, Banishethe Sicknes and all evill, It is ovserved

t Labour






49
t Labour dothe heate and drye the bodye, therfore it must needes be
necessarye for flegmatique persons to vse, to drye vpp their moyst
humors and to heate ther bodyes wch by rest and idlenes are
cooled and moystned but a Colerique bodye is made more moyst
by labour. wherfore wher labour and exercyse is discretely vsed
ther needethe noe other Physique as hathe bene alreadie declared
To conclude therfore let vs gather togither the benifitts and pfitts
of bodelye labour and exercyse discreetlye and moderatelye
vsed. viz.

It stirreth kyndlye and naturall heate, it openethe the powers
of the bodye, It loosenethe Cold, thick and toughe humors and
expellethe them, Makethe all the ioyntes nimble and lythe,
It comfortethe all the members and part of the bodye;
And as moderate labor is good soe measurable rest is good for e
bodye and to much therof hurtfull and evill, for therby evill
and Corrupt humors are ingendred, And even as water
yf it rest and stand still it will putryfie and stincke, Iron
yf it lye still and be not vsed rust; soe liekwise man or woman
when they have ever much rest doe decaye in healthe and strenght
of bodie, and fall in diverse infirmities, sicknesses and diseases,

The fowrthe Chapter of the diversitie of exercyses to be
vsed accordinge to the sondrye conditions of men & difference
in constitution of bodie and complexion and alteration of the
temper of the ayre.

Now as men doe differ in condition and Compexion soe are diverse
and sondrye exercyses to be vsed of them: according to the constitution
and condition of everye man: For we see t some be stronge and lustie
others weeke and feeble, Some are riche others are poore, Some have
greate libertie, other are restrayned therof, Sometyme the wether
is fayre, somtyme otherwise. And soe these diverse dispositions requir
diverse exercyses. The first and the best is to walke before meate
in Sweete ayres drye and cleane places free from evill savours and
from filthie morishe waters as is before rehearsed. And those that
cannot goe to ryde yf they have horses. An other yf a man can neyther
ryde nor goe abroad by reason of the fowlenes of the weather, Then
lett him walke in the howse, and beare some weyght from place
to place till he be wearie or take a staffe in his hand and hold it
till some take it from him by force, or hold a penny in his hand &
lett one take it out yf he can. Or els hold and pene yo wynd as
longe as you can for that is good for them t shall Runn, Wrastle, cast
the stone or such lieke, But of all exercyses flee vnmeasurable

exercyse of





50
exercyse of venerie, for when a man dothe wast and cast out
good humore to muche, he is more weakenned and infeebled
therby, then yf he should lett out fortie tymes as much blood
out of his bodye. And the overmuch vse therof  ingendrethe
the Palseye and many other diseases.

The fyfte Chapter declarethe how a man should ordre
him self in his dyett.

Now as ther are some that have all thing at their will and pleasure,
meate and drinke, and what els they can desire, Soe other ther
are wch have not this plentie, yea have scarce ynoughe many tymes
to suffice nature, and these are not bound to observe the dyett prescribed.

These Rules therfore serve for such as may make choyce in their dyett
and live in plentie, Lett them therfore eate good levened bread,
drincke holsome wyne or Ale, feede on light meat of easie digestion,
Talke merrylie att the Table, Eate not wthout an Appetite,
Chew well ther meate Sleepe not with a full stomake, nor Eate
till their Stomake be emtye, wch you shall know by the desire you
have to eate and by the Whitenes of yor Spettle, And alsoe yf
the desilre of yor Appetite be kindled, you shall feele a good ayre
come from e Stomake. And yf you eate wthout an appetite yor
Stomake may not digest yor meate by reason of coldnese therof,
And to walke after meate is verie comfortable for the Stomake.

The sixt Chapter declarethe the qualitie of meates, and that
a man should make choyse of such as are most agreable to his constitutio,
and for the healthe of his bodye.

ffor some thing are hott and burnee bodye as Pepper, Garlicke
Onions, Savage, Myntes, Cresses, and such lieke, And
some are Cold and Chill the bodye, As Lettuce, Purslen,
Gourdes and such lieke. And yf you feede on waterye
meates they are apt to Corrupt the blood and rott it as
Cucombers Mellons, and yf a man vse to feede much on drye
meates they drye the bodye. Yf yor meate be fatt they
hindre digestion, yf bitter they are not norishinge, And
yf they be Salt they bren and annoye the Stomake, And
if they be sower they hasten old age, and, wher any of these
meates are to muche vsed they are Contagious for e
bodye, And nothinge more vnholsome then those meates
wch are meanelye temperate, voyd of excesse in everye
qualitie, and participateth som what of everie one.

And






51
And therfore by naturall reason and iudgement of Physique these be
good and holsome meates. Viz. Lambe, kidd, Hennes Capons
Chickins ffeasants, Partridge and Plovers, and all Land byrd
But noe Sea fowle. Skaled fishe of runninge waters, reere Egg
Borage, Langdebeofe, good  Cernes bread well baked, Alsoe yf
one be cloyed about the stomake wth toughe fleame and Slyme
matter then it is good to eate Sharpe short meates and sower
as Cheese, Salt meates and bytter the tast wherof may be amended
wth sweete apples, and honny. Drinke good old wyne, eate Cherries
grapes damesens and Almond before meate, Peares Quinces,
Nutt and Wardens before meate. Give to Sanguine men
distempred, Malancholie meates, and vnto melancolique men
distempred give Sanguine meates. Eate not to much of the
milke of beast and drincke not much milke and wyne
togither for it ingendreth leprosie and white Scabbes. As concerninge
the quantie of meate to be taken or of drincke, noe certayne
Rule or precept can be given, only this observe what quantitie dothe
you most good and dothe best agree wth you and that vse you. Vse not
+ to eate presentlie after Sleep labor or bathinge. And feede on
of those meates wch your appetite desireth whatsoever they be whether
light and easie of digestion or grosse meates, for Such as the
Stomake earnestleye affectethe and desirethe it hastethe and eagerly
katchethe it longe holdethe it, and well and perfectly digesteth it

The seventhe Chapter teachethe certayne rules to be observed
concerninge meate and drinke and about Sleepinge good for
the preservation of the healthe of man.

It is not good at one tyme to eate diverse meates, for one turnethe
to grosse and heavie humours, the other to light and Subtill humors
and soe yf light meates be first eaten, they wilbe first digested
and drawe wth them the grosse meates that be not digested, and yf
the grosse meates be first eaten, then the light meates wax corrupt
in the stomacke, for they cannot passe because of the grosse meates.
afterward. Eate noe rawe meate, ffeede measurably, leave
wth an appetite, and yf you overcharge yo Stomacke wth meate
it provoketh you to vomitt and in that case eyther sleepe or walke
softlye, and eate noe meate in xxiiijtie howres after, And
then eate a little and drincke a draught of good wyne
therto, and have care to ^keepe a better dyett afterward.
s ss s s s
Two.





52
Two thinges are Causes of diverse sicknesses: Wherof one is
diversitie of Meates and drinkes, and of them be ingendred
diverse humors some good and some evill/
The second is longe sittinge at meate, for the meate that
is first taken is concocted and digested before any digestion of
the last beginn, Soe the meate t is digested draweth that wch
is not digested vnto the Liver. Alsoe drincke not to muche
at yo meate lest it cause the meate to goe over soone out of yo
stomake, or make yo meate to Swime in yo stomake/ Alsoe
abstayne form drinke presentlye after Sleepe or greate Labor /
till you have walked or rested a whyle/ Nor drinke by night
for that ingendrethe the dropsy. And after dynner or after
supper vse to stand or walke softlye vp and downe, till yo meate
be well settled in your stomake, And sleepe a little yf you be vsed
therto, and bothe daye and night vse to sleepe on the right side
for t makest best digestion, for then the liver lyethe vnder the
stomake as the fyre lyeth vnder the pott, And after the first
sleepe turne you on the left side till you be disposed to turne
you agayne, at lye at yo ease, soe you lye not on the backe, for
that causethe the superfluities to drawe vnto the hearte.
And observe this rule that the more you eate, the more you must
sleepe. And hathe bene said vse not to drinke much after
yo meate, for lieke as cold water cast in to a boylinge pott
lettethe the boyling therof, even soe much drincke powred
into the stomake after meate beinge ther begun to concoct
dothe hinder the digestion of the stomacke; And as before
hathe bene said it is verie good to stand or walke after
meate supper or dinner for it helpethe to emptie the
Stomacke and further the good digestion//

The Eyght Chapter declarethe what meates and
drinkes are best to be vsed for the keepinge of a holsom dyett
and also treatethe of the discommoditie of evill dyett./

Your bread shalbe made of fyne whete flowre well levenned and
well baked, yo drinke shalbe good holsome wyne, or well brued
Ale or beare freshe and stall with sage leaves and Rosemarie
yo fleshe of fowre footed beast shalbe beefe, mutton, veale,
venison, faune, kidd, hart, Cunye, Lambe, Porke, Pigge
and in ward of beast, Brawne, trypes souce and suchlieke,

The yo






53
Then yo fowles shalbe Bustard, Crane, Henn, sewz, ffesant, partridge
Plover, Rayle, Quayle, Godwitt, Pigeons, Lark , Thrushes, mavis
Starlinge and all other smale byrd that are not fedd on the water.
Your Water fowle are these, Swann Storke Curlew, Bitter, Goose
bothe wylde and tame, Barnakle, Mallard, Teales, Plovers,
Preynes, Redshankes, Merles, Whemes, Wygens, Woodcockes
Snight, Oxbird and such lieke, t be much better rosted and baked
then boyled. And yo pottage shalbe made of these hearbes following
viz. Sage, Burrage, Langdebeofe, psley, Rosemarie, Rodes,
Thyme, Isope, Savorye and Mercurye, and they shalbe soemwhat greene,
Alsoe for yo salt water fishe, you shall vse Haddocke, Gurnard, Rochett,
Codling, dorye, Mullet, Playce, soles, Turbutt, Halebutt, freshe
linge and Hacke. Yo shell fishe shalbe Crabbes, Crayfishes Shrimps
Wilkes and Cockles/
You must refuse to eate Cunger, dogge ffishe, Raye, freshe salmon,
Thornebacke, Herringe, makarell/ Porpus, Seale and all other
beastlye fishe that live by raven/

Alsoe e freshe water fishe you shall vse to eate shalbe Pyke, Roche
Perche, Dace, Breeme, Cheven, and Vmber, Chrefishes,
Deduse, Trout, smale menewes, and Guggens; leave
all muddye fishes that are Slymye, as Eales, Tenche, Loche, and such
other muddy fishes/

White meate is somewhat Contagious, except Butter, Egg
are good boyled rosted or poched, Alsoe yo sauce must be made
of Sorrell, Mynt, Costmarye, dittany, Pelletorye, Persleye
Avence wth cromes of levenned breade tempered wth a little
Vinegre and salt;

And for yo spyces you shall vse these Cloves, mace, saffron, Ginger
Graynes, Longe Pepper, Nuttmegg, Synemom, Pepper & sugar
for these are good and holesome./

De Mala gubernatione sanitatis

Many ther be that doe not onlye evill governemt in meates and drinkes
but alsoe doe defend and mayntayne their disordre wth great earnestnes
and many contentious word: affirminge that they be are best in healthe
& live most ease when they are most disorderlie in their dyett and have
lest care to governe them selves by rules and precepts of physitions
and soe they skorne the Physitions and other wise men that have a
care to keepe good dyetts. And not regardinge the state of their owne
bodyes, their owne healthe and wellfare, spend their dayes in Gurman-
dizinge in ryottinge and surfettinge perswadinge them selves that

their





The discommodi-
ties of surfetinge
& evill dyett.
their contynuall Custome of surfeting dothe them noe harme
because they are so used thereunto But noe doubt they are
greatelie deceyved, for it hurthethe them verie muche,
for it alterethe their Complexion, It debilitatethe and
infeoblethe their vitall & Spirit, and fillethe them full of grosse
humors, Alsoe as Gallion saythe yf one of those disordred
psons fall into any sicknes it is a harder matter to recover
them then twentie others that are of good governement.,
Wherby it is ^to be seene wither Custome dothe accord wth Nature
yea or noe. Yf it dothe accord and agree wth nature then it
may be vsed and kept, yf not to be vtterlye refused, and by little
and little to be left and putt cleane awaye.

The Commondatio
of Moderation
in dyett & e

Evell of ill dyett
excesse in any
thinge

Constantyne saythe that moderation in keepeinge a
meane betwixt extreemes is one of the most soveraigne
and best thing that canbe for the healthe of a mans
bodye, for the excesse in any thinge is hurtfull. To muche
or to little of meate or drinke, to muche watchinge or
to muche sleepeinge, over muche Labor and to muche
rest, the extreemes eyther of heat or cold, doe spoyle a
mans complexion, waste nature, destroye his livelie
spirits; Whereas vsinge a measare in keepinge the
bodye in good governement free from excesse in anythinge
Comfortethe the bodye in all part therof, helpethe a mans
witt and understandinge and dothe preserve him in good
vigor and disposition bothe of mynd and bodye makeinge
him more fitt to serve God and to mannage worldlye
affayrers. And soe to conclud lett us evermore give
laud and thankes vnto Almightie God or gratious
Lord, wch hath given to man remedyes for all sicnesses
& diseases.





The Preface 55

Now that I have written generallie of the Fowre Complexions
of man and the Alteration of them, Of the Twelve Signes
wth their severall properties And alsoe of the seven planet
how they move and are disposed: And have alsoe sett downe &
declared certayne rules and observations wth other thing
pertayninge vnto the Regiment of healthe: Now will I
shewe you what medycynes are agreable and fittinge for the Cure
and rememdie of diverse sicknesses, and alsoe wch contagious
hurtfull and not agreable wth the same Sicknesses.

First ther are two manner of Medycynes that be requisite &
needfull to relieve man in tyme of Sicknes: One is called
a Simple Medycyne the other is called a compound medycyne.
A Simple medycyne is made but of one thinge onlye, As of some
Oyle, herbes, Rootes, waters distilled of hearbes, wyne, honey, seed,
&c. Compound Medycynes are made of two simple or more.
And therbe many Medycynes of the same kynd As Treties
Emplasters, Oyntments, Potions that be called drinkes
Electuaries, Syrrops, and waters eyther to be outwardlye applyed
or taken inwardlye by eatinge or drinkinge them for the
Comfort of mans bodye and for the destroyinge and takinge
awaye disease and Sicknes.

Alsoe it is to be observed that Sicknesses and maledyes are Cured
by their Contraries, as hott diseases are cured wth cold medycynes,
& cold wth hott, drye wth moyst medycynes et & converso. And
those sicknesses that have bene caused thoroughe Anger, Sorrow
and griefe of mynd, are to be cured wth ioye and gladnes.
Nevertheles sometymes diseases and maladies have their Cure
not by Contrarie medycynes but wth such as doe accord &
agree wth them. As scaldinge and Brenninge be healed wth hott
medycynes that draw out vnkyndlye heate, wheras Cold medycynes
doe in close the heate and put the patient to more payne. In ffevors
alsoe t be hott yf one drinke cold water and milke it is verie Contagious &
perilous for the Sicknes. And cold medycynes applyed to hott member
increase the heate and much more augment the payne. ffor example yf
a mans head be hott inordinatelie putt it in cold water or Snow and
it will make it much more hotter then it was before, for the role Stopethe the powers
and enclosethe the heate in a lesse space than it was in before. And a thinge t
is inclosed in a lilttle space, hathe more power and force then, when it is at large,
And soe sometymes hott medycynes, and sometymes cold heale cold Sicknesses.
But Temperate medycynes are most profitable for all manner of disease
be they hott or cold.





56
Of the diverse hurtes that often tymes come by
Chance vnto the bodye of a man in diverse part therof

Of the hurtes in mens bodyes some are old and some are newe,
And lieke as ther are diverse hurtes soe their are diverse medycynes
as hereafter followethe.

If a mand heade be broken wthout breakeinge of e skinn know firste
whether the Skull be broken yea or noe, And whether any of
the Two skinnes that goe about he Brayne be perished, or not,
The wch Skinnes are called Dura mater & Pia Mater. Of
the breakeinge of the skinn these are signes and tokens. A man
loosethe his appetite to his meate, and cannot digest his meate,
he sleepethe heavelie and hathe little rest, he makethe water wth greate
payne and goethe to the privie wth greevance, he fallethe into
some fever. It will greeve and payne him to eate hard crust,
or to Crack nuttes, and these are tokens of a mans skull being broken.
And yf the skull be broken it is to be examined whether any of the
two skinnes that goe about the brayne be broken: Yf Dura Mater
be broken or hurt (wch is the outer skin) you shall know it by these
signes: The head akethe, the Cheekes looke redd the eyes are impaye-
red bothe in color and in sight, the tonge waxethe blacke.

But yf ut happen that Pia Mater wch is the skin next the Brayne
be hurt, then a man shall lacke sleepe, his speeche will waxe
smale, his eyes will waxe dull and dym, and blood will yssue out
of his nostrill and eares, and he will be costive and may not
avoyd or expell any thinge downeward, And twise or thrise in
a daye he will fall into fevors and agues, wch is a most dan-
gerous most liekelie of deathe. And somtyme the skin is
bowed inward wth a stroke and the patient shall sleepe but
little, and when he sleepethe he shall sleepe verie vnquietlye
wth much trouble in his sleepe, adn he farethe as yf he were
franticke and would rise vpp and take weapons to fight.

And sometyme the head is swollen wth a stroke and the skull
not perished, and you shall know it by these signes. he may
eate well and drincke and sleepe alsoe, neyther fallethe
he into a fever for all his hurt. And these be the same tokens
to shew you whether the skull, the skins Dura Mater or Pia
Mater be perished or not.

A medycyne
for the heade
when it is swollen
& e skull not
broken.

And yf e head be swollen and the skull hole then it shalbe healed wth
medycynes t shall dosplve e swellinge as thus, Take mugworte,
hearbe Grace, Absinthiu or wormewood and Cummen, heate them altogither
& seathe them in meate oyle, make a playster of it and laye it to the
Sore, and change it often till the Swelling be abated and then it
is liekelye the matter will turne into Twitter, and then laye a playster
therto t may ripen it made in this manner followinge.

Take../





57
Take a handfull of Absinthium otherwise called wormewood as much
of mugwortes and a handfull of hock stampe them altogither wth
fowre Ounces of hogg greace, and put therto iiij Ounces of whete
Meale, and a little Wyne and iij Spoonefull of honney, And
Seathe them altogither till they come to the thicknes of a Playster
and make implayster therof and laye it to the swellinge to ripen
it & when it is Softe then it is rype. Then open it in the lowest
place and thrust out the matter as cleane as you can and heale
it wth a Treate made thus: / viz.

Take e iuyce of Marche, herbe Grace, flower honey, Swynes greace
and make a Playster therof and laye it to the Sore till the matter
be cleane gathered out, the Sorenes abated and the moystnes taken
awaye, and then fill the sore wth fleshe agayne on this wise: /

Take Encense, Mastick, Pitche well pouldred and wax and put it to
the Treatie afore declared, and make Emplaysters therof, and heale
vpp the sore. And this treate will heale all manner of Swelling or
risinges and Botches after t they be broken. And if ye be in doubt
that the fleshe will fester, then put a little poulder of Allume
in the Sore & it will helpe it and keepe it from festringe.
And when the fleshe is growne agayne highe ynoughe, yf you
will not have it muche seene laye theron the redd Oyntment,
or Apostolicon or els mixe old gotes Cheese wth honey and lay it
therto. /

Alsoe a man may be wounded in the skull two manner of wayes
The head may be cutt wthout perishinge the skull And the skull
may be Cutt as farr as e outward skinn. And Dura Mater or
Pia Mater be perished wthout hurtinge of the Brayne/
But yf the brayne be hurt and the wound be eyther on
the fore part or hynder part of the head t comethe to the
brayne then is it deadlie/ But a wound that comethe
from aboue downeward wthout hurtinge the brayne, thoughe
it passe thoroughe the eare or nostrill it is not mortall soe
longe as the Brayne is not perished . And it may be
healed in this wise/ Take e Glare or whites of Egg and
wett them in a soft lynnen Clothe/ and laye it in the
Wound soe t everie place be closed therwth and then
laye playster theron to make it quitter./.

And





58
And yf it be in Winter. Take violett leaves and
ij manner of Hokk Leekes and Peritorie of eache
a handfall Stampe them togither wth a pound of Swynes
greace and sett it on the fyre and frye it a whyle, Then
put into them ij Ounces of meale of Linseed, and of
fenecreke iij Ounces of wheate meale, and myngle
them altogither over a soft fyre, and make a playster
therof and laye it to the Sore.

And yf it be sommer make the Emplayster thus:
Take of e hokke leaves one handfull stampt them wth
iij Ounces of Swynes Greace t is not salt, Then
take the iuyce of Violett of Sungreene and Peny-
worte, and put as much wyne therto as is of the iuyce.
And take iij Ounces of wheate meale and as much
of honey, and mingle all these togither vppon a soft
fyre, and straine it & keepe this Emplaster and vse it
about the Sore till it be hole. But when the wound watreth
then drye it wth a lynnen Clothe, and when it is drye
laye Lint therin, and ever as the fleshe increasethe put
in the lesse Linte. And when the wound is dryed vpp,
annoynte it wth the yellowe oyntement that Chirur-
gions doe use, wch is good for all manner of wound
for it makethe good fleshe good Quitter, and draweth
out the corruption of the wound & makes them cleane,
And thus you make the yellow Oyntment. /

The yellow
oyntment
how it is made

Take a li of meate Oyle, one li of Sheepes Tallowe,
halfe a li of pitche iij Ounces of Colophyne, an ounce
of waxe, and yf it be in winter take of Oliban mastik
Galbanum, Armoniack Seraphine and Terpentyne,
of eyther halfe an ounce, and melt them that will melt
wth the oyle & make poulder of the residue & mingle
them togither over the fyre, and when it is sodden
ynough put yr Turpentyne therto, then close it
vp and keepe it, And yf you will know when it is
well sodden put a dropp therof uppon a marble stone,
or an other cold stone & touche wth yr finger when it
is cold and yf it cleave to yr finger & relent not then
it is well sodd. /





59
An other good Oyntment

of many most
excellent
oyntments


Take webbwort, Plantem Marshe, Holyhokkand
Bitten Stampe them and frye them in Swynes grease
Goat Tallowe & butter, Strayne it and put therto a
little Waxe & Incense and mixe altogither and
annoynte the wounde therwth

An other good Oyntment

Take xl. or C  Baye berries of the Lawrell ttee, braye
the, wth Incense and put therto as much bores grease
and as muche Brock grease, and yf the wound be new
mixe all these wth sodden honey and when the wound is
closed annoynte it wth this oyntment & it will heale
it./

Vnguentam Popilion how it is made (& wherfore it is good

Take iiij li of Poppler flowers, iij li of hearbe Water,
one li of Henbane, of Pettie Morrell, of orpen, of Sengreene
the lieke quantitie, of Endive, waybread, violet water
Cresses of each halfe a li washe them cleane, Stampe them
and put therto ij li of well fryed bores grease, And
when they be well medled togither, put it into a pott
well closed & lett it stand nyne dayes, then take it out
of the pott and put it into a Pann, and sett it over the fyre
& frye it well & stirr it wel wth a Slice yt it stick not to e
Pann, and when it is hott ynoughe, take it from the fyre
and straine it into a vessell, and sett it over e fyre agayne
& put therto a quarter of a li of wax in smale peeces & as
muche fyne poulder of frankencense and stir it well till
it be relented, then take it from the fyre and straine it
& lett it Coole, and put the water from it. Then turne it
& take awaye all the filthe from the under side, and sett
it over the fyre agayne & melt it, and wth a feather skume
it & put it in boxes; And this the true makeinge therof
It is a soveraigne medycyne for aches.






60
Vnguentum Pretiosum how it is made and
wherfore it is good.

yet Oyntments
.
Take an Ounce of Sulphur viuens half an ounce of verdigrease
and beate them to Smale poulder, then take a li of oyle Oliffe,
& medle them well togither. Then take half an ounce of
Qucke slver and mixe it wth the former, & stirr them well
togither; then take halfe a li of freshe grease and braye
it by it self & mixe it wth the other thing. Then take a li
of Cleane honey and mingle it wth the rest. then take
the Roote of Elecampane and seethe it in water vntill it
be as softe as grease, Stampe it in a morter by it self
& take out all the hardnes of the roote & doe it awaye.
Then take a quarter of a li of Rosen, an ounce of ffranken-
cense a quarter and halfe of Virgins waxe & a little Oyle
Oliffes and boyle them over a fyre a whyle, and then medle
it wth the former receipt. and then put it in Boxes &
vse this oyntemt. for it is good for newe festers, newe
wound Mormalies on the legges or feete, and helpethe
Limbes that be Swollen & all the maladies of e bodye.

How to make vnguentum Sanatiuum.

Take Bitten vervayne, Bugell, Sancle Pimpnell
Strawberrie hearbe Robert, hearbe water, Tansie Orpine,
Sungreene, Solficle, Egremonie, greate Consounde mydle
Consounde, pettie Consounde, Osmonde, Cropes of Hempe
Cropes of Bryers, Cropes of Nettles, & of madder of eyther
of a lieke quantitie, and of Auence as much as all the other
herbes are in waight, Stampe them altogether and put to them
a quart of oyle Oliffe & straine altogeiher thorough a cleane
clothe, Then put therto a quarterne of waxe and as much
Swynes grease, an ounce of Incense and halfe an ounce of Mastick
Boyle them altogither and put it in boxes for it is a pretious
Oyntment to heale all wound. Probatum.

An other waye to make this Sanative Oyntment.

Take Saven, herbe Grace and Tansey of eyther of them a
handfull and stampe them altogither and put therto Oyle, waxe,
Swynes grease, Incense and Masticke in lieke quantities as
is afore said, and soe make it vp for it is pved.





How to make Oyle of Henbane 1

At mydsommer take an newe earthen pott of a pottle or a
gallon, and make many smale holes in the bottom wth an Awle
and fill e pott full wth the Cropes of Henbane & cover it close
Then sett the bottome of the pott over the mouthe of an other pott
fast closed and sett them bothe in e earthe by the space of a yeare
an then take them vpp, and you shall fynd a cleare oyle in e
nether pott, That Chirurgions call oleum.

Vnguentum Pretiosum good to drive out cold taken in the Shoul-
ders Armes Thyghes or knees, how it is made./

Take hearbe of Grace Bittony, Sage, Gowldes wallwort
the tenders of Ivie and of Sawrell leaves, of eyther a lieke
quantitie and Camamell as much as half all the residue
Shredd them smale, then take dogg grease, Catt grease
Brockes grease and duckes grease, of eyther a lieke quan-
titie, shredd the hearbes smale and seathe them well togither
in a pott, and put therto a quantitie of meate oyle &
straine it. This Oyntement is very good for the gout
for Aches and vncams.

yet oyntmt

An other Oyntment.

Take Ribworte Planten Cinqfole. dayses, Millefolly,
Compharie, Wallworte, Parietorie, Scabious, Bugle, Sanicle,
a handfull of eyther of them, Stampe them togither wth Swynes
grease that is not Salted and soe lett it rest three dayes and
then Seethe it, and put thero a quantitie of waxe and
Incense and straine it, and cast therin a little quicksilver,
and then it is good agaynst Scabbes.

An other Oyntment./

Take an Ounce of Redd wax, of Pitche and Colofony ana, an
Ounce and a half, of Shepes Tallow ij Ounces, put therto as
muche Oyle as will suffice and myngle them altogither over
a Charcole fyre, and when it is neare Cold make it vp and keepe
it./





Vanguentum viride how it is made /

Take the Rootes of Sellendyne, of Coltsfoote, The leaves of
Scabious of Alledillula & of Flos Campi, of eyther a handfull
and washe them Cleane, stampe them and put them into Oyle
Olyffe mixe them well togither in a morter and put therto
a lj of Sheepes Tallowe, and put them into an Earthen pott
well closed t noe ayre come out of it, And sett it vp in a place
& soe lett it stand ix dayes. And then take it out of the pott
and put it in a fayre pann and sett it on a Charcole fyre,
Boyle it well & stirr it wth a slice, and whiles it is hott presse
and sett it agayne on the fyre, and put half a quarter of
meede waxe in smale peeces, and when it is moulten put
therto one Ounce of ffrankencense, of Masticke and verde-
grese of eache halfe an ounce all three made in smale
pouldre, and stirr them well togither untill they be dis-
solved, then sett them downe and put therto half an Ounce
of Aloeium Epaticum well pouldered and resolved in warme
Oyle. This Oyntment is good for all woundes and
will put awaye dead fleshe and increase newe fleshe,
and make them whole and sound. /

Yet Oyntmt

How to make Vnguentum called Vade mecum. /

Take the iuyce of Sellendyne Redd Dock, ffumetorie,
Scabious and Borrage of eyther of them a quarterne.
Lytherge, Ceruse, Evuscum, of eyther halfe an ounce, mixe
them wth the Lyes of Vinegre & bores grease in lieke quantitie,
and sett them over the fyre, and when they doe seethe put
yo foresaid poulder therto, and stirr them well over the fyre
wth a Slyce. Then take it from the fyre and put it in
boxes, it is good for Scabes and Vncums & suche lieke.

Flos vnguentoru.

The manner of makeinge flos Unguentorum

Take a pound of ffrankencense and Rosen togither, of Virgin
waxe of posine halfe an ounce, of Masticke, of deere
Suett, & two drames of Campher, melt what wilbe
moulten and make poulder of the residue, Boyle them
well togither over a cleane fyre, strayne it thoroughe a strong

Clothe





Clothe into a pottle of white wyne, and boyle altogither, then 2
Coole it a whyle, Then put therto    of Turpentyne & stirr it
altogither and lett it stand till it be cold, Then part the Gomm
from the wyne, and seare yo clothe wth it, and make Playsters
And it will heale old wound and newe wound, ffor of all entreit
this is the most clensinge, Souldringe, and will gather and heale
the fleshe more in a night then an other Treatie dothe in a
Monethe, for it will suffer noe corruption in a wound, nor noe
dead fleshe to ingender therin, And it will drawe out yron
Slivers. Thornes or any other evill thinge that is in a wounde,
It helpethe the Prickinge of a Thorne needle, pinn, or any other
thinge that hurtethe the fleshe. It healethe the bytyinge of
venemous beast and wormes, It rottethe and rypenethe all
botches and byles, and healethe all festers Cankers and noli metan-
geres, It drawethe out all ache from the Liver, It helpethe the
Swellinge of the genitories, and all the members of a man
It helpethe the Emerode and other Paynes and diseases
This hathe bene proved and approved. One Mr Arden
wch was an excellent Chirurgion, in his tyme, did many
good Cures by the same.

Oyntmt

Vnguentum Apostolicon wch is good to Soulder Bones
togither, and to make the Skinn of woundes smothe and
even, And is good alsoe for the swellinge of the Spleene
for grievances of the brest wch come of hurt, brusing
or falling. Is made after this manner followinge.

Take half a lj of Pitche, halfe a li of Colofony, Of Galbanum
Serapyne, Armoniack, Apopenac of eyther half an Ounce yf
it be in Sommer put therto iij ounces of waxe, and in Winter
ij ounces and make it in this wise. Take    of Vinegre and sett it
over the fyre, put therto yo pitche, Galbanu, Serapyne and
Armoniack, and melt them altogither, then put one dropp therof
into cold water, and yf it wepe of redd Swart colour, then put in
yo Colophony, smale pouldred or halfe an ounce of Masticke, halfe
an ounce of Olibanum, and mingle all these togither over a fyre,
& mixe therwth an Ounce of Terpentyne, and clense it thoroughe
a Clothe into cold water. Then Annoynt your handes wth Oyle,
and wringe out all the water, and soe keepe it. j li valet 30







An other Oyntment good to heale a cutt
and good for broken bones soe t the said oyntmt.
may come wher the sore is, for it will Suffer noe
wound to heale till it be surelie healde at the ground,
and it will have awaye the brused fleshe, & the blood,
And it is made in this manner.

Take Smallage, Ribbworte, Planten, watersuc leaves of eyther
in lieke quantitie, and a quantitie of daysie leaves and of
hearbe of Grace, Stampe them altogither wringe out the
iuyce and put it in a pann. And put therin fyne wheate
flower & stirr them altogither uppon the fyre, then put therto
a quantitie of may butter and stirr them well togither
And that will make a verye good Oyntmt. Laye it in
a wound & laye thevppon a Playster of some good Treate;
And vse this for it hath bene well approved. /

Vnguentum Appiu /

Oyntmt.
Take the iuyce of Smallage of Planten & of Morsus diaboli
halfe a pynte of all of them, of wheate flower iij ounces
of honey a quarter of a li. boyle all these togither till
they be thicke, then put therto a quantitie of Terpentyne,
& stirr them well togither, and then make it vpp and keepe
it in boxes. /

Vnguentum Mundificatum

Take Perosine, waxe Oyle oliffe of eyther of them an
ounce, Boyle altogither till it be well then put therin an
ounce of Terpentyne. /

Vnguentum ad earnem regenerandum

Take two Ounces of Clarified honey, an ounce of Terpen-
tyne, a dragme of Aloes and Myrrha & a scruple & halfe
of Verdegrease, & of mill flower dust almost half soe
muche to thick it wthall and a little Bolearmoriacke,
to culler it. This Oyntmt is good to clense wounde &
to make fleshe to growe.





Vnguentum pro Dolore in Carne & in ossibus. &c. 3

Take Sage Hearbe Grace, Lawrell leaves and Absinthium Stampe
them altogither wth May butter and put them into a pott &
lett it stand ther nyne dayes, Then sett it over a fyre &
put frankencense therto, and stirr it well, and put in in boxes
and keepe it for a Soveraigne Oyntment for Aches.

An other good Oyntment.

Take an old Gander that is fatt and pull of all his feathers
and pull out all his Entrall reddye to be rosted. Then take
a fatt Catt, meade waxe Salt and Honey of eyther of them in
lieke quantitie, then Chopp them Small togither and therwth
fearse the Gander, and sow him fast agayne. Then putt
him vppon a Spitt and rost him till he be tender. Save the
droppinge therof for it is a pretious Oyntment for all Owt
and Cankers.

Vnguentum Geneste

Take the flowers of Broome and Stampe them wth May butter
Oyntmt and lett it stand all night and on the morrow boyle them
well togither and straine it thoroughe a Canvas Clothe
And keepe it for a Soveraigne Oyntmt for the Raynes of
the backe, and for Aches in other places

Vnguentum album

Take meate Oyle as much as you will and put it in a basen
and Sprinkle theron vinegre, and stirr it wth a slice till the oyle be
fayre and cleare, the fourthe part of as muche vinegre as of oyle,
Then take lythurge of leade and stampe it Smale and put it thorough
a clothe vnto the oyle a litttle quantitie therof and stirr it togyther
Then take white lead a ... to a Gill of oyle and stirr it well togither
And take as muche Seruse fyne searsed and put therto and
stirr it well. Then take a Cattle bone such as goldsmithes doe
vse and put therto and stirr it altogither in the sonne, till it be
white for the longer it is stirred the better it is, and wilbe a good oyntmt
But yf you will have it fyne put therto Campher lythurge of gold
and





and of silver, oyle olyffe, oyle of Lynseede, oyle of Roses, This
Oyntment is good agaynst all hott sores, Scabes, Tetters
Cankers, and all manner of woundes. /

An oyntment called Nerval riall

Take a handfull of Sage of Vertue that beareth noe flower,
Rosemarie Sage Thyme, Cammomyle, Garden Mynts Arthi-
mesia, hearbe Grace, Nepp, Costmarie, Saven, Lawrell leaves,
Red Nettle, Mallowes, Smale mallowes, Hollyhock, wallworts
Cliver Bittyne, Water Cresses, and Lavender of ether of
these a handfull stampe them altogither and put therto
iiiijli of may butter Broke grease and Bores grease,
of eyther jli and a pynte of oyle oliffe, and when the hearb
be well stamped then put therto yo butter and grease. Then
putt it in a pann & sett it over a fyre, till it be well melted
and mixed togither, Then put therto e oyle oliffe and
boyle them altogither well, And then take it from the fyre,
& presse out the iuyce into an other Pann, & put therto a
pynte of white wyne, and seethe them togither till they
be greene. Then Coole it and Clense it thoroughe a Canvas
Clothe and lett it stand ix dayes. Then take ij ounces of
mastick, ij Ounces of ffrankencense and ij ounces of meade
waxe cutt in Smale peeces & put therto. Then sett it
agayne over e fyre & boyle it agayne till it be well
mixed. Then straine it agayne and putt it in boxes
well stopped And this is the best makeinge of Nerve
oyve. Whiche is a Soveraigne Oyntment for Ache
Brouses broken bones, or for Shronken Synnews pbatu

An other Soveraigne Oyntment for Ache

Take Sage, hearbe Grace, wormewoode and Lawrell leaves and stampe
them altogither wth May butter, And putt all into a pott, and lett it
stand nyne dayes fast closed, Then sett it over a fyre & stirr it well
togither, And put therto fyne poulder of ffrankencense and boyle
them well togither. Then Coole it and straine it & keepe it in
boxes for a Soveraigne medycyne for ache, well pved. /





An other good Oyntement, for all manner of Bruses / 4

Take Planten, Ribbworte dayses, wth the Rootes a good quantitie of
all stampe them and seathe them in claryfied May butter. Then straine
it and keepe it for it will heale any brouse t is curable. /

An oyntement for Ache

Take flowres of brome, Penyriall, Thyme, Mounten, and Mallowes
by even portions Stampe them wth May butter, and put them into
an earthen pott, and lett it stand Twentie dayes in a dunghill
fast stopped, then take it out and frye it, and putt therto deare suett
and stirr them well togither and straine it, for it is good for the Ache
and for e Goute, proved.

An Oyntemente for all greife in e Veynes and in broken
bones. /

Take fowre sponefull of Aqua Vitae iiij sponefull of the gall
of an Oxe, Seathe these togither in a pann till they beginn
to ryse, Then sett it from the fyre and when it is cold annoynte
the sore therwth. Then strike a plaister of Oxecrocion vppon leather
and laye it therto. /

Oyntmts An Oyntement good for the frenche Pockes and for him
that us burnt wth a Queane, and for Pyles.

Take Verdegrece one pennyworthe, Oyle of Bayes sixe
penyworthe, quicke Silver, an Ounce, and beate them together
till they looke blewe. Then putt it in boxes and keepe it close
and annoynte the grieved place, therwithe, eveninge and
Morninge, ffor a burninge spread the oyntmt vppon a browne
paper and laye it to the sore and it will heale it, pbatum
And for the Pyles annoynte them therwth and it will heale pbatum.

Vnguentum Imperiale made as followethe:

Take jli of Perofin ij. oz. of Galbanum and iiijli of oyle oliffe, boyle
all of them togither till they be well mingled then lett it Coole and
put it into boxes, and it heales all manner of wound newe and old.





Vnguentum Sanatiuum

Take Burnett, dauke, Tormentill, Croyser, Pigle, Sanicle, hearbe
John, hearbe Robert, herbe Water, Comfarie, white Bottle dayseyes,
the Cropes of hempe, & nettle Red Bryer, Red Cole, mader
Spurge Maior et Minor, Violett, Sowethistell, growndeswell
Virga Pastoris, wilde Tasell, medowsote, Crowesope. flos
Campi, Brome flowres, Bitterne Tansie Sauge, Sutherwode
Yarrowe, Strawberrie whyte Pimpernell, Philago, weyhore,
and Verveyne of all these in lieke quantitie Then take as
muche Avence as is of all the other herbes, and all these herbes
must be gathered in the monethe of may or els before Mydsomer,
Stampe all togither and put therto newe made May
Butter, well mixed togither, and sett all in a Cleane Vessell
Nyne dayes, or more till they be hore, Then frye it in a
pan and strayne it thoroughe a Canvese Clothe, and lett
it Coole, and when it is cold, open it wth some thinge and lett
out the water that is in the bottom. Then Rechafe it agaynst
the fyre and coole it and put it in Boystes, hereof a wounded man
must drinke first and last as much as a pease and t will heale a
wound wthout any plaster, Albeit laye a Red Cole leafe to the
wound or a redd Bryer leafe and change it allwaye when
you give him drinke, and it will heale it shortlye. /

Vnguentum Dialtea is a hott oyntmt Called Dewtie it molyfiethe
neshethe & clensenthe all hard cold Sores & mostethe them that be
drye namelie in the Brest as Impostumes in the brest or in the longes.

Take e rootes of white mallowes, ijli of fenecreeke, jli of Linseede, di:li of Marshe
mallowes dij lj of oyle oliffe, iiijli of waxe, j.li of Terpentyne, Galbanum,
gumm of ere of eyther of them ijli.  di oz j of Colophium, pyz rosenum,
Rosenum of any of them joz. Beate all these togither and put them into a li
of fayre water viij dayes, and on the ixth daye boyle them on the fyre till
it wexe thick. Then put them into a Pockett and put thero a little hott water
to doe awaye the inglumore, and presse the pockett betwene two stones,
and take to it jli of Slate Coole and boyle it wth iiijli of oyle of oliffe
till the third part be wasted, and after that put in the wexe Turpentyne Gum
de Ere, Galbanu, the poulder of Colophinu & of Rosen and when all these
thinges be entyred togither sett it on the fyre till a droppe therof
will stand vppon yr nayle, for then it is well & when it is cold put it in
Boxes.

An other makinge of Dewtie./

Take Brock ffoxe, Capons, hennes, dogg and Bores grease and the
marrowe of a fore legg of a horse, the Suet of a deere, and Sheepes
Tallowe of eache in lieke quantitie, Ratt, Catt & Hares grease
Then take the iuyce of Viz. Mallowe, Rubarbe, Morrell, Comferie,
daysey, herbe of Grace, Maithe, Planten, Haros, Mattfellon, dragance,
wyld nepe, and frye altogither in a pann wth all e said grease, and
when it is well sodden wringe it thoroughe a stronge clothe, & put it in pott
of stone, It is hott and moyst, of e nature of fyre, & is verie Softe.






How to make Oyle of Roses. / 5

Gather a li of Roses t be full blowen earlie in the morninge when
the dewe is vppon them and Clipp of all the white of them and
put them in a glasse wth oyle of the greenest oliffe that you
can fynde well medled togither and soe stoped that noe ayre
can gett into it. Then sett it in the sonne Twentie dayes
and stirr it everie daye, then strayne it thoroughe a peece of
Canvas from the growndes of the Roses, and put it into a glasse
and soe keepe it in the sonne other xxtie dayes and then
it is well made

An other waye to make oyle of Roses. /

Take yo Roses and e Oyle by equall portions of waighte, yo Roses
must be Smale Shred, putt them togither in a glasse wth water vpp
to the neck, and lett stand soe close Stopped duringe the space
of two Monethes, and everie daye stire it and stopp it sure agayne
and at the two monethes ende straine it thoroughe a Canvas
and put awaye all the reffuse of the Roses. Then keepe it well
in a glasse, for some men saye that this is the best makeinge
of Oyle of Roses. /

A waye how to washe Oyle Oliffe, to make it more Cold and
Savorie. /

Take a vessell wth a smale Mouthe and put therin oyle and water
a lieke quantitie, then stopp the mouthe close and shake them well
togither a good while, and sett the mouthe downeward, and
soe lett it stand and rest an howre & more, then vnstopp it beneath
and lett the water runn out, and when the Oyle comethe then
stopp the mouthe and turne the vessell and put in more water
and doe therwth as you did before, and doe soe iij or iiij tymes
as neede requirethe. /

Gather a li of Cowslop flowres when they be in their season and putt
them in a glasse and putt to them oyle Oliffe t is cleane and neate oyle
as muche as the flowres may be hidden in the oyle. and lett them
lye therin till these herbes followinge may be gathered, viz Calamint
hearbe John, Sage, Egremonie, Suthernewoode, wormewoode, Pulial
riall, Lavender, Peritorie, Rosemarie, Cammomell, heyroff Peletorie
of spayne, Lawrell leaves, e flowres of Lyllies, of eache one a handfull

wch must





wch must be gathered in the monethe of June, Grynd
them smale in a stone morter, then take the flowres of
the Cowslopes out of the oyle, and wringe them softlie wth
cleane handes and put them into e morter wth the other
hearbes, and grynd them well togither, then laye them a
steepe in whyte wyne a daye and a night, then take them
easelye out of the wyne, and boyle them on a soft fyre,
wth oyle oliffe of the quantitie in sight of the same hearb
and lett them boyle till the water and wyne be wasted,
and then it shalbe be knowne when it is well. Take
a Sponefull of the liquor t is in the pott bottom, and
if you see noe water in the bottom of the Spone then
it is boyled ynoughe, Then take it from the fyre &
let it stand till it be nighe cold, soe that you may handle
it, Then stronglie straine it thoroughe a Canvas bagg
and put this oyle in pewter or glasse vessell & and it
will keepe well three yeares. This oyle is good
agaynst Cowtes, Bruses, all maladies that art in
the Sinewes pceedinge of cold gowte or Palsey, for
fractions of bones Ache in the ioynt. It must be
made in the ende of May or Mydest of June. /
If you put therto these herbes over and besides it is the
better and will last twentie yeares. Baulme,
herbe Robert, Origanu, Englishe Madder, Thyme
hillworte, Red mynt Horse Mynt, Isope, Horhownde
Neptryall of eyther of them a handfull, & two handfull
of Ambrose and put them a mongst the other hearbes,
and dresse them as aforesaid. In sommer tyme you
shall annoynt yo griefe agaynst the sonne, and in
winter agaynst the fyre, and after the annoyntinge
e sore shalbe Covered wth wooll t was never vsed,
and warme it well agaynst the fyre for this
Oyntment is of greate vertue as hathe bene well pvd.





An Oyle for the head. / 6

Take Margarum, Sauge, Lavender, hearbe of Grace, the tender
leaves of the baye tree and Camomell half a handfull of eyther
of them. boyle them in white wyne till they be tender. strayne
them from the wyne & braye them smale. Then boyle them in oyle
Oliffe halfe a quarter of an howre, and stirr it well for burneinge
and lett it stand a ripeninge viij dayes. Then make it mylke
warme and straine it thoroughe a strayner, and therof you shall
have a fayre oyle. Take a little therof at once and make it
mylke warme, and therwth annoynte ye sore head eveninge and
morneinge. And it will helpe that and other diseases. /

An Oyle to heale a wounde, and for broken bones soe that
the Oyntment may come vnto the sore. It will suffer noe
wound to heale but first by the ground, and it will avoyde dead fleshe
and evill blood, and keepe wound cleane.

Take smalleche, Ribworte, Planten, and water Suckles, daysie leaves
in lieke quantitie, and a little hearbe of Grace, Stampe them and wring
out the iuyce and put the iuyce in a pann, and put therto fyne wheete
flower, and sett it on the fyre and lett it be well stirred and put
therto a quantite of May butter and stirr it well, and it wilbe
a Suddye Oyntemente. Then take Lynte and the Oyntmente
togither, and laye it to the wound, and laye a Playster of Trete
thervnto, and soe lett it lye till neede be to remove it and soe conty-
nue wth the same till it be whole.

How to make an oyle for a Sore

Take a pynte of white wyne, & halfe a pynte of oyle Oliffe, and put
it togither then take Rose Campen, Grownd Ivie, Burr leaves, orpen,
Bittenye, Stampe them in a morter, and take the iuyce of them
& iij Spoonefull of Turpentyne, & honey and put it in to e
wyne and lett it seethe togither halfe an howre till it be well myn-
gled, Then take it of & put it in a glasse, and anoynte e Sore
or take Lynt & wett it in the Oyle, & laye it to the Sore, with
a Plaster, And yf you will have yo Salve a Sore drawer
take this oyle and the Salve            and melt them to-
gither vppon a Chafinge dishe till they be thicke, and put lynt
into it, and when it is cold chafe yo salve in a dishe wth a knife & stirr
it vp & downe a good while, And it wilbe a pure Salve and drawe merve-
lous well, but take half soe much of the yo oyle as of the Salve,
for yo Salve must be more then yo oyle when you melt them.





To make an Oyle for any Sore that is in greate
heate Ache or Swellinge.

Take Nightshade, Planten, Elder, Howselieke Rosemarie or e flowres or
e leaves of eache of these herbes two handfull, but let the moste part
part be of Planten greate & small, and seethe them in Swynes grease
or May Butter, butt stampe the herbes first before you put them in.
Then let them seethe till e Oyle be greene and take awaye e Skum from
it as it ryseth and when it is well sodden strayne it and put it
vpp. Then put vnto it one ounce of puer oyle of Roses yf it be for e
Ache onlye If it Swell put to e Oyle a handfull of hollyhoke leaves
& Mallowe leaves.

ffor to make an oyle to heale a Cutt alone

Take Planten Small & greate, Bitteny, Sellendyne, valerian, orpen, howselieke,
nightshade, Grownsell, woodbyne leaves, motherworte Mallowes, Sickle-
worte & Tatsane. Seethe all thes wth swynes grease but let them not seethe
drye, and when they be well sodden straine them, and take the iuyce, and
put theryo honey Turpentyne, Mastick white ffrankencense & oyle of Roses a
little Rosen & virgins Waxe. If you make much oyle, after the quantitie of
yr oyle temper yo stuffe viz. If you make of the herbes a pynte of oyle greene
then take of Mastick & white ffrankencense in poulder ij: ounces, waxe and
Rosen ij ounces, & put these into e oyle and Skum it cleane, when you melt it,
and when you have Skummed it, put to it of honey ij. ounces oyle of Roses
ij ounces, & of Turpentyne iij. ounces, and let them seethe agayne & straine it,
And if you make it pure it wilbe pure and greene. And wth a little
lynte laye it on e Sore, and it will heale it.





To make Tretis for all manner of Sores, bothe white,
redd and greene Tret

Take j li of Wax, a li of Rosen, and a Penyworthe of Oyle Oliffe,
relent them on the fyre, and put therto the Oyle and boyle them
altogither, and take it from the fyre and then it is white Treate
And yf you will have the other collored treat, then devide your white
Treate into three part, and to the second part put a penny-
worthe of redd lead and temper them well togither, and that
will make the Redd treate wch is colder than any of the other
by reason of the redd lead. And yf you will have it greene
put therto a part of this greene Oyntment that hereafter
followethe, for e Coloringe therof is more holsome then verdigreece
for a sore, for this Oyntement is good to laye on a Playster next
to the sore for it will drawe out broken bones, and is soveraignly
good for many other thing and is made as followethe:

Take redd Wort greate daysies, Osmund, Polepodie, Bugell
of eache a lieke quantitie, and as muche of Avence as of
all the other, and put therto pigle Sanicle and selfhearle
a lieke quantitie, and stampe them altogither Smale in a
morter. Then put therto halfe soe much freshe grease as all e
hearbes doe waye, and stampe altogither till they be mixed,
Then frye them in a Pann and sett it in a close Vessell fowre
dayes and then frye them agayne till they be thoroughe hott,
and then straine it thoroughe a clothe, and lett it stand till
it be cold. And lett out the water & frye the thicke agayne and
put it in boxes. This is a pretious Oyntement for all Sores
and it may be longe kept and wth this Treate you may color an
other Treate in winter and make it greene. And this Treate
should be made in Sommer, and put therto a quantitie of deere
suett, for it wilbe soe much the better. /

To make Apostolicon, wch is a verie good Treate. /

Take wormewoode, Waybread, Smallege, Centorie, e Roote of Osmund
in lieke quantitie, and as muche of Egremonie as of all the other,
washe them Cleane, stampe them, and putt them in a newe earthen Pott.
& put therto a pottle of good vinegre, and seathe them to a Quarte,
straine it, and putt e Liquor into e pott, and sett it over the fyre agayne,

Li Li Putt therto
li





Putt therto an Ounce of mead waxe, that is melted in womans milke,
An Ounce of Allam Smale Pounded, an Ounce of blacke Pitche
an Ounce of Masticke smale pouldred, an Ounce of Galbanum vn-
pouldered, an ounce of ffrankencense Smale pouldred, halfe a qur
of Terpentyne a quarterne of prosin, but not the Terpentyne
in till the rest be boyled and relented, and when you take it from
the fyre then put in the Terpentyne, and stirr them altogither
till they be well mixed and when the Terpentyne is melted
then straine it into a cleane vessell, and put therto as
much of the Roote of wallworte by weyght as is of the Smallage
and mixe all well togither.

To make Terpentyne for Treaties.

Take three quarters of cleane Rosen, a quarterne of Perosin,
halfe a li of Oyle Oliffe that is greene, make Poulder of e
Rosen and prosin, and putt the oyle into a cleane pann and
put therto the Rosen and profin, and sett them on a Charcole
fyre, and boyle them softlye, and not hastelie, and as soone as
the Rosen and prosin are relented, and well medled with
the Oyle then sett it from the fyre & lett it Coole till the
greate heate be past, then straine it and keepe it. /

The princypall of all others called Gratia Dei,

Take Bittanie Verven, hearbe Robert, hearbe Walter
wayebread Smallage, Osmund, Orpin Egremonie,
flos Campi Bugle Robworte, Chresworte a lieke quantitie
of eache viz an handfull, Rootes, Stalkes, Leaves flowres
as they growe. Washe them cleane and grynd them smale
in a Morter, and after put them into a pott, and
putt therto a pottle of good white wyne, and cover
well the pott, seethe it softlie on the fyre, till halfe
be wasted. Then take it from the fyre and lett it stand
xxiiij tie howres, and sett the pott over the fyre agayne till
it be reddie to seethe, then take it from the fyre and
straine it soe as you may have all the substance of the
hearbes, then washe cleane the pott wth white wyne &
sett it over e fyre agayne, wth the same liquor and lett it

Seethe.





seethe agayne; Then take half a li of mead waxe cutt into smale
peeces and cast into the pott, and stirr it well wth a slice, and 8
stirr it softlye almost a quarter of an howre, and then sett it
from the fyre and put therto an ounce of Mastick, halfe a
li of Rosen, three ounces of Perosin, halfe a lj of franken-
cense well beaten to pouldre, and take a li of Terpentyne,
halfe a li of Spanishe Cod, and putt it all into the pott, &
stirr it well till it be cold; Then take a pynte of vinegre
and a pynte of the iuyce of the said hearbes, and of
womans milke, and of the iuyce of Selendyne, of eyther
an ounce, and put it in a glasse till next morninge.
Then take out all the moysture that is in the pott and take
the vinegre, e womans milke, and the iuyce of the hearbes
that is in the glasse, and mixe them altogither and
putt them into the pott, Sett it agayne over the fyre,
and lett it seathe softlye a whyle, Then take it from the
fyre and lett it Coole till you may suffer yo hand therin,
Then take out the Treate, worke it in yo hand agaynst
the fyre till it cleave to yo handes, for e more it is labored
the better it wilbe. And this foresaid Gratia Dei
is the most pretious Treate, for it will heale all
manner of wound that may be healed wth any manner
of Treate. And yf any wound be to soone healed and
rankle wthin. Laye this Treate to the place it it will
open the wound agayne, and heale it agayne, yf the
Plaster be removed twice a daye in winter and thrise
in Sommer, and at everye tyme you must washe the wound
wth white wormewood wyne, and yf you have noe white wyne
then take Red wyne and at everie tyme you remove the
playster wype it, for it will serve twise layeinge to. And
this Treate is verie good for Swellinge and ranklinge
of wound, for the Canker and for the fester, for it is a
Treate, Attractative, Mittigative, Consolidative Sanative
Mundificative, and may be accepted as well as the best
Treate that can be made, wth mans handes, And therfore
it is called Gratia Dei, t it to saye the Grace of God helpethe
all thing.





how to make Oxicrocion wch is a yellow Treate,

Take deares Suett and melt it in a Pann of Earthe,
Them take a portion of Rosen a greater quantitie of Mastick
of Olibanum, Lythurge of Gold, and of Silver, and of Virgin
waxe a lieke quantitie and a little oyle Oliffe. Seathe them
well togither, and then take e vessell from the fyre, and Coole
it a little, and put therto the poulder of Saffron and the
yolkes of Egg and stirr it till it be cold. And this a good
Treate and best healpinge and drawinge, and it is good for
broken bones, and for all manner of Aches in everie Lymm,
It loosenethe hard Impostumes, And therfore old Chirurgions
of Salernum vsed noe other plaister but this only in all manner
of Causes.

An other good Treate. /

Take good fatt Bacon melt it in a Pann and lett it stand, and
when e Fatte us fallen into e bottom powre out the greace into a
Vessell and lett it Coole, Then take Three li of Rosen a li of
waxe, a li of Bacon grease, a li of Sheepes Tallowe, a qte
of Gumm Galbanum, and lett e gumm lye in a little Luke
warme water xxiiijtie howres vntill it be relented. Then
breake yo Rosen Smale into a pann, breake the waxe unto
the Rosen and put therto the Tallowe, grease, and e water
the gumm was in, and sett it over the fyre. Put therto a qrn
of good frankencense, halfe a qrt eof Masticke, a qrter
of pofsn fyne pouldred & boyle them till they be relented
& well mixed togither. Then take vij pennye wayghte
of Verdegrease, ground Small on a morter stone, Cast
it into the Pann and stirr them well togither halfe a qurt
of an howre. Then take it from e fyre and put it in a
bagg of Canvase, and put a little water in a bason,
& stirr it in the bottom, and hold over the bagg wth the Treate
& lett it runn into the bason and presse out the treate wth
a payre of Tong and when it is cleane thoroughe Take
a fether and put a waye the frothe aboue, and soe lett it stand
all one night, and on the next morninge take out the treate &
dresse it accordinge to you liekeinge, for it is as kyndly a made
Treate as yf it should be on warrantise.

And A youth





A good Treate to Close a Wound and heale it /

Take e whites of Egg Rawe honney, and Rye meale a lieke quantitie
and take as much of more of the Iuyce of Marche as is of the other
and putt therto the iuyce of Comferie & of Violetts, and seethe
them togither and make it vpp. /

An other Treate good to open a wound, to clense it, to
take awaye the Ache, and heale it, and alsoe to take awaye
the dead fleshe t is cankred and corrupted. /

Take the iuyce of wallworte, Absinthium, the Croppes of redd
nettles and of Marche ana by even portions and weight, And
of the whites of Egges somewhat lesse, and putt therto rye meale,
& seethe it till it be thicke. And yf e wound be deepe put yo
Treate on a Clout and laye it on the sore, and yf it waxe drye
renewe it wth the iuyce of Marche

To make a good Plaster to heale all wound wthout Tent.

Take white waxe, Rosen, Turpentyne and oyle of Roses of eache iij ounces. Then
melt them & take of e juyce of Valerian, Orpen, Planten, Wintergreene
Woodbyne leaves and Bitteny of eache of them ij ounces, or els stampe m & seethe
them wth Swynes grease or Sheepes Suett till it be greene, Then straine it &
put to e waxe. Then put vnto it ffrankencense and Mastick made all in fyne
poulder and lett them seethe togither a Walme or two, & lett it be cold. And to
make yo Salve fayre and greene take e Sape of Nightshade & put to it

ffor to heale hurts and wound .

Take Mallowes Planten and Bitteny and seethe them well and when they
be well sodden stampe them, then take old Barrowes grease and mixe wth the
iuyce, & then take a little Virgin waxe, & poulder of white ffrankencense
and melt wth the iuyce and grease & Skum it cleane. Then straine it.
Then put Barlie meale to it. Yf it be full of Corruption then
put the Bitteny vnto it, else take it not, but e Mallowes & the Planten
And this is a reddye healer pved. / .





How to sett broken
bones & cure them:

For Broken bones hae they may be sett and Cured /.

Take e Lymm t is broken & laye it on an eaven borde, and washe it
wth warme water, then sett the bones togither. Then take the
glare of Egges & fyne wheate flowre made in a plaister on a
cleane Clothe, and bynd it to e Lymm tt is broken. and lett
it lye ther Nyne dayes and ix night before you remove it.
And give e Patient to drinke pettie Consound, Osmund
Comfarie, & Auence firt and last wth wyne and Stale Ale,
And at the Nyne dayes ende, take the same hearbes, stampe
them and frye them in freshe grease, And laye it in a plaister
to the hurt as hott as the patient can Suffer it. And lett
him drincke Egremonie and dittanum three tymes and he
shalbe hole. This is pved. /

A Redd Poulder that will Stanche blood, Soulder
bones broken & the fleshe and the Skinn.

Take an Ounce of Comfarie dryed in poulder, an ounce
of Bole Armoniacke Three Ounces of Corall, as much
of Colophonie, ij ounces of Sandragon, ij ounces of
Mumma, make poulder of all & keepe it as pretious,

An other Poulder that wch in two dayes will soulder
a wound togither thoughe it be never soe brade

Take Olibanum Sarcacole, ana, halfe an ounce of Aloes
ij ounces make poulder of them togither & strowe it vppon a
wound, & it will close it. Alsoe the Poulder of a Hart horne
burnte, Closethe a wound, and puttethe awaye evill humors,
and dryethe the wound.

An other for
to

An other Powder

Take Verveyne and drye it, and make a poulder therof fyne
Sersed, and laye it to a wound that is newlie hurte, & bleedethe
and it will stanche the blood, and heale the wound on warrantise,
It hathe been often proved. /

An other Powlder to stanche blood. /

Take Jasper Corall and Roche Allume, make powlder of
them and put a quantitie therof into a wound that bleedethe
and it will stanche it presentlye. /





An other thinge to stanche blood. 10

Take a quantitie of Bole Armoniack as much of Sanguis draconis
make fyne poulder of them and mixe them wth the glare of
Egges, laye it to the wound and soe lett it lye Two dayes &
it will cleave faste vnto the sore. Then to loosen it that it bleed
not when it shalbe taken of. Take Oyle of Roses and annoynte
the Plaister therwth and yt will supple it that you may easelie
take it awaye. /

An other for stanchinge of blood, souldringe of bones
and veynes and healinge of Sores. /

Take Sanguis draconis, Bole, Myrra Frankencense
Masticke, Spruce, Litthurge, poulder of Comfarie, poulder of a
post of an old house yt is called Venult, ana, Make poulder of
them all & cast it on e wound or on the sore, and it will stanche
the blood. /

An other good Powlder to stenche blood.
Take an ounce of Incense two dragmas of Sundragon, half a
dragme of Sarcacole, a dragme of Shepard purse medle all these
wth the glare of Egg, and putt therto hares heres and laye it on the
veyne. /

ffor to Stoppe bleedinge of a wound or of the nose

Mallowes, Planten, Violett, Wallwort Rosewater. /

To make a Poulder to heale a wound and to stopp blood. /

Take Lyturgium Bolarmoniake or Sanguis Draconis or Aloe pateru
Mastick, white ffrankencense or Olibanum and make them all
in fyne powlder and strowe it on fyne Lynte, or wett the lynt
in white wyne, and laye the poulder on it. pved.

An other good Poulder for the same.

Take Bolarmoniack or dragons blood, white ffrankencense or Olibanum
Mastick Lyturgium and the poulder of Cokellshell burned & made all
into poulder.

To make a poulder to heale to clense to stopp blood to keepe
the wound from rottinge to comfor and to Soulder - /

Take Mastick white ffrankecense, dragagante, Bolarmoniacke of each halfe
an ounce, Myrra & Boras of m bothe halfe an ounce, and put vnto it a little
quantitie of e poulder of Arabeke, or else lyturgium, for the Myrre
if you will you may put Gumm Elempanie, Then put to it a little Cam-
pherni poulder, And this will heale a wound verye well. Laye it on
wth Lynte. /





A good drinke for man or woman tt is wounded. /

Take Bugell strawberie leaves, daysie, Comfarie, the Cropes
of redd Cole, Cropes of Redd bryre, Cropes of Osmund,
Cropes of Hempe, Cropes of redd Nettle, Sanicke, Orpyne,
Tansie, Pimpernell, Mouseare, and Violett ana, of eyther
of them one handfull, Of the Cropes and Rootes of Auence
five handfull of the Cropes & rootes of hearbe Robert three
handfull. And the weight of the third part of all these
hearbes in Madder. Washe all these verye cleane and stamp
them in a Morter, and put them in an Earthen pott
and put therto a gallone of good white wyne, and boyle
them altogither till halfe be wasted. Then take it from
the fyre and coole it a little. Then straine it into the cleane
Earthen pann. Then take a pottle of lyfe honey, such as will
runn out of the Combes wthout pressinge, Clarifie it cleane
over the fyre, and put it to the said liquor, soe that you have
of them in lieke quantitie. Then boyle them togither till
the quantitie of the hearbes be wasted. Then straine it into a
glasse, And make this before Mydsommer And let the sicke
drinke therof first and last wth a spoonefull of fayre spring
water that hathe bene sodden, and lett him drink it warme.

To make good Balles for wound, to knitt Sinewes
and Veynes that be brused, and to knitt broken bones
on warrantise. /

Take daysies, Comfarie, & Osemund, the Cropes of Hempe,
the Cropes of redd Cole, the Cropes of redd nettles, the Cropes
of redd Bryre, Sutherwoode Tanseye, Pimpernell, Bitteny
Bugell Sanicle Rodis lig Gold and Crocos, Auence,
and Madder a lieke quantitie by weight of all except of the
madder wherof take as muche as of all the rest. Washe
them cleane and grynd them smale in a morter, and when
they be smale ground and well medled togither, make Ball
therof, the bignes of smale nutt kernell, Couche them on
a fayre bord, and sett e bord wth e ball in some convenient place

wher





11
wher neyther sonne, wynd nor ayre may come to them, for dryeinge
to fast, and everie daye turne them and rowle them wth cleane
handes, and put awaye the wormes yf any be in them, And
thus preserve them till they be drye and better balles be
not vnder the Skye to knitt and for to heale. /

A drinke for a wound that driveth out of it all Corruption
and healethe it,

Take Sothernewoode, Tansey, Red Coles, Parsley Seede Strawberye leaves
Planten greate & small & hempe seede, seethe all these togither in white
wyne & a little honey & washe the wound wth it and drinck it or els this
drincke. viz Pimpernell, Water Roote or Sotherwoode, Egrimony, Isope,
Tansey, Planten, Strawberrye leaves, Bitteny and redd madderworte
and seethe them in wyne, vinegre and honey, and this drincke Cureth
or healeth a wound by it self wthout other helpe. pved. /

To make a good drincke for all manner of wound
& for an Aposteme.

Take Bitteny Violet leaves, Avence, Scabious, Tormentill, Pimpnell,
Egremony, Buglosse Planten Strawberrye leaves & ffemetorie and still
them all wth white wyne, and put in it a little Sugar when the patient
dothe drincke it, or else chope these herbes and seethe them wth wyne, and
washe the Sore wth this water and laye your salve vnto it.

How Potions made of Hearbes are to be Clarified and
made fitt to be dronken .

Potions for the Sicke are made of the iuyce of such herbes as are
healeinge, and of wyne or Ale sodden therwth, and clarified on e
fyre, and then clensed till it be cleare. And if the iuyce of
the herbes be bitter put therto a little honey. And althoughe
e iuyce be never soe thick, you may make it as cleare as
wyne or water in this wise, viz. Take the whites of Egg
snd the Shelles small broken, and meddle it wth the iuyce
of herbes, And sett it altogither over a softe fyre in a shallow
Pann, but let it not seethe or cast vpwarde, and then the
dregges of the herbes wth the white of the Egg shelles
will hover aboue, and the iuyce underneathe will be as
cleare as wyne or water.





Of woundes in sondrie partes of mans
bodie how they may be cured.

Yf a man be wounded wth a speare of wth an Arrowe if the
wound be deepe how it shalbe cured. And that two manner
of wayes:

The first waye to heale a deepe wound is: To make a Tent
of Linnen Clothe and lett it be smale, that the poynte may
come to the bottome of the wound, and Annoynte it wth the
yellow Oyntement, or wth some other good Oyntment & putt
it into e wound, and laye a playster of Treate theron. Butt
lett yo Tent be soe bigg aboue t it may hold the wound open,
otherwise the wound may heale aboue but not wthin, and that
is verie dangerous, for when such wounds are not perfectlie
healed, but breake out agayne after, Then are they worse to heale
than they were when they were first hurt. And therfore wound must
be healed at the bottom first and then aboue.

The second waye to heale such wounds as are deepe in any place
except the head is as followethe: Take Lard of a Swyne &
make a Tent therof t will fill the wound, annoynte it wth
the yellow Oyntmt. and laye an Emplaister therto made in this
wise: Take wyne, Oyle, honney, Meale, hearbe Grace, Sauge
and vse them in manner of an Emplaister vppon the wound,
and Change it twise a daye dureinge xiiij dayes togither and
ever as the wound healethe soe make the Tent of Lard lesse and
lesse, and soe you may heale all suche deepe wound. /

How to heale a broad wound.

Yf a man have a broad wound in his head, or any other place
of his bodie. Sowe the lippes of the wound togither in iij or
iiij places wth a quarrell needle, & a Silke thrid, & leave a hole
on the nether part of the wound, And make a plaister
of Wyne, Oyle and wheate bread that is not well baked
and boyle them over the fyre, and therof haveing made a plaister
laye it to the wound And after heale it vpp wth the Yellow
Oyntmt. or some other good thinge. And yf the Lippes of
the wound be greate and the place about it be Softe and have
smale pimples, and the wound wax white it is a good token.
Butt





12
But yf the lippes be thinn and he place about it wexethe hard
and black, it be token the Cankeringe. And yf the wound
wexe blacke wthin: Then take a fyne Clothe and wett it in the iuyce
of Sengreene, Mercurie, Penyworte and Henbane, meddle ther-
wth the gleare of an Egg, Oyle of Roses or of Violetts & Sanders,
vse this to the wound vntill it be in good temper.

And yf wormes breed in a wound. Take the iuyce of an
Oxes donge newe made and put it into the wound And
make a plaister of the Oxes donge and laye it ther vppon &
wthin three dayes the wound wilbe Red, and then heale it vpp.

Yf the scull of the head be broken, of yf that a
Peece therof be cutt awaye, how to know whether
the man may be cured yea or noe. /

Wounds of
e head.

Take Pimpernell stampe it and temper it wth water , let the sicke
drinke it, and yf he cast it agayne then he shall dye. /
And in lieke manner the iuyce of Mouseare and the iuyce
of Columbyne and Auense given him to drinke yf it
come out of the wounded he will dye in Short tyme after or els
yf it come not out he shall live. Then yf you fynd him curable
yf the weaknes and feoblenes of the patient may endure it
Take out the broken bones yf any be in the wound and
clense it. Then take a fyne peece of Linnen Clothe that is
smale, cleane and softe, and laye it on the brayne to keepe
the filthe from it. Then laye an other peece in the break-
inge of the Skull, but put the endes of the peeces in such
manner that they may get vnder the skull to keepe the
filthe from the brayne. And the best thinge for this pur-
pose weare a Sponge of the sea, well washed and dryed.
But for want therof, take (as hathe bene said) a fyne linne
Clothe softe and cleane, and when you have stopped well
bothe vnder the broken Scull and in the breache therof, Then
take a fyne Linnen Clothe, and wett it in the glare of Egg and lay
it on e wound and bynd vpp the head. And lett the man wch is
hurt sitt or lye in sych manner that e matter may come out
of the wound. And change it twise in a Winters daye and thrise
in a Sommers. and soe contynue workinge till it be whole. And yf
any corrupt fleshe growe vppon the brayne, Take a gobbett of

Sponge





Sponge of the sea that is first washed and dryed and laye
it theron for it will frett it awaye. And yf ther growe
any evill fleshe on the scull frett it awaye wth Ermadactolo
And when the Skull is well covered heale vpp the wound
wth the Oyntmt Apostolicon. And this manner all such
wound are healed, wher the skull is perished. /

But yf the skull be verie much broken and a smale wound
wthout. Then put in your finger softlie and searche how farr
the skull is wounded, and when you know that. Take a
Razor and cutt the Skinn a Crosse wise, and wth an other
Instrumt part the fowre quarters from the skull, and hold
eache of them togither in manner of a rowle, and yf the
blood be noe impediment yf any bone lye loose take it out,
or els tarrye till the third daye but in the meane tyme
put in everie use the fowre quarters a peece of Linnen clothe
wett in the glaire of Egg And yf the quarters swell &
increase it is a good signe. And the third daye when you
have broken out the bones, Then heale it upp as I sayd
before, And on the Second daye after a man his hurt you
shall laye on the brayne a cleane linnen clothe that is not
wett in the glaire of e Egg.

And if Dura Mater be hurt that clothe that shalbe layd vppo
the brayne, shalbe wett in fayre warme water, for hurtinge
of the brayne, But peradventure the skull is soe broken
as you cannot perceive it for the smalnes of the breache,
and in this case you shall cause the man to hold and stopp his
mouthe and his nose, and to pene his wynd to blowe and
yf the skull be broken then will the wynd come out of the
breache. And yf e wound be soe narrow as you cannot see the breache
then make it bigger wth a Razor as I told you before and
then at bothe endes of the breache in the skull make two holes as
you soe neede, accordinge to the largenes of the breache. Then
cutt awaye as much as is betwixt the two holes and then heale
it up wth Vnguentum Apostolicon as hath bene said, And yf it
chance t a peece of the skull be cutt awaye and hange by the Skinn
& that the Skull be not cutt quite thoroughe to the brayne, Then
part the bone from e skinn and stiche vpp the skinn agayne
and lett therbe the space of an ynche betweene everie stiche,
and beneathe a voyd place must be ordeyned for e matter to
avoyd from e, and Strew theron redd Poulder for that will
Soulder them togither agayne. Then heale them vpp wth some
of e Oyntment afore said. But laye not the poulder therto aboue
nyne dayes or twelve at the most. /





13
And yf soe be the Skull be cutt thoroughe and the peece hange besides on
e Skinn Then slitt the Skinn and take awaye the bone from it, and
sowe the two peeces of the Skinn to the Skinn of the head, and lett
the middle part be open betweene them bothe and laye a soft lynnen
clothe, vppon the brayne Then heale vpp the skull as hath bene
before declared and soulder the sides of the two skinnes to the head
wth the redd poulder.

And yf the Skull be bowed inward wth a stroke Soe much as is Apayred
must be cutt awaye, and then healed as is aforesaid, And when you
will Cutt it awaye make fowre holes a crosse as is before said, and
then Cutt from hole to hole and soe you shall best Save the brayne and
the residue of the Skull. /

And yf the Skull be Shott thoroughe bothe sides wth an Arrowe
and the Arrow cleavethe on the one side. Then take a Razor and
on that side Cutt the Skinn on crosse, and part it from the Skull,
And in the Skull make iiij holes a crosse about the arrow head,
that it may easelie be drawne out, and then drawe out the arrow
head, but drawe out the shafte on the other side first. And then
heale vpp bothe wounds as is before said.

And yf the Arrowe pearce on the one side and not on the other
Then Cutt the skinn a crosse from the Arrow, and part it
from the skull, And make the hole large ynoughe for then
you shall see the skull the better. Then drawe out the
Arrowe and heale vp agayne as is before declared.
And thus verie sufficient and sure good remedies have bene
shewed you for all hurt and wound in the head





If a veyne be cutt in any part of a man, how the blood may
be stainched. Or how Sinowes or Veynes, may be souldred
agayne togither that be cutt in sonder.

Ther are many thinges that will stenche blood of Veynes or wound
Viz. Take the Cropes of redd Nettles but not to much and laye
it on the wound and it will stenche the blood.
The hearbe called Bursa Pastoris will doe the same.
The donge of a Mare or of an Asse, made in poulder layed on a wound.
The warme donge of a Swyne.
The Webb of Ater Coppis.
The Soote of a Chimneye.
Alsoe the Poulder of Vervin fyne sersed, and layed to a wound will
stenche the blood and heale it.
Alsoe the poulder of Sanders bound to a veyne that bleedethe will
presentlie stenche the blood, but it is paynefull for yf have not the better
hart it will make the partie to Sowne.

And yf a veyne be cutt a sonder, Then sowe e endes agayne togither bothe
above and beneathe, wth a silke thrid. But be ware you perishe not the veyne
wth sewinge, and drawe the endes softlie togither wth a thrid for breakinge
the Skinn, soe that the blood may yssue out bothe above and beneathe And
then wett a fyne Lynnen Clothe in the glare of Egg and laye it to the
wound measurablye. Then laye an Emplaister about. If it be in winter
as hathe bene declared in the wound of the head. And yf it be in Sommer
Laye therto e yolke of an Egg till the wound quitter. and then wth the
yellow Oyntmt and other thing t engender fleshe, heale vp the wound.
But yf an Arrow or a Thorne, Silver Pinn or any such thinge sticke in
a Veyne, first pull out the Arrow or whatsoever it be, and sow the veyne,
as before hath bene shewed. And then cast on the red powlder or some
other thinge as is a foresaid. Or els take two ounces of Encense one ounce
of Aloes Epatic One ounce of hares heres smale Cutt, and half soe much
of the glare of Egg as is of all the other, and medle all this togither, and
laye therof a good quantitie on the veynes that are cutt. And lett it lye soe,
till it fall of by it self. And in what place soever of the bodye you laye a
medycyne to restrayne and stenche the bleedinge, Lett it lye ther three
dayes before you remove it. And yf a Veyne be cutt even longe put e
the two sides therof softlye togither wth yo fingers, and then laye e
medycyne to it as is aforesaid. But sowed it not unlesse ther be verie
greate neede, but bringe the brinkes togither, And then make this
medycyne. Take Sarcacole pouldred, Sandragon and e white of
Egg and laye theron. And yf the medycyne wexe drye and hare, &
will not well of, annoynte it wth oyle of Roses or some other thinge that will
relent it.





14
Yf a synew be Cutt how to sowlder it

Take Angyll watches wch be greate wormes that lye knotted togither
in Sommer morning bruese them and heate them a little over the
fyre in Oyle oliffe, and laye them to the broken synewes and that
will soulder them agayne togither.

Alsoe in this manner you may soulder Synewes togither
Sowe the vttermost skinn of the Synewes togither, then Sprinkle
theron the Redd powlder: and that will soulder them perfectlie agayne.
And yf the wound Swell then make the medycyne I told you before
for swellinge of wound in the head. and laye it therto till the
swellinge be asswaged and abated. but yf the Synew be sticked or prikd
lay therto Emplaister made of Galbanum Armoniacke Serapia, Apopo-
nack alsoe of Sporge Bene flowres and Holyhock. Then Annoynte
the necke and armeholes wth oyle &c.

A Soveraigne Emplaster good and profitable for Synnowes
that be Cutt, hurt or broken.

Take two ounces and a halfe of Colofium two ounces and a halfe of
Rosen, iij ounces of oyle, one ounce of pitche. And of Olibanum, Orpiment,
Allom a lieke quantitie. ij Ounces, and halfe a pynte of wyne
Make powlder of that wilbe made into powlder, and melt the other
and boyle altogither and make a plaster therof and laye it therto,

How to keepe
synnewes
fro e Crampe.

And yf you cannot keepe e Synnew from the Crampe Then Cutt the
Synnew all a sonder, and then it will not ake, and yf it be but somewhat
Cutt or pricked, then it will ake. And yf ther stick in the Synnew

How to draw out
Yron, Thorne,
bone t stick in
a Synnew. /

a thorne, Iron, or bone Laye therto the iuyce of Beet or the seede
of Clarie, or of Ditander And yf it be yron laye therto an
Adamant stone, And yf it be a Thorne, Stampe filberd Carnell
and the seede of Clarie and laye it therto, And lett noe water
touche the Synnew that is hurt.

The waye how to heale an Arme or a legg yf it be hurt or broken.

Yf the bone be broken and the Skinn be hole on the out side it may be
healed on this wise. Viz. ffirst heale the broken Lymm, and ioyne
the bones togither. Then ordeyne you iij peeces of fyne Linnen
Clothe, and wett them in a glare of Egg, and laye them on every
side of the Sore, Then take a Clothe of iiij fyngers broad &
wett it alsoe in the glare, And bynd the Arme or the legge
therwth about the other, And looke that every Clothe be layed even,

that





that they make noe pitt or dent in the Arme or the legge. Then
ordeyne them Splitters and laye about the Sore, and bynd them
fast wth a stringe, to keepe the lymm even, that wexe not
croked. and soe lett it be bound three dayes, till that the bones
be souldred agayne togither. And yf it swell wth the byndinge,
then washe the legg or the Arme wth warme water, t Hockes,
or Beet or Planten hath been sodden in. And when it is well
washed, annoynte it wth Morcation or wth Deutie, and soe contynue
yo workinge untill it be hole. And in the meane tyme lett the pati-
ent drinke the iuyce of Dasies, Comferie and Columbyne seed
for these things will helpe sowlder the bone togither.

And yf the Arme, or the legg be wounded in the bone or in the Synew
cutt asonder, and yf any Sliver of the bone be left, Take it away
and then sett the bones even togither, and sowe the overmost skyn
of e endes of the Synnew, and then wett a clothe in the glare
of Egg & laye it to the wound and cast some of the Redd powlder
theron to soulder the bones and Synewes togither, Then wett
lynnen Clothes in glare and bynd about the wound, Then rowle
it fayre and wett a clout in glare and byn about it. Then Splint
it and stirr it not till iij dayes be past and then remove it &
renue it, and annoynte the fleshe wth the yellowe Oyntment.
for it reingendrethe fleshe & cast the redd powlder on the Synnew,
& laye it about the broken bone, & soe contynew yo workinge,
And looke therto everie three dayes, And give him such
drincke every daye as will Soulder bones. /

And yf it swell or ake, or if the Synewes shrinke, Then
annoynte it wth dutie all about e sore, or else make an Emplaster
of Hokkes, Beet, ffenegreke & Lyn seede powldered and beaten togither
and layed to the sore. But in any wise soe t it be well bound
or els the bones will not soulder well togither.

But you shall vnderstand that some wound of Armes and Legg
are not curable but deadlie. As yf the brawne of the Arme or his
Synnewes be cutt overtwharte, or a slent, or if the Thighe be cutt
three ynches aboue the knee, it is verie dangerous. And yf the
other part of the Arme be Swollen or wexe blacke and akethe,
That wound is deadlye, meddle not therwth, yf they have not
these Signes they may be cured by God helpe.





15
But in the hurtinge of the Legg lett not e medycyne be to drawinge
vnlesse it drawe over much matter to the sore. And if therbe a longe
wound in the Arme or in any place of the bodie, wthout breakeinge of
bones of Synnewes, or cuttinge of the Synnewes; Then sowe the brink
of the wound togither as before hath bene shewed you, And wth the
Redd powlder and the yellow oyntment you may heale it vpp. /

And yf one be wounded vppon the Liver e Longes, the Stomacke, the
Mydriffe, the Reynes of the backe, or the Throtebole, I counsell you
not to meddle wth them. Nor wth the creepinge veynes in the hamm
yf they be Cutt. ffor all these be incurable wthout the greate goodnes
of God. /

Yf the Ribbes be Cutt or broken they may be sowldred agayne, and the greate
Ropes or gutt yf they be perished or hurt may be healed better then the
smale ones, for it is dangerous healinge of the Smale Ropes and gutt.
And the lights may be Cutt and suffer medycynes for he that is soe hurt
feelethe noe greate payne, but of the receyveinge of the hurt. It is dan-
gerous medlinge wth any of these, for they be mortall. Yf the light be
cutt and come out of the wound, That wch is brused you may Cutt awaye
and heale it and putt it in, and then heale vpp the wound wthout, But
yf the Ropes be cutt and come out of the wound, Yf they be cold: Then take
a Whelpe and slitt him in two, and laye the cold ropes in his bellie
till they have gotten a heate, And then make an elder pype, and lett
it be smale and soe longe that it passe the lengthe of the breache by
an ynche, and put the pype into the rope, and on it sowe the endes
togither at ij stitches or iij and soe leave a greate Space betweene your
stiches t you take out the pype when the endes are sowed togither, And
sowe it in that manner that the superfluitie t is in the rope, may passe
thoroughe the pype wthout lettinge, And clense the intrall of the fylthe
that is in them, and then softlie putt them in thoroughe the wound, and
cast the Redd powlder over e soweinge everie daye till it be souldred togither
and then take out the pype of Elder. And then soulder vpp the remnant
wth the powlder and take out the thrides and heale vpp the wound forthwth.
This workinge is good yf the Ropes be cutt aslent, and not even over-
twhart; Mamnia is good therfore, or els you must slitt a mans wombe wch
is grievous and paynefull for any man to endure, And therfor Chyrur-
gions have by their learninge devised to make potions to drincke that
will bringe a man a sleepe whyles he is a dressinge t he shall feele
noe payne .

And such potions





And such Potions be made in this manner

To cast one in
a sleepe. /
Take the iuyce of Henbane, the iuyce of black Popie
or els the seede of them, the iuyce of Mandragon or
of his fructe, or els the iuyce of Trevy the iuyce of Mulberry
The seede of Letuce and Opiu, Theobaytiu of eyther of them
ana a lieke quantitie ozj beate them togyther in a brasen
morter and sett them in the Sonne betweene Mydsomer and the
Asumption of our Ladie. Then take a Sponge and lett it
drincke vp all the liquor, and laye the Sponge in the Sonne
and lett it drye. And when you will make a man to sleepe,
laye the Sponge on his Mouthe and on his nose till he fall
a Sleepe, And then you may cutt him at your pleasure, And
when you will awake him: Rubb his Teethe and nostrill with
vinegre.

An other potion to bring a man a Sleepe. /

Take the iuyce of White Popie and of black Popie, and
of letuce seede ana: oz j of Opium Theobaytiu oz j make
poulder of them and give it him to drinke, And when you have
done yo Cure, then wake him wth vinegre as aforesaid,
And give him some Confortative to drinke to Cheere him vp.

How to Agomye, good on warrantise to laye to any man
that is hurt or bruised.

Take a quarter of mede waxe, halfe a quarter of Terpentyne,
halfe a quarter of perofsn halfe a qr of Bore grease,
halfe a qr of Bayes Lawrell, halfe a qr of Comyn,
And of oyle of Baye of oyle Oliffe, or Dewtie and of Frank-
encense of eache of them an ounce, putt all these togither
save the poulder of Comyn and Bayes, and put all the
other thing in a cleane vessell and sett it on a Charcole
fyre. Stirr it well wth a Slice till it be melted Then neyther
Streine it nor skome it, but sett it from the fyre and stir
it well till e greate heate be done, Then put in the
powlder and strow it in featlie & stirr it as you would still
papp till all the poulder be in & the matter neare cold,
Soe that you may Spread it on a white leather, And when
it well spread, Take a Lynnen Clothe and laye it aboue.





16
A Medycyne eyther to be eaten or dronken, good for Festers
Wound and for all open Sores. / and it is made in this wise.

Gather the Seven Grasses wch are good for Festers, of eyther of
them ana: m.f: a handfull of those grasses t lead to the wound,
of everie one a handfull of everie one of those that drawe to the wound
ana: a handfull and liekwise a Nipsenfull of Bittenie, for as
Salt dothe Savore all meates soe dothe Bittenie Savor all oyntment
and Treat. Then stampe all these grasses in a Morter Small
and make balles of them and laye them in a pott the space
of ix dayes till it be well moysted, then putt them in a fayre
pann and putt therto Cleane butter, and boyle them togither,
and putt therto white wyne, And boyle them fast togither & stirr
them well; Then drawe it thoroughe a Canvase into a Cleane
vessell, and stirr it well, Then putt therto cleane wex moulten
or els it would be to weake for to handle, and putt therto a little
honny, And when you will vse this medycyne eate therof as
much as a beane, or drincke it in warme Ale, and laye a bryer
leafe on the Sore.

Of the Grasses. /

These are the five Grasses that are called the five Lances. That lett
into the wound, viz. Ditten, Peluette, Confond media, Pimpnell,
Auence.
These are the five that drawe to the wound, viz. Oculus i Mather,
Bugell, Redd Cole, Orvall.
And these be the seven grasses proper for the Fester viz. Ache,
hearbe Robert, Bugell, Sanicle, Gaveni, Molleyn, Crowsope
obser:  And observe this for a rule that everie man wth open sore, hath noe
hott ffester. But wher the Fester is the fleshe is hard and shining
proud and Chafed. And ther ar two Manners of ffesters.
One is hott an a nother is Cold.

That wch is hott hath a large hole And the cold a narrow,
And these two Festers are devided into three.

1. Wherof one dothe frett the fleshe, and out of that cometh
quitter.
2. The second devidethe the fleshe,
3. And the Third Frettethe e fleshe and Synnewes and the
Joynts and out of that cometh a black quitter, wch is uncurable. /






An Antidotorie of Chyrurgerie wch teachethe
to make Medycynes for all sores of grevances
that belong to chyrurgerie & are to be healed
by that art, and the thinges herein expressed
have innumerable tymes bene well proved
to be true. The whole worke is compiled
into Sixe Chapters. Wherof:

1 The first teachethe Repercussiue Medycynes
for to repell any tumor swelling wexing &c
and they are of two sorts {Symple, made of any one thinge
{by it selfe.
{ Compound, of ij: iij:iiij. or more
thing medled togither.

2 The second is of Resolutives & Maturatives wch are
Medycynes t are to resolue & loosen matters gathe-
red togither & to rypen them & to quitter them
yf neede require.

3 The third is of Mundificatiues wch are clensing medycyns
when the sore hathe well matured, & cast out the
Quitter to make all cleane.

4 The fowrthe is of conglutinatiues, Regeneratiues
or Consolidatiues. That are Medycynes knitting
& fastning the lippes of woundes togither
& to make e fleshe to growe wher neede is
& to close & heale woundes & sores in seasinable tyme.

5 The fift of molificatiues wch are Medycynes t
doe mollyfie & make soft e places t be hard,

6 The sixt is of Cautarizing Medycynes t be
to be burnt, in diverse places when neede requires,





17
Caput. i.
Of Repercusiue Defensiue Medycynes

Note. It is to be noted that as oft as you intend to make a Repercussion
it is good first to purge the bodie as the humors doe require,
Yff the bodie be stronge and hott then purge it by blood lettinge.
Yf it be feoble, Then purge it wth garsing and wth this medycyne
Take x plumes of Violett v. ounces (but the violett shalbe putt
in at the ende of the boyleinge). Boyled in a li of water, till
halfe be wasted, and putt therto half an Ounce of Tamaridus
as much of Arana, as much of the pithe of Cassia fistula,
Then straine it stronglye thoroughe a Clothe, and put therto
the rynd of Mirabolus Citrinus grownd into fyne poulder
halfe an ounce, And this should be made in the eveninge,
and earlye in the morninge. Then straine it agayne,
Clense it, and give it the patient. /

Rep: Simple
wthout stopping.
Repercussives Simple wthout Stoppinge of the poores are these viz.
Oyle of Roses Pettie Morrell.

a little
Stoppinge.
Repercusives that doe stoppe the poore a little: viz Vmbelicus
Veneris, wch is called pennywort, wch groweth on the walles, Also
Endiue, Sicorie and wyld Tansie.
And know well this that Repercussives t be stoppinge and
dull mens witt or feoblethe the Courage be not to be vsed
but in greate neede as in akeinge and dolor, wch may
not be suffered

That stopp
verie much
These are verie much Stoppinge and doe dull the sense and stupifie
viz. The iuyce of Lettuce of the garden, Mandrake Popie
Iusguamy & Dwalle, or thing that be grounded be many
Repercussives as roses dryed, all the Sevall Spodyu Bol-
armoniack Nutt and Claye of everie of these Simple or
compound medycynes you may vse. /

Note Yf you vse the iuyce of any of the Repercussiues eyther
Simplie of one alone, or in Composition, if you would
make it to perce more reddilie put therto a little vinegre.

This is a good,





This Medicyne following is a good compound
Repercusiue: viz.

Take the iuyce of any of the forenamed hearbes
oz ij of oyle of Roses oz j of Vinegre halfe an ounce.

An other good Medycyne.

Take oyle of Roses oz ij Bolarmoniack halfe an ounce, vinegre
halfe an ounce, and if you be in doubt t any member
dothe rott and corrupt then putt therto ij oz of terra
Sigillata.

The Repercussiues or defensiues of the member, may be
put vppon any member of the wch you shall suspect any
corse of Melencolique matter should come, yf it chance soe
that the matter be drawne togither and confirmed to any
manner of Impostume, or els the place be Apostumed
and broken, Then put noe repercussive medycynes
vppon the Sore but about near vnto the beginninge of the
greavance of the Sore, As thus for example if the
payne and griefe be neare vnto the ioynte of the fatte
then laye the medycyne to the legg ioynte.

A Cold Matter properlie shall not be repercussed, but
some tyme it shalbe defended in e beginninge with
purgatious of medycynes in comfortinge e member soe
t ther shalbe noe gatheringe togither of the matter For e
wch Trocisti helpe much wch is made by the Apothercarie in
this manner. Recipe. Tarbith abbi carnosi et gummosi
oz j. hermodatis: abbi oz. j .dizinzeber ozj et fiat trociscus
vnus, cum pauco syrupo violarum diazinzeberis, wth the wch is
made the thick Cake, and the best takeinge of this is everie
morninge fastinge.

A medycyne to consume the hardnesse of the watter

Repe zinzeboris albi inundati oz j Liquerice mandato oz iij.
granarum Paradise, Cardain qui libet gaviofili ana ij oz. inter
abbis panis li ij.





18
Medycynes that Comfor a member soe that it shall not receyve
cold matter. viz -

Wormewood, Squenutiu, Sutherwood, Spiknurd, Mastick
Roses and oyle of Roses, Take of these foresaid thing as many
as you will, and put them in an vrynall and put therto Oyle
and boyle them in a Caldron of water, and therwth annoynt
the Sore, Or else boyle them in wyne and make a playster
or make a poulder therof and temper them wth wyne, &
plaster the Sore, These foresaid medycynes serve both
for repercussives and defensives.

The  Second Chapter of Resolutiues & Mataratiues

wch have greate affinitie and agrement in their operation
and workinge, for they be of a temperate heate, and yet
they have a difference: for why Resolutiues that be
looseninge have their Substance and heate tempered wth
softness, for they open the powers and tempately they
drawe out the matter, and Comfort the heate and make
the matter fitt to be drawne forthe and to avoyd out, And
thus yf they fynd, much matter and greate soe that the
poores Suffise not to cast out the matter, then they rypen
Somtymes.

Maturatives be rypeninge medycynes for as much as they
have a temperate heate and a certyne Substance thoroughe
the wch stoppinge the poores they keepe a kyndlie heate
in his place, and soe they mature and rypen the thing
alsoe by little and little till they loosen it. Wherby it
is often found that one kynd of Emplaster dothe some-
tyme loosen and Somtyme ripen that is to saye
resolveth and maturethe.

These followinge are Resolutiues: Viz.

Camamyle, Howslieke & their flowres, Oyle Annett and his
Seede, the wyld Mallowe leaves, Peritorie, Bren Goose
grease, Duck grease, hennes grease, Elder leaves, Hollyhock
Cole leaves and his seede, Storax liquida, Ladanum, Mastick
ysope, Hinda and others





How to make a Resolutive Emplaster. /

Take wyld Mallowe leaves, Cole leaves, Camamell flowres of eyther
a handfull seethe them in runninge water, then grynd them
small, Then take poulder of Anyse seede, and take one part
therof and an other part of Cole seede, & two part of
Brenn or meale, and make Emplaster therof. /

A Resolutive Oyntment.

Take oyle of Camomyll or of Anyse vj.oz. of duck grease oz j
of henes grease oz j of the poulder of Anyse seedes oz ij
of Camamill flowres made into fyne poulder ij ounces
And make Oyntment of all these.

A Resolutive Emplaster.

Take a handfull of Mallowes as much of Colewort leaves,
and the rootes of Ramsies, Seethe them in runninge water,
Stampe them and make Emplaster therof.

To make good Diaquilon that resolvethe Cold matters
and loosenethe and softnethe wher it is hard.

Take fyne flowre, of Lytarge xij oz oyle of Camamill,
of Anet, & of Iring viij oz. the iuyce of wyld mallowes,
of lyne seede, of ffenegreeke, of old dryed figges and
Raysons wth their stones, the iuyce of Gladium, the iuyce of
Spanishe Terpentyne iiij oz Seethe them togither that it
be harder than an Oyntment and softer then a plaster.

Note. And know you that all Emplasters Resolutives, Maturatiues
& Molificatives that is to saye, loosening, Ripeninge and
Softninge, ought to be made in a meane betwixt hardnes
& softnes, for yf they be to hard, then they prick, and
make the matter thicke, and flye awaye and abyde not
on the place. And it is to be considered that some tyme in
resolveinge of a matter Some part therof is softned and
the other hardned wch ought alsoe to be made softe, Therfore
washe the member softlye wth warme water till it wex redd,
and after annoynt it wth an oyntmt of iiij part of oyle and
one part of waxe.





19
An Other princypall Medycyne to Soften
Scrophlies, That the King evill and kernell To
make them reddie to be resolved:

Take a pound of Oyle in a glasse, and put therto the rootes of
wyld mallowes, and the rootes of wyld nept cleane washt
and scraped of eyther j.oz. Then put the glasse wth the oyle
and the rootes into a vessell of water, and boyle them till the
rootes be somewhat scorched. Then Strayne out the oyle, and
put to that oyle iij oz of wax in Somertyme, and but ij oz in winter
and this makes a Soveraigne Molificative, wth the wch you shall
one daye mollyfie and a nother resolve, or ij or iij dayes as you
shall soe neede. and yf you put therto the x. part of Euserbium
it will make an excellent medycyne.

These be maturatives eache by him self Viz.

The Mallow of the Garden, the roote of the wyld mallowe yt is
called the Marshe mallowe, the roote of the dock, the roote of the
White Lillie, Garlick, oynions, Rapes, lyn seede, Skerwitt,
ffenegreeke, whete flowre, or whete Leven, Swynes grease, eyther
of these be Maturatives by it self wch is a rypeninge medycyne,
that rypenethe a Sore, Or else yf you meddle ij or iij of them
togither wth grease, you may make Emplaster therof. /

A Compound Medycyne, that will rypen a bloodie
Apostume, and everie Apostume t us reddie to quitter. /

Take Mallowe of the Garden and Violett of eyther .M.
and ii Rootes of Marshe Mallowes seethe them perfectlie well
in water, then grynd them small, and presse out the water
& iuyce thatt is in them, Then take one li of that iuyce
of oyle iij oz. and of Swynes grease iij oz. of lyn seede
of meele of ffencreek ana, j oz. of wheate flowre ij ounces
and meddle all those wth the hearbes and make a Playster
therof neyther to thick nor to thinn, But looke that
you put noe ffenecreeke in the Maturative yf the Sore be
burneinge of it self.

Alsoe thus





Alsoe thus cold matters ar matured

Take an Onyon and a garlicke gead in lieke quantitie and
two Egg and roste them altogither in the ashes, then pill them &
grynd them altogither, then take as much wheate Leven as is of
all the other and stampe them altogither wth oyle oliffe, and therof
make plaster maturative.

Thus you may rypen an Anthrax a fellon or a
Carbuncle, for as much as they are gathered of greate
store of matter and hard to touche and alsoe they
are reddye to inflame the matter and they are not to
be rypened wth any medycyne but such as will cleanse
and rypen bothe togither. And that is found in
one thinge a lone. Viz. In Tart Levened dowe
and Somewhat Clammye, becasue of the Sweetnes
wch dothe rypen the Sore best, and the tartnes, dothe
cause it to clense and drawe out the matter, Soe t
it rypenethe equallye togither. Wherfore in everie
hard matter Tart leavened dowe is the foundation
of matter of Emplaster. Then make thus a Compound
Maturative, that best servethe for Anthrax, ffellon or
Carbuncle.

Take ffat drye ffigges xij, an ounce of Reysons, as much
of tart Levened dowe as is of bothe the other Stampe them
small and put therto as much old oyle and vinegre as
will Suffise to meddle wth the plaster./

Alsoe take harie Scabious that hath some what broad leaves
neare the earthe, and hath a square stalke the lengthe of
a Cubitt, the leaves a finger longe, a flowre lieke to e
Skye, and the higher that it wexethe the lower wexe
the leaves. Take this Scabious and grynd it wth
freshe grease, and make an Emplaster therof, And t
will rypen an Anterax a ffellon or Carbuncle, often pved.





Cap: III 20

The Third Chapter is of Mundificatives that rypen and clense
the matter t was not fullye matured, and these are verie necessarie
to be had at such tymes are you are constreyned to deale wth an
Aposteme before it be fully rype, and when the matter is greate in
quantitie and not handsome to be matured: As in Skarfullis, Kernell
and hard Byles.

A Mundyficative of Apostemes that be well rypened, and of newe
Sores, for it clensethe well and ceasethe ache, and fleshethe the place.

Take e yolkes of iij hennes Egg and wheate flower and make a salve
therof and laye it therto.

A generall Mundificative that rypenethe and clensethe Apostemes
that were to longe before they were opened, and it clensethe alsoe
Anterax, ffellons, Botches and old Sores, if it be possible to heale
them.

Take good white honey ij oz the yolkes of ij hennes Egg and meddle
them well togither with wheate flower as is aforesaid. Then put therto
iiij oz of Smallache and boyle it over an easie fyre, till it be thick and
make Emplaster therof and laye to the Sore.

And yf you will clense deceyvable wound the malice wherof you thinke will
turne unto a Cancer. Then put in the Mundificative the iuyce of
Absynthiu in stead of Smallache, And yf you will rypen hard sores, as the
king evill, or Botches, Put in the medycyne in stead of Smallache
as much as thone half of the medycyne dothe amount to of Onyons and
white lillie rootes, that have bene well sodden in water and after
well ground vppon a Moller stone, and therof make Emplaster. /

An other noble medycyne for deceyvable and venemous wheles that
be hard for to heale. /

Take de li of Ceruse, of Olibanum and Mastick ana, diz. of Bolearmo-
niake ij oz. of Redd lead di .oz. of water of Roses ij oz & di and put therto
as much honey as will suffice and temper it vpp wthout heate of the fyre. /

An other Mundifiative that comfortethe the place wher it is put.

Take iij oz of Mol Rofat strained, and one .oz. of Barlie flowre, meddle
them well togither, and yf the wound be amongst the Synnewes,
it needethe to be clensed, and then put therto the fowrethe part of the
Recipt aforesaid, of Terpentyne well washed, and yf you will make
it more stronge to mundifie, then put therto Sarcole, as much
as the vjth parte of the whole dothe amount vnto. /

An other Mandifi:





An other Mundificative of fistulaes that be runninge, Sores
mortyfied wth Cankers, that be brenninge, and alsoe Sores
that have the Crust, And many other Sores, And it is called
vnguentum Aposhlorum wch St Peter and St Paul made in this
wise viz.

Take white waxe, Rosen Armoniake t us a gum; of eyther of them xiiij .
of Vertegreece iij .oz. of ffrankencense vj .oz. of Astrologia longa
vj oz of lyturge ix oz of Myrr and Galbanu, ana iiij oz of Bedellu
vj oz. and putt them in stronge vinegre, and disolve it. And make e
Oyntment, wth ij li of Oyle in this Manner: First make poulder
of all thinges as is afore said, that wilbe pouldred and sersed
and alsoe disolve all the gumes wth fyre and when they be disolved,
then put in the wax And then put in the Oyle, and straine it all,
and when it begines to be Luke warme, then shake in the poulder
easelie, and stirr well all the confection till it be cold and keepe
it till you neede to vse.

Cap: IIII

The fowrthe Chapter of Conglutmatiues & Regneratives that
is to saye of glueinge or knittinge togither wexinge and healinge
vp agayne of the fleshe. Noe well that Conglutmatives and
Aggregatives are all one, and have a difference from medycynes
Regenerative, Incarnatives wch be both one, And as well they as the
first medycynes have a difference from Consolidatives & Octatrizatives
and Sigillatives wch Three are much lieke in healinge. /

The first Medycynes that be called Conglutmatives and Aggratives
that is glueinge or knittinge the lyppes of wound togyther in places
wher the fleshe is not cutt awaye, but onlye slitt in sonder,
They be desectatives wth a manner of Clamenes and clensinge,
And thebe some Simple medycynes that worke mervelouslie As
lyme, leaves of white lillye, leaves of Planten, leaves of Apletree,
Cipresse tree and such lieke /

A Compound medycyne.

Take one parte of ffrankencense, ij part of Sandragon, and
iij of quick lyme, all three meddeled in poulder





A Common Medycyne Conglutmative to knitt the
lippes of a wound togither  21

Take the lynte of old fyne lynnen Clothe that is purelye white
put therto the oyle of Roses and a little Galbanum, melted and
mixed togither in manner of an Oyntment, And yf you will
put therto a little poulder made of the Rynd of the ffranken-
cense tree, & of the Clove tree, or best of Asbrolognia brent the
medycyne wilbe much e stronger. /

Regenerative Medycynes are these that increase fleshe in a
wound, but it is needfull that they be clensinge and dryeinge
wypeinge awaye the greate Superfluitie, and alsoe dryeinge
that wch waxethe all daye in hollow wound,  But this they
doe in diverse wayes, ffor a wound that is in a moist bodie, as
in a man that is naturallye fatt, or in him that hath the
dropsey, or a woman or a child, Then it is needfull to have
medycynes that be somewhat dryeinge, As ffrankencense
Vermnshe, ffenegreeke, Lyturge, Mastick, Myrr Aloes,
Beardflowre and such other thing / The wound of a drye
bodye us requisite to have a drye medycyne, Viz. Astrologia,
Gladiu e mele of Orabus, and Lupynes and such other, and
namely yf the brent they be dryer /

Alsoe yf a wound have much quitter it needeth to have the
more dryeinge medycyne, And yf it have little quitter
then it needethe the lesse dryeinge. /

This is a good Compound Medycyne /

Take x part of oyle ij part of poulder of vertegreece and
grynd them well togither, And this maketh a good Regenera-
tive of good fleshe, And a Corasive for evill fleshe t is to saye
frettinge.

A Regenerative Poulder /

Take ffrankencense, i oz. Vernishe ij .oz .ffenecreeke ij oz and
make fyne poulder therof well mixed and put enoughe
therof in the wound.

Alsoe litergium





Alsoe Litergium & Nitritum makethe fleshe to growe,
and increasethe it, and fretethe awaye evill fleshe
And removethe Scabbes from the bodye, and thus it is made,

Take poulder of Litarge as much as you will and grynd it in
a morter wth oyle of Roses till it be lieke an oyntment,
And that Oyntmt bringethe old Sores to a good rule. /

Alsoe of these Symple thing you make an Oyntment Viz.
Take of e poulder of lytarge, j oz of oyle of Roses iiij oz. of wexe
j oz. in Somer tyme and in winter oz secu and this is the
proportion of all Oyntment. And if you will make it more
dryeinge put therin more of the poulder and lesse of the
Oyle & wexe, And yf you will more vnctious put therin
more of the waxe and oyle, and lesse of the poulder /.

Medycynes Consolidatives & Sigillatives and Cicatriza-
tives or such that makethe e Skin to wex be these

Lytargie ffeverfewe Brent Bones, Ceruse of the roote of
pyne tree, drye Rosen, Suthurwood, the rynde of ffrankencense.
Balaustia, Galles Nuttes, Cucumer & many other All
these Simples are good by them selves /.

Of Compound Medycynes in some vnguentum
Rasis is the best, yf it be made of the Ceruse for it will
make Skin to wex, and it is good for breninge & scaldinge
of fyres, water, or oyle, And for everie place that wantethe
the Skin, and for hott whilkes, that wydeth the Skin in every
place, and for many other thing. And it is thus made,

Take Oyle of Roses iiij oz. of Ceruse and wexe ana, j oz.
mingle them togither and put therto the whites of ii Egg
and a drame of Camfer, and make an oyntment therof.

An other.

Take white Rosen boyle it in stronge vinegre, then annoynte yo hand
wth oyle of Roses and gather up the Rosen and drawe it longe
betweene yo hand & keepe it to yo vse, And in Somer
tyme put therto half as much waxe as ther is of the Rosen. /

Another





22
An other of the foresaid Symple thing

Yf you take one part of the poulder, of Rosen and of waxe in lieke
quantie as much as half the poulder, and of oyle of Roses iij parte
you make a good Oyntment called Sigillative that Closeth wound very well.

An other noble Medycyne to knitt broken bones, and make sure e
place that hath bene out of ioynte when they have bene sett.

Take the flowre that hangeth vppon the wall of a Mill howse di li
of Mastick, dragagant, and Gumm Arabiac ana oz sem. of Bolar-
moniack oz s. make poulder of all these and meddle them well wth
flowre, and wth the whites of Egg that it be as thicke as
honey and make Plaster therof.

Caput. v

The fifte Chapter of Molyficatives t makethe softe any member
that hath bene broken or out of ioynte, or wounded and is healed &
hath noe moveinge in the ioynte, that needethe molificatives
to comfort the Synnewes, and comfort the matter that is gathered
into the Synnewes, Of the wch Molificatives this is owne
that hath bene often proved. /

Take Bedellum Opopanac, Gum Arabec ana. j oz. and disolue
them in wyne then melt ij oz. of Swynes grease, and an ounce of
Duckes grease, hennes grease and goose grease, and mixe them
wth the gummes, for all Gummes doe greatlye profitt the Synnews
and especyallye Terpentyne. /

Alsoe take one oz. of wex and another of Terpentyne, and put therto
j oz. of ffenecreeke meale j oz of lynseede poulder of ffrankencense
oz fe. of Mastick oz fs. mixe altogither and make an oyntment
therof wch is an oyntment for ache proved often tymes

An other

Take goose grease, duck grease, hennes grease, and Swynes
grease t us vnsalted, and as much of yellowe waxe and
melte them altogither, then straine it, and when it is cold it is
a Soveraigne oyntmt for many thinges.

An other /





An other

Take the Rootes of Marshe Mallowes and of wylde nepe
and grynd them and steepe them in a glasse with oyle in
a Cauldron of water with iiij part of oyle, and one
part of waxe, and this makethe a soveragne
molificative, and yf you put therto the xij part
of the medycyne of Euforbium, it will make it
a pretious oyntment for the Crampe, whersoe=
ever it bee. /

Now for Molificatives these Medycynes suffice,
But take heede as often as you will molifie a
member with these foresaid medycynes. ffirst
washe well the member with hott water that Marshe
mallowes and other mallowes, the flowres of
Camamell, lynseede, and ffenecreeke hath beene
sodden in and afterward you may annoynt the
member with the oyntment convenient thervnto. /

Cap: VI.

The sixt Chapter of Cauterizinge t is to bren wher
neede requires Medycynes Cauterizinge wch bren
the skin  without fyre are these. viz: Sivers, nepe, Apiu
Emerodarum, puttockes foote, Crowes foote ffaturisworte, Can-
tarides Oynions, Garlick, Spanishe Oynions Squlle,
Anagardus and hard pitch, meddle them altogither in
lieke quantitie and yf you have noe honey of Anagardus
reddye, make it in this wise:

Take a payre of smithes pinsons wth broad bittes and heate
them reasonable hott, and putt in them Anagardus,
then presse the Bitt togither & therof will come honey
Take t honey well and equallye mixed wth hard pitche
and it makethe a good Cauterize, These two alone wthout
Iron will open Apostemes.

An other Cauterizinge Medycyne

Take blacke sope and quick lyme and temper them togither
and that dothe make a good Ruptorie medycyne.





23
Medycynes Frettings stronglye and not Violentlye and doe well
avoyde dead fleshe

Take Hermodactilis Verdegreece, Astrologia rotunda, in lieke quantitie
make poulder of them.

A medycyne t is stronglie Corosiue and Verie good for Crust old Sores
ffistulaes and Cankers.

Take e iuyce of Asfodill oz vj. quicke Lyme oz ij. Orpement oz ij. and make
small Cakes therof and drye them in the Shaddowe in the Somer tyme,
and when you have neede to remove rotten fleshe, or to close old Sores or
Crustes, make poulder of one of the Cakes and strow vppon it and about
it, Neverthelesse when soe ever you vse this, medycyne you can never Voyde any
thinge any thinge therof awaye, till the Crust that is made and gathered
theron doe fall awaye of it self, And yf it hathe drawne vp all the fleshe
then is it well, or els put more thero as you did before. Albeit put lesse
of the medycyne therin and then mundefie it, and heale it up as other
wound.

And thus endethe the Antidotorie of Chirurgerie and of many excellent
Medycynes verie necessarie for Chirurgions and such as take Cares in hand.





Here followethe the makeinge of diverse
Salues for Sores & Woundes

A Salve that causethe a wound to give Matter

Take Turpentyne iij ounces, Hart Suett an ounce of Oyle
of Roses x. ounces, white ffrankencense in poulder halfe
an ounce, melt the Suett e oyle of Roses togither with
the Turpentyne, and put the powlder to it, and wth Lynte
laye it on a little warme.

A drawing plaster wch drawethe vnto it matter
& corruption & all vncleanes in a wounde:

Take Rosen a li. waxe halfe a li. Sheepes Suett Hart
Suett or Deere Suett or May butter eyght ounces, Ter-
pentyne iiij ounces Aloes in powlder a dragme, Mastick
and white ffrankencense of eache an ounce Myrra halfe
an ounce. Melt the waxe Rosen and Suett togither and straine
it thoroughe a Clothe Then put therin the Turpentyne
& the other parcell in powlder & oyle of Roses ij ounces stirr
them altogither till it be cold & put to it a dragme of Saffron
in poulder. /

A Salve that causethe fleshe to growe & healethe.

Take Planten, Valerian, Mouseare, Mallowes,
Daysie and Grunsell, then take yellowe waxe twelve
ounces, good Oyle Oliffe a li. Turpentyne iiij ounces,
Rosen five ounces, white Frankencense, Mastick of eache
ij ounces, Saffron a dragme, Ten ounces of the iuyce
of Orpen, and melt e wexe, Oyle and Rosen togither
wth the iuyce of Orpen, And after put therin Terpen-
tyne and sett it from the fyre and clense it well, and
make the other parcell in powlder & put therin when
it is halfe cooled and then straine it.

A Salve to take out thornes, Splinters or bones

Take waxe and Rosen of eache x. ounces & an ounce of
Hart Suett melt them togither, Then take of the powlder
of Adamant stone halfe an ounce, The roote of okeferne,
the roote of white dittane and the roote of Rethe of eache a
dragme in powlder, and an ounce of oyle of Hempeseede
and make therof a plaster.





To breake & to rypen Apostumes or any other Sore. / 24

Take ij Ounces of Galbanum halfe an ounce of Rosen halfe an ounce
of ffenegreeke meale, halfe an ounce of Terpentyne & a little
Swynes grease, and seethe them togither, and then put to them
the Turpentyne & Galbanu & the Rosen and seethe it togither
& straine it and wth leather laye it to the Sore as brade as you
will have it broken. and it will rypen and breake any Sore pved.

A Salve to drawe and to heale and to make Skin./

Take Planten, mouseare, a little mallowes and Pimpernell
Stampe them in a Morter then seethe them in Swynes grease
and Sheepes Tallowe half a li of waxe, an ounce of Terpentyn
halfe an ounce of white ffrankencense, a little dragagant
a little Mastick and a little Rosen, all in fyne powlder,
melt that wch is to be moulten wth the Suet when it is greene,
put the poulder to it and straine it.

To make fleshe to growe in all hollow wound and to Skin.

Take Mallowes Valerian, Byttanie Planten most of all,
daysie leaves, mouseare, Growndsell, & Scabious, Stampe all
these in a Morter wth Pimpernell & Egremonye; Then seethe
them wth deere Suett, or Sheepe Suett or May Butter till e
Oyle be greene; Then put therto a li of waxe, xij ounces of
Rosen and Seethe them wth the Oyle, then put to it half a
li of Terpentyne, Mastick and white fffrankencense,
of eache two ounces in poulder, halfe a dragme of Gumm
dragagant, halfe an ounce of Gumm Elempini or of Myrha
in powlder, Then put all these togither and put it in the waxe
and Rosen and strayne altogither agayne in fayre water, and
this will heale any Sore, And yf you will put to it an ounce of
Oyle of Roses: it is verie good pbatum.

A Salve to Skin and to heale. /

Take waxe and Sheepes Suett of eache a li. and these herbes
Planten Egrymonie, Mallowes, Mouseare, & Pimpernell,
Stampe them & seethe them wth the waxe and Suett till
they be greene, Then put an ounce of Turpentyne, a little
Mastick and ffrankencense in powlder, and a little Gumm
Dragagant, And put all these to the waxe wth a little honey
and lett them seethe a little togither and straine it in fayre
water.





A Salve that clensethe matter & maketh fleshe to growe

Take Terpentyne and honey of Roses strayned of eache ij ounces,
Myrra and white ffrankencense of eache iij dragmes and a
little Saffron, all these in fyne poulder, and e yolke of an Egg
and temper all these togither, And yf you will have it to matter
put a Tent in Oyle of Roses & putt it in the wound, wth a plaster,
And yf you will Clense it put this foresaid Salve to it wth fyne
Lynt dipt in this Salve. /

When you will laye any Plaister to any wound laye about
it the defensive Oyntment.

A Defensive Salve for all Sores.

Take iij ounces of oyle of Roses, Bolarmomiak ij ounces Terra
Sigillata a dragme Camfer a dragme, Vinegre halfe an
ounce, Nightshade and Howselicke of eache a handfull, Stampe
them and take the iuyce and mixe it togither and of all these
make a fyne oyntment in a Morter. It is cold. /

An other Defensive /

Take Sape of Nightshade or sape of howselicke iij ounces
Oyle of Roses j. ounce Bolearmonick j ounce, vinegre halfe
an ounce, Meddle all these togither and laye about the wound
wth the white of an Egg.

A Salve that Skinneth & makethe fleshe.

Take Rose honey vj ounces, Terpentyne wexe and Rosen of eache
ij ounces, ffrankencense and Masticke of eache on ounce, Myrha Sercole
and Mumme of eache a dragme, of these make a Salve and strike
it on a Clothe. But first put into the wound warme Oyle of
Roses meddled wth the white of an Egge and temper it and
put it in the wound wth Lint dipped into it, and about the wound
shall you strieke defensive

A salve to make a wound to matter. /

Take Hartes grease and Terpentyne of eache two ounces, Oyle of
Roses an ounce, Mastick and white ffrankencense of eache halfe
an ounce in fyne powlder. /

A Salve to make fleshe growe in all manner of wound.

Take Valerian Planten, Mouseare, Mallowes, Bitteny, Verven & Pimpernell
and stampe them and seethe them wth Sheepes Suett till they be greene oyle,
then straine it, and put to it Turpentyne iiij. ounces, honey ij. ounces,
white ffrankencense, and Mastick in poulder x. ounces, Aloes, and
Saffron the third part of a dragme in poulder, Oyle of Roses and wexe
ynoughe and make a Salve therof. probatum. /





A Salve to make Skin fayre and to heale. / 25

Take white ffrankencense and myrrha of eache an ounce, vj ounces of Rosen, iiij ounces
of wexe and x. ounces of oyle Oliffe, and therwth make a Salve; Or els wth this powlder,
Take Masticke white ffrankencense, dragagante and myrra of each halfe an ounce,
and make therof a fyne powlder, sersed; or take Lytargium medled wth oyle of Roses,
This Salve dothe heale the wound, And laye it nott on the wound till it be cleane
& full of fleshe, then laye it on. /

Yf the wound be deepe. /

Take Oyle of Roses mixed wth the youlkes of Egges warme, and fill the wound &
dipp a Tent in the Oyle and put it in the wound, till the tyme the matter come
out. And then clense it everie daye wth a clensinge Plaster; It is made of
Rose honey Barley meale, and Sometyme Turpentyne, Myrrha, Sarcacole,
And about the wound a defensive, But yf the wound be not deepe you may
heale it wth the greene wound Plaster, or Iuyce plaster.

For a newe wound. /

Take Planten greate and Small, St. Johns worte Red Coleworte, white Coleworte,
Suckleworte Sickleworte, Mallowes, Bittenie, Scabious, Sauge, Daysie, Tormentill, Orpen.

A good drawinge Plaster wch drawethe to it e matter of all uncleane wound.

Take Rosen x. ounces Waxe vj. ounces, Sheepes Suett viij. ounces, Turpentyne
iij. ounces, Masticke and White ffrankencense in fyne poulder of eache half an
ounce, Mirrha and Aloe Sicatryna in fyne poulder of eache ij dragmes, or els
halfe an ounce of them bothe, Melt the Rosen waxe and Sheepe Suett
togither & straine it, Then put therin Terpentyne & the other parcell in
poulder, and oyle of Roses x. ounces and stirr all togither, and after it hath
sodden a while Skim it cleane and put it into a boxe, Yf you will have it
greene, Take Planten, Orpen, Valerian, Mallowes, Bittenye, Howselieke, or
Daysie leaves Stampe them and seethe them wth the Rosen, waxe & Sheepe
Suett till it looke greene and straine it

To make a Salve wch makethe fleshe to growe in all Complexions

Take waxe and Rosen of eache x. ounces of good oyle Oliffe xj. ounces, honey a dragme,
melt them togither and Skim it cleane, and straine it, then sett it on the fyre,
put therto iij ounces of Terpentyne, Mastick and White ffrankencense in fyne
poulder of eache x. ounces. Then take it from the fyre, and put therin Saffron
and Aloe Sycatrina, of them bothe twopeny weight in fyne poulder, and
stirr it and put it into boxes. If you will have it greene, Stampe Planten,
Valerian, Bittenie, Pimpernell, Mallowes, Mouseare, & daysie leaves,
Seethe them wth the Rosen waxe and oyle till it be greene, And put to
it a little gumm Elempanie in poulder.





To make the skin to growe.

Take waxe iij. ounces, Terpentyne ij ounces, Gomm Elempanye
& white ffrankencense of them bothe an ounce in fyne poulder,
melt the waxe wth a little oyle of Roses, and put e Terpentyne
& the poulder into it and lett it Coole, and if you will have it greene
put the iuyce of healinge hearbes unto it

A good drawing Plaster.

Take honey two Spoonefull Mastick, white ffrankencense and Myrrha all
these in fyne poulder, an ounce of Aloe in poulder a Spoonefull Terpen-
tyne ij ounces, and put them altogither & stirr them well, Then take
the youlke of an Egge and an halfe pennye waight of Saffron &
put to it, and temper it agayne & thicke it wth beane flowre, and make
a Salve of it, and put to it oyle of Roses a small quantitie.

An other pure good Salve that dothe heale newe and
old wound & hath bene well pved. /

Take Planten Small & greate Selfeheale, Auence, Bittenie, or
Verven, Valerian, daysie leaves, mouseare, Pimpernell, mallowes
or Tansie, of eache of these as you thinke good, Stampe them and put
them into a Pann wth Sheepes Suett or deere Suett, clensed Rosen
viij. ounces, prosin iiij. ounces, waxe x. ounces, white ffrankencense
ij. ounces in fyne poulder, and seethe them altogither till they be greene.
Then straine it and put to it oyle of Roses and honey of eache an ounce,
& iiij ounces of Terpentyne, and lett them seethe altogither
& skim it cleane, Then put to it Mastick gumm Elempaine,
or Mirra one dragme, and lett it seethe a walme, and put in
it a dragme of Campher, and lett it Coole, And then melt it
agayne and straine it & put it in boxes, & it will heale well.

from louing frend

All these hearbes are good for Cutt and hurt, Planten Small &
greate, Pimpernell, hearbe Robert, Tansey, Tutsorne, Selfeheale,
Mowseare, Auence, Tabacco, And these be healers, Dasie, Bitterne,
Salendyne, Vervyne, Scabious & orpen, And these be Clensers
& purgers Valerian Mallowes and Coleworte, And these doe
incarnate Howselieke, daysie, Growndsel, & Nightshade, and
these are cold and greate abaters of Swellinge





Flos unguentorum the purest Salve that may be. 26

Take Rosen & prosin of eache halfe a li, virgin waxe and ffrankencense
of eache a quarter of a li Masticke an ounce, Hart Tallowe or deare Suett
or Sheepes Suett one quarterne of a li. Clensed Campher iiij dragmes
melt that wch is to be melted & make poulder of that wch is to be pouldred,
and boyle it altogither and straine it thoroughe a Cleane Canvasse Clothe
into a quarte of white wyne. Then boyle the white wyne & all the other
stuffe togither. Then lett it Coole a little and then put therto a quarter of a
li of Terpentyne, but let not the stuffe be hotter than you can suffer yo
hand in it. Then stirr it all well togither till it be cold and put in the Cam-
phire and keepe it for yo vse, and keepe it for the best plaster that can be
made for newe or old wound. ffor of all Intreat it is most ingendringe
& clensinge of ffleshe, And it healeth more in a Senight than other Salves
in a Monethe, And it will suffer noe dead fleshe in a wound nor
noe corruption to be ingendred in it, and it is good for all broken
Impostumes, on warrantise Probatum.

A greate drawer, And this Plaster is good for
old wound for it clensethe and healethe.

Take Rosen & Sheepes Suett of each j. li Waxe dim. li Butter iiij ounces
ffrankencense and Mastick of each an ounce in fyne powlder, melt
the Rosen, waxe, Butter and Sheepes Suett togither, & when it is well moulten
straine it, Then put therto an ounce of honey and of Terpentyne iij. ounces
and seethe them altogither agayne, and Skim it cleane. Then put in
the Mastick and ffrankencense, & Myrre two dragmes in fyne poulder
put into it, And put it in boxes & lett it Coole, and yf you will you may make
it greene wth those herbes before mentioned.

A Intreat t will heale any newe wound.

Take Planten verven, Bitteny, Selfeheale, Valerian, of eache as you thinke
good, daysie leaves one handfull, then stampe them and boyle them in
white wyne, till the wyne be wasted, & vij. ounces of Sheepes Suett wth
them, Then straine it and put to the liquor Rosen and Waxe of eache
x. ounces, Profsn iiij ounces, and melt them wth the other Stuffe and
when it is molten Skum it cleane, and put therto of white ffrankencense
& Mastick in poulder of eache one ounce, Myrrha in poulder a
dragme, & in the Coolinge put in iiij. ounces of Terpentyne &
a dragme of Campher in poulder, and stirr it well & put it in a boxe. /





Flos vnguentorum this Intreate is good for old and newe
wound for it clensethe and healethe, and Sufferethe noe
corruption to grow in wound, nor evill fleshe. /

Take Mallowes, Planten small and greate, Pimpnell, Sanicle
Bitteny, Daysie, Verven, Valerian, Mouseare and Egrimonie of
eache of these as much as you thinke good, And stampe them and seethe
them in white wyne, And when it is hott put therto viij ounces
of hartes, deares, or Sheepes Suett, and when the wyne is con-
sumed, put in of Rosen Perosin waxe of eache half a pounde,
and melt it & straine altogither, & put it into a cleane vessell
and sett it on a softe fyre and skome it cleane, And put vnto
it Olibanum & mastick in fyne poulder of eache an ounce,
Mirrha in poulder two dragmes & stirr it, well, And in the
Coolinge put two dragmes of Campher, And put it in a boxe
for a pure plaister that hath bene diverse tymes proved.,
And looke you make you Salve as cleane as you may, and as
greene as you can, wth the herbes, And yf you have noe wyne
seethe yo Rosen, waxe and Suett togither wth the herbes till
it be greene and straine it, And soe you may doe all other
Salves yf you have noe wyne, And if you have wyne, make
yo Salve as greene as you can, Soe you burne it not, for
if you burne it you mare it.

ffore a Sorenes that is Impostemed inward
and the Skin not broken

Mynce Rewe, Sauge & the fatt of Salt Bacon togither, and
after Stampe them small as you can, And then take a quantitie
of black Sope & labor them togither wth yo hand till they be
well wrought, then strike it vppon white leather, and laye it
to the grieved place, whether it be brused wth hurt or fellon,
Proved.

Item for a bruse Hocsycoksion is good

Item for a fellon, take a black Snayle and slitt it and
laye it to the Sore place & it helpethe.

A Salve that Clensethe Rotten Fleshe

Take waxe and Rosen of eache an ounce, Spanishe greene halfe an ounce,
Mastick, Mirre & galbanu of eache an ounce, ffrankencense & Lytarge
halfe an ounce, Then take oyle Oliffe iiij ounces, and put the galbanum
waxe & Rosen to it, & melt them & straine it, and then put to it an ounce of
Terpentyne & the Spanishe greene or greene Coperise & allume brayed
in poulder, Then put e ffrankencense, myrre mastick & Lytergium in
fyne poulder vnto it. /





27
A Salve that makethe fleshe to growe in all wound and hurt:

Take waxe and Rosen of eache x. ounces, Sheepe Suett or good Oyle Oliffe
viij ounces, and Stampe these herbes Planten Small & greate, daisie
leaves, Valerian, Mallowes or Coleworte, Sanicle, Pimpernell, or Egre-
mony or eache of these as you thinke good, Then Seethe all these togither
and when it is well sodden then Straine it and put it into a cleane
Vessell, then Skome it cleane over a softe fyre, Then put vnto it
iiij ounces of Terpentyne, but looke t the Salve be not to hott for
burneinge of the Terpentyne, & the Salve, and in the Cooleinge
put of ffrankencense and white Masticke in fyne powlder of
eache one ounce, And stirr it well and put it in boxes. /

This Plaister will heale all manner of Sores

Take Galbanum an ounce, Armoniacke halfe an ounce, and dissolve
the Galbanum and Armomiak in vinegre a daye and a night, then
melt waxe iiij ounces, Rosen ij ounces, then take it from the fyre
& in the Coolinge put in the Gummes dissolved and then sett it
on a soft fyre & alwaye stirr it till the vinegre be consumed and
in the Coolinge put in Myrre, Mastick Olibany & Terpentyne,
and stirr it well & make it vp in Rowles. /

A Salve Mundificative

Take Rose honney iij. ounces strained & a little Terpentyne,
Mastick & ffrankencense of eache halfe an ounce, mirra a dragme
all in fyne poulder. /

To take the dead fleshe out of any Sore to clense it. /

Take Allume in poulder one ounce, greene Coperas in fyne
poulder halfe an ounce, Honie iiij ounces, & a little Turpentyne
& white wyne a pynte, and seethe them altogither over a softe
fyre, till the honye be thick but burne it not and when it is cold
wth lynte laye it on and lett the lynt be tempered wth the honey
& lye to it xxiiijtie howres, And then take awaye the dead fleshe wth
a knife, & laye a clensinge Salve to it, and yf the dead fleshe
sticke fast to it, laye the Oyntment wth the Lynt on agayne And
this Oyntment shall take awaye the dead fleshe & clense it, put
to it beane flowre. /





If a Sore legg be in greate heate, lett these herbes be in
yo Salve. Viz.

Violett leaves, Growdsell leaves, nyghtshade leaves or elder leaves,
and these shall kill the greate heate of any Sore, The iuyce of
these herbes & Planten leaves small & greate are verie good in this
Case.

A Salve for all manner of Sores, and tis a drawer.

Take oyle oliffe, Turpentyne, Rosen, Waxe, Deere Suett & Sheeps
Tallowe, of eache one as you shall thinke good. Then take Smal-
lage, Bugell, Bitteny, Ragworte Planten & Orpen, And
take the iuyce of all these herbes, but first take all that is
to be molten & melt them vppon a Chaffinge Dishe wth Coles,
And put the oyle & Terpentyne vnto it, and then take the
iuyce and put to the Same, and soe lett it boyle softlye togither
till it be mixed, & stirr it for burneinge, and when it is
thick take it of and make it in Rowles & put lynt into it.

A greate drawer For a Sore legge a verye pure Salve & it will heale and drawe

Take Smallage Bugell, or Ragworte, Planten Rose Campen or
Poochewort orpen, Bitteny & Valerian of eache of these one
handfull, and stampe them, and take e iuyce of them and
put it in a dishe, Then take of oyle Oliffe, honey and Terpentyne
of eache Sixe Spoonefulls & put them togithers, Then take
of cleane waxe and Rosen a good quantitie or els ffrankencense
for yo waxe, if you take them all three, quantitie for quantitie
you shall doe well, Then melt yo Rosen waxe & ffrankencense,
in a dishe wth a little Deere Suett, Then take yo oyle Oliffe
Honey and Turpentyne & put to the waxe &c. Then take
the iuyce of e herbes & putt into it and seethe them fayre
& softlye for burninge, & stirr it often and lett it seethe till it
be thick, Then straine it agayne, and lett it Cale in a dishe,
Then put it vp & keepe it and it will heale any Sore. /

To make a pure Salve that will heale and drawe. /

Take Rosen, waxe freshe Butter and Turpentyne Sixe
Spoonefulls and melt them all vppon the Coles & then put
therto lynte, and lett it seethe till it be well mixed togither,
Then take it of an lett it be cold, and then temper it well
and put it in boxes. /





ffor all manner of woundes a greate drawer. 28

Take ffreshe Butter and ment it in a Chafinge dishe Then take
ij Spoonefull of Tarr and ij Spoonefull of pitche & cleane waxe Rosen
& ffrankencense as much in bignes as xiij walnutand of Ter-
pentyne sixe spoonefull & melt them altogither wth the butter
and lett them seethe fayre and softlie for burneinge & stirr it
often and when it is well myngled togither put fayre lint into
it then take it of and lett it Coole, and yf ther be dead fleshe
in the sore, then burne them and make poulder therof and laye
it to the sore place & a plaister vppon it, and lett it lye xxiiijta
howres. Then take e salve and applie it alone vnto it &
it will drawe the dead fleshe awaye & make all cleane,
Then take this Salve or the salve before written and it
will heale it vppon warantise. Probatum./

ffor to heale all manner of Sores

Take a quantitie of Redd Leade and a pynte of Oyle Oliffe
and mingle them togither till they be thick, then put in
lynnen Clothe, in lynte, ANd this is a true plaster for
all Sores.

To make a plaister for kankelinge and for Bladders
and for rysinge of heate in a Sore legg.

Take Archangell that is the dewe nettle, and seethe it well in
water Then take it out of the water & lett the water runn cleane
out, and braye it well in a Mortar, and make a plaister
therof, and laye it some what to the Legge and soe doe
often and it shall destroye e akeinge e frettinge and the
fowle red water that is therin and heale it fayre and cleane.

ffor a newe hurte.

Take Creame and honey Bitteny and Bugell, oxpen valerian
& planten, and seethe all these in the Creame and honey
take all these and straine them when they be halfe sodden
awaye and when the liquor is cold laye it to the Sore wth a
linnen clothe, and soe change it in the morneinge and it
will heale it, and if you put a little oyle oliffe vnto it and
a little Terpentyne it is verie good. Proved./






For a Sore Legge, that dothe heale many.

Take ground Ivye and Bittenie or hearbe Ivie and Bugell,
orpen and Groundsell, Valerian Planten or Pocheworte
and beate them all in a morter, and take a dishe and straine
the iuyce into it. Then take Oyle Oliffe iiij Spoonefull &
Deere Suett as much as five wallnut and these into a
fayre wth a little butter t was never Salted vppon
a Chafinge dishe of Coles, and lett it melt altogither,
and stirr it often for burneinge, and when it is moulten
put the iuyce of the herbes into it, and lett it seethe upon
the Chafinge dishe softlye & stirr it and when it is thick
take it of & straine it, Then Rowle it vpp in yo hand
when it is cold and keepe it, and it will heale any Sore. /

A Specyall Salve to heale any Sore. /

Take Rosen and prosen of eache halfe a li. Virgin waxe and
ffrankencense of eache a quarter, of Mastick one ounce,
Tallow a quarter of a li. Campher ij dragmes, melt
that wch is to be melted, and make poulder of that wch
is to be made in poulder, and boyle it well togither over
a fyre, & straine it thoroughe a cleane clothe into a
pottle of white wyne. Then boyle the wyne and the
Stuffe altogither, and lett it Coole a little, Then put
therto a quarter of Turpentyne and lett yo stuffe
be but blood warme, and stirr it well togither till it be
cold. And keepe it for e best Salve that may be made,
it is proved. It must be made vp in Rowles. /

ffor a Sore Legge.

Take ijd of Terpentyne oyle Oliffe waxe and Rosen Tallow
of a Sheepe or deere Suett, and the iuyce of these herbes
Smallage, Bugell Orpen, Campen & Bittenie. But
first take yo Terpentyne waxe and Rosen and sett them
over the fyre togither to melt. Then put in yo iuyce
wth yo oyle, and lett them all seethe togither as longe as
the Skum rysethe, Then take it of and make it vpp in a Rowle
or Rowles, and it will heale any Sore that hathe not
dead fleshe in it. pved. /







If a Legge burne in greate heate when it is hurte. / 29

Take the iuyce of all these herbes into yo Salve; Planten, Howselieke
Nightshade, & orpen. And it will take awaye all the heate and
make it in temper.

ffor a Sore legge, for a Cutt.

Take e iuyce of these herbes, Growndsell or Pocheworte, Bitteny
& Bugell, or orpen and put therto honey, e yolke of an Egg
& Saffron, & temper them, Then take oyle oliffe iiij
Spoonefull and Terpentyne wth a little Butter and as
much wexe and Rosen as seven wallnutt in bignes,
and melte the Rosen waxe & Butter togither vppon
a Chafinge dishe of Coles, Then put the iuyce and the
oyle ye oyle vnto it, and let it boyle together very Softlye
till it be thick, and then take it of, and wth freshe Butter
Rowle it vp betwene yo hand. Proved.

For a Canker, for the Poxe; for dead fleshe in a Sore /

Take a Gallon of Smithes water and put therto a quarte
of Englishe honey and ij handfullx of Sauge, and let them
boyle altogither a good while and as the Skum risethe
take it of and it will be as cleane as water, when it is sodden
ynoughe put therto a pynte of white vinegre, and a penny
worthe of allome in Lyme powlder not brente, and lett it
all seethe from a Gallon to a pottle, and then take it of
and put it in a glasse and washe e Sore wth this twise a daye
morneinge and eveninge, And it will helpe many Sores, And
it will keepe good for three yeares. pbatum. /

A medycyne for a Sore Legge /

Take one handfull of grownd Ivie, and two handfulls of Growndsell and
stampe them in a Morter and straine them, & take the iuyce sett it
uppon the fyre, and put therto one Spoonefull of honey & a little quan-
titie of fyne whete flowre, and let it boyle togither till it be thicke
& stirr it uppon the fyre for burneinge and soe take it of and make a
plaister, as broad as the Sore, and laye it to the Sore legg and it will
heale it. It hath bene often pved. pved. /





To make the Skin to growe & to drawe and heale any Sore place.

Take Bitteny Orpen Rose Campen of eache two handfull and
take the iuyce of them and put therto two Spoonefull of stone
honey & the youlke of a newe layd egge, and sixe Spoonefull
of Creeme and ij ounces of Cleane Rosen, and of wex vj ounces
and of deere Suett or May Butter or freshe butter vj ounces,
and melt all these vppon a softe fyre, till it be somewhat
thick, and stirr it for burneinge, And this will make the skin
to growe yf ther be noe dead fleshe in it, And yf you cannot
gett the hearbes get every thinge els and it will heale a Cutt
verye well. And if you take yo herbes and stampe them
wth freshe hogges grease, it will make the Salve to be the
better; for it is better for a Salve then any other grease,
And you must strayne yo salve when it is sodden And
looke that you Lint then betweene the Salve and the Sore
and laye the plaster vppon it, or Spred the salve vppon
the Lynte. pved. /

To make Skin to growe quicklie vppon any Sore
that hath noe venome in it. –

Take of waxe and freshe Butter of eache iij ounces and
an ounce of pure Rose water, and ij ounces of Creeme,
And let your water be hott before you put in your waxe, butter
& Creeme, and then let them seethe till the water be consu-
med, And laye this vppon fyne Lynte vppon the Sore
Probatum. /

To make a good Salve for a Sore legge. /

Take Valerian or Selandyne, Bitteny Rose Campen Orpen Small-
lage, Archangell or femytorie, of eache of these one handfull,
Then take of oyle oliffe, and white wyne of eache a pynte &
seethe them in it, Then take cleane waxe, Rosen & ffrankencense
of eache of them ij ounces, and put to the herbes then, Then
take vj Spoonfulles of Terpentyne, & iiij. of Honey and put
to it, and seethe all these togither, till it be thick, Then strayne
it cleane and put it in boxes, This is a pure Salve, or
Oyntement yf you melt it, for any Sore, And it will heale
& drawe mervelous well. And it is good alsoe for a Swelling
If you make a Seare Clothe of the Salve, as broad as the place t
is Swollen,





30
A verie good Salve for a bruse or a Swellinge or any other Sore /

Take Bitteny, Rose Campian & orpen of eache iiij handfull & Take
the iuyce of them & put it in a dishe. Then take waxe and fran-
kencense of eache of them iiij Ounces & melt them wth freshe
Butter. Then take blacke Sope iij Spoonefull of prosen or Rosen
as muche and put them to the waxe & let them seethe together,
Then take the iuyce of the herbes wth one ounce of Oyle of Roses
wth as much of oyle of Cammamell or oyle Oliffe and seethe them
togither till it be thick. Then straine it and let it be cold. Then
spread it vppon a lynnen clothe, as broad as the swellinge or bruse
or ache is, and laye it to the Sore place, and it will helpe it within
fowre tymes layeing to it. But warme e Seare clothe alwayes
when you laye it to the Sore If you can gett noe oyle take sheep
Suett instead, and seethe all these thing in it till it be thick.
But you must put to all these thing above written, three
Spoonefull of Terpentyne for that must be in yormedy-
cyne at all tymes.

How you shall make a salve to drawe well

Take oyle of oliffe a pynte and of white wyne as muche and put it to
yo wyne so you make yo Salve with herbes: Take the iuyce of herbes
iiij. ounces of Turpentyne as muche and put them to the oyle and
let them seethe altogither vppon a softe fyre a quarter of an howre
and stirr it for burneing: Then take of virgin wax or cleane
waxe vj. ounces, ffrankencence, Rosen and prosen of eache iij
ounces of Campher ij dragmes. And melt all these wth Tallow
or Sheepes Suett or freshe or May Butter vppon a softe fyre
by them selves/ when they be molten put them to the oyle and
lett them seethe agayne altogither softlye for burneinge & stirr
them often, & when it is something thicke then strayne it into a
cleane dishe and lett it Coole and then put it vp in a Boxe or
rowle it vp. If you cannot get oyle or white wyne; Then take
iij ounces of Turpentyne, as much of Tallowe mynced and let
them seethe togethers, and then put the other thing before written
into it & lett them seethe altogithers. And this is the best make-
inge of Salves t can be made. And you may make yo Salve as
little as you list, Soe t it be tempered after this manner specyfied.





A Salve to make e Skin to growe and drawe
and heale any Sore place in shorte tyme.

Take Biitteny Orpen, Rose Campen,planten, of eache
of them two handfull & take the iuyce of these herbes yf
you cannot gett these herbes: Take Smallage, Ribb worte
Valerian and Mallowes, and seethe these herbes in a
Gallon of white wyne till they be tender. Then take
yr herbes & wyne & beate it in a morter. Then take
a cleane skillet & put in the liquor as it is, and put of
prosen & Rosen a qrter of a li of Cleane waxe a qrte
of a li of honey iiij Spoonefull And lett the perosen
& Rosen be beaten to a poulder & put them altogither, and
let them seethe till they be melted. Then put in of oyle
Oliffe an ounce, of Deere Suett a quarter of a li of
Terpentyne ij ounces. And lett them seethe altogither
till it be very thicke. Then strayne it into a Boxe
And when you will vse itt make fyne Lynte and
put the salve vppon it, & laye it to the Sore, But you must
keepe lynte vnto it alwayes. And it will suffer noe
dead fleshe to abyde in it, If you want the other
herbes. Take Ragworte Burr leaves Grownd Ivie
and Growndsell in like quantitie as afore saide. And
alwayes stir yr stuffe well for brerninge.

ffor to make a Salve to heale a Cutt or any other hurt,
and to drawe./

Take of Cleane waxe & of Cleane Rosen of eache of them iiij. ounces
and of oyle vj. ounces dimi: or els deere Suett, Hart Suett
or Sheepes Suett and take the waxe and the Rosen and melt
it with the Suett. or if you will have it drawe well wth oyle.
And if you will have it drawe much, then put in more of Rosen
then of waxe, with one ounce of Terpentyne. Alsoe ffranken-
cense and perosen beaten to fyne powder ij Spoonefull
and melt them togither. Then take iij ounces of iuyce of
these herbes & put to the salve while it is .. seethinge. planten or
Rose Campen orpin & Bittenye & let them seethe altogithers a little while
Then put to it a Spoonfull of Stone honey & lett them seethe till they be somewhat
thick and stirr it for breneinge. Then straine it thoroughe a fyne clothe
and keepe it till you have neede. Probatum./





To make all Salves pure and good 31

If you will make Salves pure wth herbes lett them be
sodden wth white wyne or water till they be tender, or els
stampe them & seethe them in Swynes grease deeres Suett or
Sheepes Suett And strayne it and make a salve therwth
or els when they are sodden tender, let the Salve and it
seethe togither & straine it. And this will make any Salve
pure that is made wth herbes

The waye to make Salve for Sores

Take waxe and Rosen, If you will have yr Salve more healeinge
Note then clensinge, Then take more waxe then Rosen, And yf you will
have a Salve to clense more, as in deepe wounds, then take waxe and
Rosen. And  yf you will have fleshe to growe then take waxe and
Rosen in lieke quantitie. And if you will have Skin to growe
put waxe and noe rosen, If you will have have it clense muche
put to the Rosen iij ounces of myrrhe and little waxe.

To make a white salve

Take white leade iiij ounces Lyttergium ij ounces  white ffrankencese
iij dragmes, Mastick ij dragmes, make eache parcell into powlder
by it self, and the white lead wth oyle oliffe, and put therto lytter-
gium, Mastick, and ffrankencense and stirr it often tymes and at
eache stirringe put therto a little rose water, and when it be-
ginnethe to be thick, put more oyle therto & at eache tyme a little
Rose water, and make it soe that it be neyther to thick nor to thin.

An other white Salve

Take of oyle oliffe a li. Stampe white leade a li, waxe halfe a li
Campher iij: dragmes. iij youlkes of Egg Stampe these togither
in a Morter, & last of all put in yr Campher poulder.

A greate draweinge Plaister.

Take yellow Rosen jli Virgin waxe halfe a .li. hart Suett viij ounces
Terpentyne iiij. ounces, Mastick, white ffrankencense f. myrrhe & Aloe
Sicotrina of each halfe an ounce, melt the waxe Rosen & hart Suett
togither, Straine it and put to it the Terpentyne & the other pcell
in poulder and oyle of Roses ij ounces & stirr it till it be cold.





To make a Salve to Clense and cause fleshe
to growe and to kill the heate

Take white Rosen, white waxe, Tallowe of an oxe black pitche,
Byrdlyme, myrrhe of eache iij ounces, and oyle oliffe that
therbe Sufficient of such thing as belonge to the makeinge
of a Salve And put therto Sarcowle in poulder halfe
an ounce

A Salve that Clensethe and causeth fleshe to growe

Take white Terpentyne that is not washed iiij ounces the
youlke of an Egge and a little Barlye meale, make
therof a Salve: /

An other salve that causethe ffleshe to growe
in all manner of freshe wound./

Take Terpentyne iiij ounces honey halfe an ounce poulder
of the barke of white ffrankencense a dragme Saffron
the third part of a dragme & take as much oyle of
Roses and waxe as will make a Salve./

A salve that makethe fleshe to growe
in any wound of yonge personnes./

Take Terpentyne that is not washed ij ounces Rose
honey a dragme Saffron the third part of a dragme,
And take as much oyle of Roses & waxe as will make a Salve.

A Salve that causeth a wound to give matter.

Take Terpentyne iiij. Ounces, hart grease or the mar-
row of a harte ij ounces, Oyle of Roses one ounce, white
ffrankencense halfe an ounce

A Salve to cause matter to come in short tyme
as hath bene proved

Take Terpentyne iiij. ounces, oyle of Roses & waxe of eache
ij ounces, melt them togitherm & as you will vse it make
a little warme, and laye it to the wound with lynte et fiat





A Salve that taketh awaye vncleanes in any wound 32

Yake vinegre halfe a li. honey a li. Spanishe greene ij. ounces
Allume one ounce Seethe them alstgither on the fyre till it is
redd, for it takethe iij kynd of Colors in the seetheinge, If
it be sodden a little it seemethe greene, If it be sodden well
it seemethe Redd, if to muche then it will be black./

To make a Salve to drawe and to heale./

Take a quarter of a pound of virgin waxe and ij ounces
of Sheepes Suett & melt them tofither a little then take
it from the fyre, & put therto an ounce of frankencense,
& stirr it well togither & put it in Boxes, or Boxe./

For to make the Skin to growe on any Sore./

Take Virgin waxe or yellowe waxe one li and melt it over
a Chafinge dishe wth Coles, Then put to it ij ounces of the iuyce
of Planten, Of Oyle Oliffe & Rose water of eache one ounce,
& one Spoonefull of honey & lett them all boyle togither,
and when it is somethinge thick, take it from the fyre but
be sure to stir it often for breninge.

To make a Salve to draw well

Take waxe iij ounces, Rosen iiij. ounces, ffrankencense in poulder
an ounce, Turpentyne ij ounces, honey one ounce, mastick ij
dragmes, Campher ij dragmes, oyle oliffe ij ounces, Sheepe
Suett, or deere Suett or oyle of Roses, or May Butter, or fresh butter
two ounces, Then melt all these on a soft fyre, And beate
the Rosen, frankencense, and mastick in poulder and put
them to the waxe wth all the other, after the makeinge of
the other Salve, Then take white wyne a pynte & take
Planten, Bitteny Tose Campen & orpen of each ij
handfull and stampe them & straine them and take the
iuyce. Then Seethe the residue wth the wyne till it be tender
Then Strayne them agayne and put therto a little oyle oliffe,
Then Seethe e iuyce wth the residue of the other pcell aboue written
till it be thicke & not to much and stirr it often for burneinge & straine it.
And this is a greate drawer & a healer, But make not yo Salve as the
Chyrurgions of London doe, for they make them drye & then they
never drawe well, but make them moyst and then they will drawe &
heale well. pbatum.





To make a Salve that is a greate drawer.

Take a Sawcerfull of good Cream & honey iij Spoonefull
Virgin waxe an ounce, and Seethe them well together
on a Chafingedishe of Coles till the Creame & the rest be
well myngled & thick. Then take a little wheate flower and
put to it, stirr it together till it be thick and put in e
youlke of an Egge, and temper all togither agayne &
when it is colde rowle it up betweene yo handes.

A reddie healer of wound./

Take Mallowes Valerian & Planten & seethe them well
then Stampe them, and then take old Barrowes grease,
and a litle Barlie meale, & myngle e iuyce, e grease &
meale altogither and make a Salve thereof. But if you
take the iuyce and the grease, & melt them togither and
Skum it cleane, put e meale to it & straine it altogi-
thers this is the better, or take one ounce of waxe & melt
it wth the Grease it is good.

A Salve wch cleansethe the matter and causeth fleshe
to growe, and drawes to it the matter in all uncleane wound

Take white Rosen or other Rosen a li. Mayden waxe or yellow
waxe halfe a li. Sheepe Suett viij ounces, Turpentyne
iiij ounces, Mastick and white ffrankencense of eache
an ounce, melt the waxe Rosen and Suett togither and
straine it thoroughe a Clothe, Them putt therto Turpentyne,
the other. pcell of poulder & oyle of Roses ij ounces &
stirr them altogither till they be colde, And yf you will have
it greene put Sappe of orpen, Elder, howselicke valerian
Bitteny, Planten & Mallowes, Lett them be stamped &
sodden wth the Suett, And when it well sodden, straine it,
& make the Salve wth the same Suett.

A Salve whiche clensethe the matter & makethe
fleshe to growe./

Take Turpentyne iij ounces, honey strained one ounce,
ffrankencense halfe an ounce in poulder, Barlie meale
or wheate flowere halfe an ounce, oyle of Roses halfe an ounce,
the yolke





33
the yolke of an Egge and halfe a dragme of Saffron, and
melt e Terpentyne, honey and oyle of Roses togither wth
the Virgin Waxe, Then straine it and put therto the barlye
meale, the poulder of frankencense, the youlke of the Egge
and the Saffron, and temper them altogither.

A salve that fillethe white fleshe in all freshe
wound and healethe and draweth verye well.

Take yellowe waxe vj ounces, good oyle of Oliffe halfe a li Ter-
pentyne iiij ounces, Rosen or white Rosen v ounces white
frankencense & mastick of eache ij ounces in poulder,
Saffron a dragme, oyle of Roses an ounce Melt the waxe
and Rosen together wth the oyle, & afterward put in the
Terpentyne and clense it, and then sett it from the
fyre, and straine it & at the halfe cooleinge put to it e
Mastick ffrankencense & Saffron and stirr it And if
you will have it to drawe muche put therwth more of the
Rosen then of the waxe, and this will heale any Sore
as hathe bene pved If you will have it to clense
muche take the iuyce of Sellendyne and Bitteny, To
coole the heate of the Sore Take Plenten Small and
greate, orpen, Howselicke Mallowes and Valerian,
the iuyce of them wth a little beane flowre. Proved.

A Salve that is a good drawer./

Take Rosen in poulder vj ounces, Pitche in poulder i scle Terpentyne iiij
ounces waxe iij ounces, oyle of Roses j. ounce ffrankencense and Mastick
in poulder of eache halfe an ounce, Melt the Rosen Pitche & waxe togither,
But first of all take these herbes and stampe them, Bittenie or Sellendyne
two handfull orpen and Howselieke of eache iij handfull, Planten small &
greate of eache vj. handfull, Mallowes valerian & Tutsane of eache ij. M.
Stampe them & straine them take e iuyce and iiij ounces of Sheepes Suett
Deere Suett or Tallowe, and melt the Suett the iuyce togither and Skume it
cleane, Then straine it & put it to the waxe Rosen & pitch: & lett them melt to-
gither, & clense m from e fylthe. Then take it of & put to it e Terpentyne, ffran-
kencense & mastick in poulder, and oyle of Roses and you will a little Sencocole
alsoe in poulder and a little clarified honye, and a little beane flowre for they
purifie and clense. Alsoe if you put a litle iuyce of Worme woode it preser-
vethe from dead fleshe.





ffor to make the Skin to growe on any Sore as hathe
bene well proved

Take waxe ij ounces, white ffrankencense & mastick in poulder
of eache halfe an ounce, Mallowe, Planten, Valerian
& Tatsane of the iuyce of them iiij ounces sodden wth
Swynes grease and when the grease is greene, put
the waxe and it together, & clarifie it and then straine
it and put to it the poulder, & keepe it to heale any
Sore. Probatum.

These hearbes are all verie good in any Salve. viz.
to heale any wound.

Sickleworte, Loveache, nightshade, Matfellon,
Egremonie, woodrothe.

ffor to make an other Salve Take of these herbes viz.

Grownd Ivie, Smallache, Burdocke leaves, Mallowes
Bugill, Rose Campen, Bittenie, Growndsell Howselieks
poocheworte, Ragworte, Planten, Orpin, Valerian, worme-
woode, Sorrell, Lyllies, Sickleworte & Adders tonge, all
these hearbes are good for Salves but take yo Chiefe./

All these are greate healers wth or wthout herbes. viz

Virgin Waxe or Cleane waxe, Oxicrotion, Rosen prosen
ffankencense Mastick Campher, Turpentyne, white
wyne, hunye, white leade, Redd leade, Creeme Goome
of Ivie Pitche. Tarrr, Black soape Sheepes Suett,
May Butter or freshe butter, deeres Suett, Capons
grease, Hogg grease, All these heale and drawe well.

To heale a Sore./

Take Bitteny Selfheale and valerian, Stampe them small and grynd
them well and then put to it a little honey and youlk of
Egg and grynd them all in a morter agayne. Then put to
it a little wheate flowre or a little Barlie flowre & a little
Turpentyne and temper them altogither. And it is a
pure Plaster. Pved diverse tymes.





34
If you will have a Salve to be a greate drawer and to
clense muche

Take Rosen in poulder xij. ounces, waxe iiij. ounces, pitche in
poulder one ounce, melt the waxe Rosen and pitche togither
and take the iuyce of Bittenye, Sellendyne, orpin Howslieke
Nightshade, Valerian Tutsane, and planten Small & greate
Wormewoode or Centarie Take the Sape of these herbes, as
muche as will make it greene, put the Sape first into the pitche
& put it into the waxe and Rosen and melt them togithers,
wth sheepes suett, Swynes grease or Tallowe, Then take
Turpentyne iiij. ounces Sarcocose, white ffrankencense,
& mastick in poulder of eache an ounce, But first put
in yo Turpentyne, & lett it seethe two walmes, then take
it of and straine it and put the poulder into it & stirr it and
lett it Coole.

For wound in generall that are in greate heate
and for swelling.

Take Planten of the Small kynd, Mallowes St Johns worte
of the iuyce of these herbes iiij ounces oyle of Roses, or rose
leaves an ounce, and melt all these wth Virgins waxe &
wth Terpentyne an ounce, wth May Butter and a little
Campher and make Salve of these & laye it vppon a Clothe
warme to the wounde, The iuyce of Nightshade is good also
pved.

ffor wound that lacke fleshe wth what herbes you shall
make a Salve to make the fleshe growe

Take Mallows white Coleworte, Planten, Mowseare, Rose
honnye or oyle of Roses, white ffrankensense & white waxe,
and make therof a Salve wth Terpentyne.

A greate drawer.

Take Rose honney vj. ounces, fyne bowlted Barlie flower
ij ounces, & seethe them togither. Then take ij ounces of
Terpentyne, washed white in Rose water, and put to it
and let it Coole, And put this to the wound, for it is a greate
drawer.






A Salve to bringe wound that bee Rankled or brenninge
or akeinge in to their kynd temper agayne and to
cause them to leave Rankelinge and burneinge

Take e iuyce of Smallage, nightshade and Planten
of eache in lieke quantitie Then take honney
& the white of an Egge of eache in lieke quantitie
wth a little Turpentyne, and mingle them to-
gither till it be thicke, and let it come at noe fyre,
Then laye it to the Sore & it will close it, and leave
the ache and bringe it to the kynd temper and
heale it fayre, ffor it is a principall Salve for all
old Sores; wallworte is good alsoe.

To heale wound

Take wormewoode, Bitteny, Centerye and
peache leaves, Stampe them and take the iuyce
and temper it wth honey
The lieke drincke wth Malmesie killeth wormes

To take out bones or Splenters out of any wound.

Take Bitteny Vervin and Rewe, Stampe them togither
and mingle them wth honey and a little Beane flowre
or wheate flowre/ and the white of an Egge, and
make a Plaster/

ffor a legge that is in greate Heate, To take e payne
from it, and to Coole it.

Take Maij butter & the Herbes, Violett leaves, Howslieke
Burdock, Growndsell and Nightshade, ffor all these herbes
are cold in operation. Stampe them, and seethe them wth
Maij butter, and straine them and burne them not in e
seetheinge, Planten and Egremonie are cold alsoe/ pved

A greate drawer/

Take Rose honey vj. ounces, fyne boulted flower ij. ounces and
seethe them togither, then put to it ij ounces of Terpentyne washed
white wth Rose water & let it coole. and laye it to the wound.
And then put a healinge Salve to it. It is a greate drawer;





35
If the Head be broken wth Clubb or Staffe
Take Alaxatica, Sanguis draconis, myrrhe, olibanum, of eache
in lieke quantitie, and make them in fyne Poulder, and
myngle them wth the white of an Egg. Share of the haire
and make a plaster of this and laye it to the Sore.

A Mundificative Salve/

Take Mirrhe, Sarcocole, Turpentyne and honey of Roses.

To Close wound

Make oyntment of the iuyce of longe Planten wth hogg grease
Sheepes Tallowe, Turpentyne, ffrankencense & waxe all moul-
ten togither.

ffor to make a pure Salve for a Cutt, and it will heale
it in short tyme./

Take iiij. ounces of Cleane Waxe, of Rosen in powlder Seven ounces
Oyle Oliffe, oyle of Roses & Turpentyne of eache ij ounces, mastick
and ffrankencense in powlder of each an ounce, honney clarified
halfe an ounce, Sarcocole in poulder a dragme. Take the waxe
Honey and oyle, and melt them togither and Clarifie them
If you will have it greene; Take Planten Small and great,
Mallowes, Orpen, Tutsane, Bittenie, or Solendyne,
Valerian and a little Nightshade, of eache as you thincke
good, and Stampe them and seethe them wth oyle, Rosen,
and waxe over a soft fyre, till the waxe be greene, Then
straine it and put the Terpentyne and oyle of Roses
vnto it, and lett them seethe togither a little & take of e
Mastick, ffrankencense and Sarcocole, and when it
is from the fyre put in the poulder & stirr them altogither,
And when it is cold, With Lynte laye it on the Sore,
and it will heale it. pved.





To make a good draweinge Plaster

Take yellow waxe, Rosen and ffrankensense of eache ij.
ounces & melt them wth oyle of Roses & Swynes grease
or Sheepes Suett, or deere Suett, Then take Birdlyme
& Terpentyne of eache iij. ounces, And then put yo
Sappe of herbes to it yf you will and straine it.

To Clense a Sore from the matter

Yake Planten, Valerian and Nettles or els Sellendyne
& Bitteny & white Salt and stampe them altogether
and laye it on the Sore, or els take Nettles & Bitteny
& Stampe them wth Salt and laye it to the Sore
and it willl not Suffer it to breed any dead Fleshe,
and it taketh awaye all corruption. And put a
little honey to it pved dyverse tymes.

To Clense a Sore when it is newe

Take a little Rosewater & the white of an Egge made
in oyle and a little flaxe and laye it on the Cutt
Alsoe to Stopp the blod put to it a little Bolus Armoniak
in poulder wth a little Vinegre, & a little of the iuyce
of Bitteny & Planten, & a little oyle of Roses
and put all these togither & dipp the flaxe in it and
annoynte the Sore wound about.

An other to clense a Sore wch is pure good/

Take Rose water the white of an Egge made in oyle, and
a little Terpentyne washed in Rose water till it be
White and a little oyle of Roses & put them togither
and wth a little flaxe laye it to the Sore and it will
clense it.





36
An other to Clense a Sore

Take Strayned Rose honey, Terpentyne iij. ounces, a little Barlie
meale, a little ffrankencense in fyme poulder, and a little myre
in fyne poulder.

ffor vncleane wound to puryfie them & preserve m from
evill fleshe.

Take honey water or honey nettles, Woodbynes, wyld Sauge, orpin, dasie
Scabious Cinquefol, Red Colewort and Cammamell water.

To keepe a wound cleane from Rottinge.

Tale Bolarmoniake an ounce of white Coperis a little quantitie & beate m to
fyne poulder, Then take of Campher a oz. and beate it to fyne poulder, but
you must beate iij. Almones in e Morter before you beate the Campher, Then
make it all in a poulder & seethe it on a little water or Rose water, or in e
iuyce of dasies. and when the poulder is sodden a little take it of and let
it Cale, and wth Lynt wett in e water laye it to the wound & when it is
drye laye on more, and this will clense any Sore, and keepe it from dead
fleshe. As hath bene pved divers tymes.

ffor to take out dead fleashe wthout any payne.
Take Woodbyne leaves and small Planten iiij. handfull & Sallendyne ij. m.
and beate them in a Morter & seethe them in a pynt of honey till they be well min-
gled, Then straine it and with Lynte laye it to the wound. The poulder of honey-
sokles is pure good to eate dead fleshe.

ffor to take dead fleshe from e Sore./

Take e iuyce of woodbyne leaves & of Smallage of bothe halfe a pynte, a quartr
of an ounce of Coperas burnt in fyne poulder, a halfe penny worthe of honey
& a Spoonefull of vinegre. boyle all these togither till they cpme to the thicknes
of life honey. Then take it of & keepe it for any old Sore or newe if any dead
fleshe or corruption be therin. As hathe bene well pved.

To drawe and put away dead fleshe.

Take a pynte of white wyne, as muche of honey & iij. Spoonefull of Allom beaten
to poulder & of drye white Salt a Spoonefull in poulder & of madder as much as e
bignes of a wallnutt or wyldinge and put it in a Lynnenclothe fast bound
and let them seethe togither a qurtr of an howre, and as the Skum rysethe take it
of, and when it is almost sodden awaye take it of and straine it and put it in
a glasse Then take Allom & Coperas & burne them bothe vppon a hott
stone & make poulder of them. Take of the poulder & put it wher the dead fleshe
is. Then take of e oyle wth lynte & put to it soe t the lynte be mixed wth
the oyle and laye it on the Sore xxiiijtie houres. And this will take awaye
all dead fleshe and clense it. Then take a knife and loosen e dead fleshe, & if
it sticke fast laye on freshe ffor this hathe bene pved diverse tymes & alway
helpeth.

ffor a Sore full of dead fleshe and waterethe an wosethe.

Take a pynte of white wyne or runninge water & as muche of honey & ij Spoonefull of poulder
of Allome burnte and beaten & all the other thing as is aboue written in the other & when you
will vse it, put some into a Sawser and put lynte into it cold, and soe laye it vnto e
Sore place, Then laye a plaster of Diaculum vppon it or any other plaster, and you
must wringe out e Madder into e wyne & honey when you have sodden it. pved diverse
tymes





ffor e Synnewes An oyntement for Synnewes

Take Mallowes, the myddle Mugworte, Butter, Rosemarie
Holihockes Roses and Rewe, and make oyntement wth Maij butter..

ffor Synnewes that Shrinke, an oyle or Oyntemt.

Take ffive Swallowes out of the nest & Rosemarie and
Red Rose leaves of eache a handfull, Strawberrie leaves,
Mallowes, Howselieke & Holihocke of eache halfe a hand-
full, and beate the hearbes & Swallowes together in a
Morter, Then frye them wth Maij butter and a little
Swynes grease, ffrye the Swallowes fethers, Gutt and
all wth the herbes, and burne them in the fryeinge. Then
Straine it and let it stand in the Sonne Tenn dayes,
in a glasse, and Clarifie the oyle agayne as cleane as
may be from all manner of filthe. and put to it a little
oyle of Turpentyne if you may have it. And this oyle
will make the Synnewes to stretche, and helpe them if
they it be well made, And put to it a good ounce of oyle
of Roses, and this is a pure oyle as hathe bene well pved.

An other makeinge of oyle of Swallowes
for Shrinkinge of Synnewes

Take young Swallowes out of the nest a dozen & of Rosemarie, Lavender
Cotton & Strawberrie leaves e longe string and all, of eache of these
a handfull after e quantitie of e Swallowes. Braye the Swallowes
gutt and all togither. with the herbes in a Morter till they be Small
and then frye them wth Maij butter and not to muche, and then
put it into a pott & stoppe it close ix dayes, and then frye it
agayne in more Maij butter, & frye it well & straine it and
then you shall occupie it Chafe it agaynest the fyre, and
annoynte the Synnewes that Shrinke. Oyle Rosett is good./
Maij butter is puer to make an Oyntmt or to put into any Salve.






An oyle good for Synnewes that doe Shrinke after they be hurte & healed.

Take Ensence t is white, frankencense and mastick of eache of them 37
in poulder and ounce, Turpentyne Virgen an ounce, Sheepes Suett
old Swynes grease and freshe butter of eache of them halfe an ounce
Then take an ounce and a halfe of waxe, and an ounce of oyle
of oliffe. But a good ounce of oyle of Roses is better. Stampe
them, and boyle all these thing togither & make it in manner of
an oyntement, hard to make plaster, and make therof a plaster
& laye it on the Synnewes t be hurt .xv. dayes and they will
stretche out; And Seethe Mallowes and Planten till they be
tender, then stampe them & put the iuyce into the oyle

An oyle for Hurt Synnewes or for all manner of
Swelling or Bruse.

Take Pimpernell, Grownsell, daysie, Cinquefol, Planten,
Bitteny, Mallowes, Camamell, wylde Sauge, woodbyne
leaves, Rewe, Redd Rose, Rosemarie, Sowthistle, & Egremony
these kill the greate heate of the Swellinge. Take of all
these herbes as you shall thinke good for they are pure good all
and stampe them, and with Maij butter seethe them till the
olye be greene, Then straine it, and put to it oyle of Camamell
& oyle of Roses of eache an ounce, and sett it in the Sonne xxtie
dayes, & straine it. If you take all these herbes, take of wyld
Sauge, Nyght shade, howselieke, Woodbyne & orpen, but a
fewe for they are verie cold in operation, or lett them agree
in quantitie the hott herbes wth the cold. Some doe take but
these herbes, Pimpernell, Howselieke, Planten Cinquefol
Camamell Mallowes, Grownsell, Rose leaves, Egremony,
Woodbyne leaves & Rewe, and stampe them & seethe them
wth Maij butter, And when it is greene put oyle of Roses
& oyle of Camamell to it, and sett it in the Sonne xxtie dayes.

ffor Synnewes an Oyle./

Take Muggwort Mallowes, Cammamell, & butter and
make oyle wth oyle oliffe or Porkes grease./





* Nerue - oyle ffor to make an Oyntment called *Nervall
wch is a pure oyntment for Synnewes

Take wylde Sauge, Camamell, Muggworte, Sauge, Mallowes
Holliock, Rose leaves, Rosemarie, Sothernewood and
wallworte. of eache half a quarter washe them cleane
& stampe them wth halfe a pound of maij Butter &
put therto a quarter of Oyle Oliffe and melt them well
togither, and put them in an Earthen pott, and cover
it, and lett it stand in a moyst place nyne dayes.
then take it out of the pott and putt it in a pann, &
sett it over a fyre, and lett it frye well togither and
stirr it that it cleave not to the Pann, and when it is hott
ynough straine it into a vessell and sett it on the fyre
agayne, and put therto halfe a quarterne of waxe, a
qurte of weathers Tallowe moulten pure, and a little
honney and a qrte of ffrankencense in fyne poulder,
and stirr it well till it be melted, Then straine it and
let it Coole and let out the wate and clense it on the
nether side and take awaye the filthe, and sett it over
the fyre agayne till it be moulten, and wth a fether
Skum it and put it in Boxes. And this is the kyndest
Nervall that can be made./





38





To make an oyle for a Swellinge or for a
Sore in greate heate, or for Synnewes hurt.

Take of Planten small and greate iij. handfull of
Howselieke as much of Mallowes a handfull, Stamp
them and Seethe them with Swynes grease till the oyle
be greene and straine it for it is pure oyle, If Synnewes
be hurt put to it an ounce of oyle of Roses. pbatum./

An oyle for Swellinge if the Patient be in
greate heate.

Take Redd Rose leaves iij.m. Planten as much,Bittemy
Grownsell, Violett leaves, Howselieke & Egremont of eache
an handfull, ffemetorie and woodbyne leaves of them
a handfull, and j.m. of Cammamell, And wth Maij
Butter & an ounce of Roses e oyle, and as much of the oyle
of Cammamell, Seethe them altogither with the herbes
Stampe them till the oyle be greene, and stirr it often
for burneinge, and straine it into a glasse and sett it
in the Sonne xx dayes & straine it Probatum./

An other oyntment for Swelling And tis cold.

Take Smallage, Planten daysies, Howselieke & Grownsell
and frye them wth Maij butter or freshe Swynes grease
and straine it and laye it on cold vppon the patient
and if you frye a handfull of Rosemarie, or put oyle
of Roses to it, it is good.

An oyle for Swellinge Bruse or Ache

Take a pynte of good Oyle Oliffe and put it in a glasse in Maij
and take younge baye leaves, youhge Sage, Rosemarie, Rose leaves,
Rewe and Camamell mynse all these Small and put to the
oyle Roses and Rosemarie, of eache a handfull at a tyme, of baye
leaves & Sauge halfe a handfull, at a tyme, Rewe & Camamell of
each a quarter of a handfull at at tyme, or els you may take of these
herbes a little quantitie at a tyme, but e greatest part let it be
of the Roses, Rosemarie and baye leaves, Then you may mynse
the oftner






the oftner and put it into the oyle, for it will make the oyle e
better for the freshe Savor, and when you put the herbes into
the oyle, let the oyle stand in the Sonne xij dayes, then put
in freshe herbes agayne, and let it stand xv. dayes, then
straine it and put in newe herbes agayne, And soe doe
often as it is before written and Cover the glasse Close
and lett it stande in the Sonne vj weekes./

ffor all Swellinge in the Legg Armes or any other part or
place of the bodye, This oyle followinge is good, and tis cold.

Take Cammamell, Rose leaves, Rosemarie leaves and flowres
Howseliek, Mallowes, Planten, but most of all violett
leaves and the flowres Hollyhock, Mugwort, Egremony
Cinquefol, & a little Fumetorie; Stampe these and seethe
them with Swynes grease, till they be greene, but burne
them not, then straine it and put therto an ounce of oyle
of Roses, and as much of Maij butter, and seethe the first
oyle and them togither And sett it in the Sonne after
you have strained it ageyne xxxtie dayes, and put to the
herbes a handfull of Grownsell, And keepe it for a pure
Oyle Probatum.

An other oyle for Swellinge of the Legge or Armes.

Take Camamell Rose leaves Howselieke Planten night-
shade, Mallowes, Hollyhock, Mugworte, ffemetorie, Rosemarie
and Grownsell Stampe them and temper them altogither
and put to it a good quantitie of Maij butter, and let it stand
in a glasse in the Sonne x. dayes, & then seethe them
till the oyle be greene, & straine it, and put it to the oyle an
ounce of the oyle of Cammamell & an ounce of oyle of roses,
and sett it in the Sonne till it be purified and straine it often.

Butter is hott in e first degree and cold in the second; The newer
it is the better. It is good for the Shrinkinge of Sinnewes,
ffor it clensethe, Supplethe Abatethe the Aches and Softnethe and
Rypenethe.





ffor all manner of Swelling that be in greate
heate to helpe them and take awaye e Swellinge. It is cold.

Take Planten iij. Handfull Howselieke, vyolett leaves &
ffor Nightshade you may
take mallowes and a
little fumetorie. Cama-
mell is good alsoe.
Nightshade leaves of eache a handfull, woodbyne leaves
half a handfull, Hollyhock & Mugwort of eache ij
handfull, Rosemarie or the flowers, (the leaves must
be mynsed) iij handfull and Rose leaves yf you may
iij. handfull and if not the oyle of Roses, ij. ounces
and a handfull of daysie leaves, Stampe these
herbes well in a Morter Then take a pynte of
Swynes grease and put to them and Seethe it over
a freshe fyre till the oyle be greene, and stirr it
often for burninge & straine it. ffor the woodbyne
leaves take Egremony ij handefull Then take
Maij butter ij ounces & an ounce of oyle of Roses
and put them to the first oyle, and let it stand in
the Sonne xvj dayes. and straine it agayne pved

ffor Swellinge not broken, and for to drawe an Issue.

Take oyle of Roses. Rose water, and the white of an Egge, wth the youlke
Beane flowre, and a little vinegre, and temper all these
togither and sett them on Embers till it be blod warme
Then wth a fether annoynte the Sore Swellinge place, morneing
& Eveninge, and at Noone, and it helpethe. pved dyverse tymes.

An other Medycyne for Swellinge.

Take a pottle of tunninge water and a greate handfull of Sauge
and let it seethe to a quarte, & then straine the liquor & put into it
a pynte of white vinegre & iij. Spoonefull of honney, and
sett all these vppon e fyre e space of halfe an howre, Then
take a Scarlett Clothe & wett it in the warme liquor, and
laye it vppon the Swellinge warme, and soe doe it iij or iiij.
tymes in a daye, alwayes warme, and the patient shall
fynde greate ease in it. Proved.





An other for Swellinge. 40

Take Mylke, Ote meale and Vyolet if you can gett them, if not
the leaves, If the Soore be in greate heate take mallowes, Cama-
mell, Grownsell, Smallage & Brokelyme of everie of them
a handfull, and shread them small into the mylke, Then take
Linseede and ffenegreake beate them bothe to powlder and put
it into the Mylke, and soe let them seethe altogither till they be
soe thick that you may stick it vppon a clothe, wth a knyfe,
Then take of Oyle of Camamell, Oyle of Roses and oyle of oliff
of eache of them an ounce, and let all these have a boyle
togither and then stryke it vppon a lynnen Clothe, and soe
laye it vppon the Sore place, and change it morninge
and Eveninge, and it will helpe in thrise layeinge on
pved dyverse tymes

ffor Swellinge not broken, and for an Ache/

Take rewe, Archangell, Langedebeofe, and Clarye of eache an
handfull & bruse them in a Morter; Then take e oyle of Neates
feete and frye the herbes but stirr them for burneinge, and frye
them till the herbes be harde. Then take the oyle and annoynte
the Sore place, The  laye a lynnen Clothe to it as warme
as you can suffer it. ANd this will drincke vpp all evill humors
and purge the dropsie, and kill the ache & make it leave
Swellinge after iij. tymes dressinge. but looke you straine yo
oyle Cleane. If you take Nightshade & the Croppes of red
Nettles & frye them with the other herbes it is very good,
Take a Plaster of Horsycrocsion and laye it to it which is verie good.

ffor a Swellinge, or for a Sore in greate heate or for
Synnewes that be hurt an Oyle./

Take Planten Small & greate iij. handfull Howselieke as muche
and Mallowes a handfull, Stampe them and seethe them wth
Swyne grease till the oyle be greene, and straine it, and it
is pure oyle. If the Synnewes be hurt put therto j  of oyle
of Roses.





ffor a Swellinge or for a Bruse, or for akeinge./

Take a quarte of oyle Oliffe, and put into it Baye leaves &
Rose leaves, Parselie, Rosemarie, Cammamell, Sauge and Rewe
and let all these herbes be mynsed small & put into e oyle
let it stand vij dayes in the Sonne in a glasse, Then put
Sixe Spoonefull of oyle of Roses to this Oyle, and let it stand
the Sonne nyne dayes And this is a pure oyle for any Ache
diverse tymes proved.
Change yo herbes putinge freshe Seven tymes, At everie
Seven dayes ende change and straine them as you change./

ffor a Swellinge that is of an Ague/

Take of the powlder of Bolus Armoniacus the oyle of Roses the
youlke of an Egge & beane flowre, and a little vinegre,
and temper them altogither, then warme it a little and laye
it vppon leather, and laye it to the Swolne place.
If you will have it to drawe muche make it thick of the
flower; If you will you put a little oyle of Cammamell
vnto it; Or thr iuyce of Howselieke or nightshade pved.

ffor a Swellinge Ache or Bruse.

Take Rewe, Sauge, Worme woode, Smallage, Brookelyme, Rosemarie
flowres or e leaves, Cammamell, Roses of eache of all these a
handfull, & bruse them in a Morter, Then take Pisse or a pottle
of white wyne, & seethe them till they be tender, Then take
a good quantitie of Sheepes Tallowe, & put to it and lett
it seethe till it be thicke, and stirr it for the burneinge, and you
must have Sheepes Suett reddye to keepe it moyste, as
it seethe awaye. Then take this Medycyne & beate it in a
Morter, and laye it as warme as the patient can suffer it,
and it will asswage the Swellinge and kill the Ache wthin
three or fowre tymes dressinge. But looke you keepe it warme
wth Clothes a weeke togither, and laye yo Medycyne alwayes
warme vnto it. This hathe bene often proved.

If you annoynte





41
If you annoynte the patient with oyle of Roses when the Swellinge
is gone, or wth the Oyle before written; Or if you take oyle oliffe
Oyle of Roses & oyle of Camamell of eache an ounce and seethe
these herbes agayne in this oyle & straine it. It is a pricipall
Oyle for any Ache in the Ioynt or any other place, Withe a
Plaster of Hocsycroction vnto it.

After this manner manner Maij butter is made.

Take ffresse Butter in Maij and let it stand in e Sonne in a glasse
xv. dayes, till it be clarified from the Curd. Then straine it but lett
it take noe water.

ffor Swellinges Humlock leaves are good.

ffor Burneinge Hollihock leaves wth Swynes grease sodden & strayned





ffor a Bruse or Swellinge

Take Smallage, Brookelyme, Rewe, Sauge, Cammamell,
Southerwood, Wormewoode and Setherwood of eache of
these a handfull then seethe them in Runeinge water
or pisse till they be soft and tender. Then take Sheepes
Tallowe and mynce it wth oyle oliffe, and put a good quantity
to the hearbes, and let them seethe till they be almost
sodden awaye, and stirr it often for burneinge. Then take
it and laye it on lynnen clothe or leather, and put vnto
it a little oyle of Roses. or els annoynte the Sore with it
before you laye on e plaster, and laye the plaster warme
to it. An other waye:

Take the herbes aforesaid and mynce them, and seethe m
in a quarte of whyte wyne till they be tender, Then take
a pynte of oyle oliffe, and put vnto it, and seethe the herbes
wth the wyne fayre and softlye, halfe an howre, and stirr
it for burneinge. Then take the Medycyne and laye it
warme to e Bruse or Swellinge, or els straine it & annoynte
the Sore wth it, & laye the herbes warme to it. and keepe
the Sore alwayes warme wth Clothes. If you put a little
oyle of Roses to it, it is very good. And this will heale
it whether it be bruse, Swellinge or blood t is cold.
As hathe bene verie well pved diverse tymes

ffor a Bruse or Swellinge or Ache an Oyle/

Take Nightshade, e Croppes of Red Nettles, Smallache, Brooklyme,
Sotherwoode, wormewoode Rewe, Sage Camamell and fether-
fewe, of eache of these a lieke quantitie, and Mynce m
verye Small. Then frye them wth Maij Butter or freshe
butter or oyle of neat feete, and stirr for burneinge,
and frye it fayre and softlie till it be blacke, and then
Straine it and take the oyle warme, and put a lynnen

Clothe





42
Clothe into it and soe laye the same wett vnto the Bruse
or Ache, and keepe it warme wth Clothes and this will
helpe it wthin iij. tymes dressinge. But you must alwayes
laye the oyle on as warme as the patient can suffer it.
If you take oyle of Roses and put to the oyle alsoe, It is
very good, or els take Rose leaves and frye them wth the
hearbes aboue written and laye the herbes warme to e
place wth the oyle./

To make yr Salves pure good for Bruse or Swelling

Take of Swynes grease or Sheepes Suett a good quantitie,
and Shred your herbes and put into it, and seethe it togither
till e oyle be greene, then straine it and put it vpp. And
this is the best makeinge of some oyles, Other oyles are
other wise made./

ffor a Bruse

Take a pottle of oyle oliffe, and a pottle of Gascoyne wyne,
and Cammamell and Sotherwoode of eache five handfull
and of wormewoode and fetherfewe of eache fowre handfull
and Sixe handfull of newe Rose leaves, then mynce them
altogither, and let them stand in a Basen well covered v.
dayes. Then seethe them altogither softlie halfe an howre
and then straine it and put it in a glasse, and therwithe
annoynte the bruse, and wette a clothe and laye it to it, and
soe Rowle it vpp. And it will heale any bruse very well.
Alsoe take with those herbes Brookelyme and Smallage, and
laye a plaster of Hocsicroction vnto it





ffor an Ache a poultes  43

Take Milke and fflowre and seethe them till they be thicke, and
laye it to the sore place as warme as you can Suffer it

ffor an ache in the Armes

Take Rewe, Planten, Rosemarie flowres or the leaves, of
eache a handfull, & frye them wth oyle of Roses, oyle of
neats feete or May butter or Capons grease or oyle oliffe
and frye them till they be black. Then strayne it thoroughe
a lynnen Clothe and when you have strained it take e
youlke of an Egge, halfe an ounce of e iuyce of flowers
of Violetts or of the leaves, and beate the youlke wth it, and
put to the oyle ,and warme it on the fyre, & stirr it, and when
it mixed take take it of, And this a pure oyle for the Ache. But
mynce the hearbes first.

For Ache in the Wriste or Ioynt or if the Knees
doe Swelle or Ake./

Take Rewe and  Loveache and stampe them together, and
put therto honey, and make therof a plaster and applie it,
and it will take awaye the Swellinge or Ache

ffor an Ache Dr Hauswell

Take oyle of Roses, Ale, and youlk of newe layd Egg
beaten togither, and take lieke quantitie of the oyle as is
of the Egg and let them be made Luke warme, and then
put into it the poulder of Saffron and soe annoynte the
akeinge place and laye a clothe vppon it and annoynte it
often.

A Seare Clothe for Ache./

Take Rosen and the best Stone Pitche and the oyle of Spike
of eache halfe a li. of waxe & venice Turpentyne of eache
two peny worthe, and a prettie quantitie of Barrowes
grease, melt altogither and thereof make yo Seare Clothe





ffor Ache in the bones a princypall oyntmt

Take of Aquavita and oyle of Baye of each a pennyworthe
and mixe them well togither but not not by e fyre.. And it
will put awaye the payne for ever, vsinge it warme , but you
must warme e oyntment a little in a Sawser before you laye
it on, And Chafe it well till it be dryed in, and cover it warme
at all tymes till it be whole. Pved diverse tymes.

ffor an Ache in the Bones of the Legg
and the Skin whole

Take a blacke Sheepes head wooll and all, take out the braynes
and breake the one in peeces. Boyle it well in good Ale, put
to it Burr dock leaves, and Primerose leaves & Rootes, boyle
them altogither till the head be sodden to peeces, Then wth
the broathe bathe the legge well agaynst a good fyre, Then laye the wooll the fleshe and herbes about the legg and
soe lett it lye xxiiijtie howres. And soe vse three or fowre
tymes and every tyme washe it in the brothe as hott as
you can suffer it./







44
 Flos vnguentorum good for all manner of Wound newe
or old, it is good for to put in all Treat. it Sufferethe noe
Corruption nor dead fleshe to grow: And it healethe more in a
Senight Space then others doe in a monethe. And it healethe
all manner of Botches and Apostemes Proved./

Take Planten small & greate, Bittent Valerian, Pimpnell
orpen, Sanecle or selfe heale, Varveyne, daysie, Mouseare or
Egremonie, of eache of these as you thinke good, then Stampe m
and take white wyne a quarte, and Hart Tallowe, or deere Suett
or Sheepes Suett a quarter of a lj. and Seethe the herbes wyne and
Suett altogether till the wyne be almost consumed, then straine it
and put it in a Cleane vessell, and Seethe the liquor agayne
but not e herbes and put vnto it of Rosen & Perosin of eache
halfe a li. Virgin waxe and white ffrankencense or olibanu
of each a quarter of a li. Mastick an ounce, Camphor iiij dragmes
But first put in the Rosen Perosen & waxe and seethe it in the liquor;
& Skum it cleane, then put in the Mastick ffrankencense a dragme
of Myrra or gumm Elempany in fyne poulder, Then in the Cooleinge
put in Terpentyne vj or iiij. ounces. But when you put in yo Terpen-
tyne yo poulder & Campher, looke t yo Stuffe be not to hott, for burne=
inge for if you burne yo Salve you mare it, and stirr it well togither
& put it into a Boxe. and keepe it for the best Intreate
that can be made on warrante. But looke yo poulder be very
fyne ere you put it in & wthout filthe And Seare yo poulder alwayes
thoroughe a fyne Searse. Proved.

To make Gratia Dei./

Take of Turpentyne & Rosen in poulder of each a li. Mastick in poulder ij. ounces,
Virgins waxe x. ounces, olibanu in poulder x. ounces, and Bitteny Planten
verven, Pimpernell & mouseare of eache in lieke quantitie & stampe them well
in a morter, Then Seethe them in a pottle of white wyne to a quarte, then take
them out & straine the iuyce into a vessell & set it over the fyre, & make a softe fyre
vnder it & soone after put in the Rosen and the Terpentyne, the second tyme
put in e Mastick olibanu & the waxe, & let them melt altogither, and straine
it agayne. And this is pure Gratia Dei. And if you will have it soften,
Rypen and drawe muche Put in an ounce of Galbanu, as much of oyle
of Roses and a little of the poulder of Myrra or Gumm Elempany






ffor the wound of a Spare or any other Iron.

Bruse Egremony wth Vinegre, or take e iuyce of it and the
iuyce of Daysie, and a little honey, Turpentyne ffrankencense
Mastick and a little Myrrha & make it in poulder & melt a little
Waxe and Tallowe, the iuyce & e Turpentyne and honey and
straine it and when it is some what cold, put the poulder into it
& a little Boras in powlder, and Egremonie brused is pure
good agaynst a bruse beinge layd plaster wise wth grease
vnto e Sore. And it Ceasethe e Ache and Swellinge

ffor the wound of a Spare or any other Iron.

Bruse Egremony, Bitteny, Planten and a little honey & vinegre
and put it into the wound and it will heale it if it be a newe wound.

A Salve that pullethe vnto it all manner of Iron
that abydethe in a mans bodye/

Take Magnet Stone or Addament stone in poulder halfe an ounce
Polepodie dixcuinalty of eache a dragme, hart grease Hempe
seede & Turpentyne of eache halfe an ounce, and make a plaster
and laye to the wound.

The Roote of a Reede stamped with honey & Planten pullethe out Bones,
doodle of a three petalled flower? Stones or glasse without any payne as hathe bene pved./

ffor wound that be hollowe ther as fleshe lackethe
and to cause it to growe.

Take Mallowes, Cole wortes & Valerian to make e fleshe to growe,
And yf you will have a Sore to drawe well, make e Plaster of browne
Paper or else of white leather with the Salve vppon it.

The Powder of Planten & the poulder of Bitteny are pure good to heale a Sore. pved.

ffor an Ague and anguishinge in a Sore Legg. a Bathe.

Take Mallowes, Chike.weede and Grownesell and seethe
them in fayre water & warme, bathe the legg and laye
the hearbes about the Sore. ~ / Proved./

To make a Water to washe all Sores

Take Planten, Rose leaves, Mouseare, Bittenye, Pimpnell Scabious,
and still altogither & washe Sores with it. pved diverse tymes.





45
ffor a broken Legge Rybbe or Bone./

Take daysie valerian and Comfarie: And drinke the water of
the herbes.

Agaynst congeled blood. Take Charvell water or water of wyld
Sauge and drinke it proved.

ffor to sett Ioynt or broken Bones. Take the iuyce of Comfarie and
drinke it.

To make a Specyall Water for Cutt or hurt in any parte
but the Poulder is better

Take an ounce of Allome and halfe an ounce of greene Coperas bothe
burnte and made in to fyne poulder and sett a quart of fayre water
vppon the fyre. put in yo poulder some and some and stirr it togither
and lett it come on the fyre adter e poulder is in and keepe it in a
glasse. And yf you will heale a Sore therwth wett a lynnedn in Clothe
and laye vppon the Sore place. And if you need a Tent take lynte &
wett it in the same & put it in e place, as a Tente. and change it eveninge
& morninge, And it takethe the dead fleshe a waye & healethe it. pved

An Excellent salve for any wound in the
flesshe.

Take a quarter of a li of Cleere Rosen, halfe a
quarter of a li of redd waxe, and halfe a quarter of a
li of Bores grease, a quarterne of fyne sugar,
or some what lesse, frye the bores grease in a pann
Then mingle them togither in a smale Pipkin over
the fire & scumm of the frothe, claryefieinge it soe as
well as you cann. Then poure it out into smale pott
and soe lett it coole. The nature of this salue
is such that it never healethe till it hath drawen
out all the corruption in the wound, and then it healethe
ymeadiatlie./





To breake any thinge and to drawe.

Take Perosen & two or three figg as you will make in quantitie
Shomakers waxe & old lynnen of eache like quantitie but most
part of Perosen, beate them altogither in a Morter till it come
to the thicknes of a plaster then spead it vppon leather pved.

To breake any manner of Sore, as hathe bene divers tymes pved

Take waxe two ounces, Galbanu layd in Vinegre a night and
a daye two ounces Rosen fowre ounces, Turpentyne two ounces
Oyle of Roses an ounce, or freshe butter or Sheepes Suett.
Take and melte the waxe, Rosen the Oyle, or butter or Suett.
Then take e Galbanum and the Vinegre and seethe them
wth the waxe Rosen and Oyle till the Vinegre be consumed
and stirr it for burneinge. put in the Turpentyne and
stirr it well togither and strayne it into fayre water
or into a Boxe. /

A very good Plaster to cause a Sore to breake,
or to breake a Byle. /

Take two handfull of Beane flowre, and one handfull of
wheate Brenn, two ounces of the meale of ffenegreeke,
and a pynt of white wyne or vinegre, three Spoonefull
of hunney & three youlkes of Egg and seethe it altogither
thicke and stirr it for burneinge and laye it to the Sore
as hott as the patient can suffer it. And it will cause the
Sore to rype and heale and bringe it to isshue, and as
often as you change bruse the Sore to voyde the matter.
Sorrell rosted or a lyllye Roote rosted in a browne paper
in the Embers, will breake a Sore.
Or take white Soape and beate it small and temper it well
wth Creame and honney and lett it seethe togither &
make a plaster of it, or temper it with Eysell./

Make a Plaster of the Rootes of Occulus Christi & verven
and it will breake a Byle, and it you will remove it
laye it two fingers from the Byle, and it will breake it
ther. pved.

To breake a fellon and heale it or any
other sore pved.

Take the strongest Ale you can gett, and boyle it vntill
(wth some stirring to keepe it from burninge) come to a salve.





46
To breake a Byle.

Take Galbanum ij. ounces and laye it fowre night in vinegre
and make a decoction and straine it in a cleane vessell wth waxe
and oyle of eache an ounce and Turpentyne and Rosen of them bothe
an ounce, and melt it and straine it and make a plaster when
it is cold as bigge as you will have it breake, and at everie Tenn
howres change it, and it will breake it. pved diverse tymes

To Rypen and loosen Apostemes or any other Sore.

Take the poulder of Perosen the meale of Fenegreake, Turpen-
tyne & a little Galbanum, wth the iuyce of Mallowes and
Swynes grease Seethe them altogither and straine it. Then
put in the ffenegreeke meale and when it is cold wth Leather
laye it to the place as broad as you will have it rype and to breake
or els make this Salve wth freshe butter or Maij butter wch is
better then the grease./

An other to Rypen Apostemes and Byles.

Take Galbanum and melt it wth freshe butter and Seethe it &
straine it and put in a little beane flowre a little honey &
Turpentyne and temper them altogither till it be thicke,
and laye a plaster of leather on the Sore pved./

An other to Rypen Apostemes or Byles.

Take ij. ounces of Galbanum an ounce of Turpentyne
a little perosen and a little waxe, and melt them altogither
in a little freshe butter and put to it a little fenegreake
meale and straine it, and lett it Coole. Proved./

To breake a Fellon./

Take Ribworte, honney and the youlke of an Egge & wheate flowre
and stampe your Ribbworte and wringe out the iuyce into e
rest and keepe it in a boxe or glasse till you have neede pved.

To breake a fellon in a night.

Take poulder made of Cantarides and temper it wth cleane
Sheepes Tallowe and make a plaister therof and laye it therto.

for a fellon.

Take of stone pitche beaten smale e quantitie of an egg, As much bores grease as
halfe an egg, as much Sheepes Suett fynelye tryed as an egg, of yeallowe waxe
the lieke quantitie, as much Turpentyne as a wallnutt, boyle them all to-
gither wth a soft fyer halfe an howre then strayne it into fayre water
& worke it into a Salve and keepe for yo vse. pved. But before you applie e
Salue take e quantitie of a hasill nutt of e best Turpentyne and laye it to the ioynt  & e Skin
of a  newe laid egg vppon yt & the Salve vppon them bothe.





To heale and drawe a Byle. /
Take ye Juyce of Growndsell, Raggworte & Pocheworte
and put therto honney, ye youlke of an Egge and Saffron and
laye all these to the Byle and it will heale and drawe.

For to Rypen Apostemes.
Take oyle an waxe and melt it then take Terpentyne and
Fenegreake meale and stirr them together and put to it
the waxe, and let them seethe a walme and let it
coole and laye it to the Aposteme cold, and you put a little
Galbanum strained to it, it is the better.

For a Byle./
Take ye white of an Egge, Turpentyne & Fenegreeke
meale, and temper it and laye to it. /

An other for the Same.
Take Fenegreake meale, Barlie Meale Turpentyne
Oyle of Roses, & honney, and make a plaster therof
if you have not the Galbanum Plaster./

For the Fyre of Hell.
Take iii quarts of the juyce of Ribbworte and a quarte of
Vinegre and a pynte of honney and seethe them
till halde be washed and put it in a stone pott, and when
you will use it, put a little in a Sawcer, And take a litle
flaxe & wett it therin and laye it on the Sore, and it will
kill the Fyer Probatum est./





For Breninge.
Take ye juyce of Mallowed, Planten & Howselicke and
seethe it wth oyle oliffe or Sywines grease.

For Breninge and Skaldinge.
Take howselicke, Planten, nightshade and Clott leafes
and frye them in freshe butter and Sheepes Suett, and straine
it thoroughe a Clothe and laye the oyle on the Sore And it will
heale it Proved
Alsoe yf you frye the herbes aforesaid with Mallowes till the
Oyle be greene and straine them, and put to the pyle a little
waxe and melt the oyle and waxe togither. It is very good/

The Makeinge of the Oyle of Egge for Breninge
or Skaldinge. Probatum:
First Roste xxtie or xxxtie Eggs till the youlkes be blewe, then
take the youlkes from ye whites and crome the youlkes into a
cleane fryeinge Pann, verye Small and sett it over the
fyre and tarme and tosse them till it come to Oyle The
Pann must be holden a slope wyse when the youlkes beginn
to tarne to an Oyle, Soe that all the youlkes will hange to
the Slyce and the Oyle will droppe and runn downe
lieke Byrdlyme, and then lett it stand in the fryeinge
pann till the Same of the heate be past. Then powre it into
a dishe and annoynte the Sore therwth. /

For Brenninge and Skaldinge.
Take of the Juyce of Planten ii Ounces, of nightshade
ii ounces, of Hempe seede beaten to poulder one ounce, of freshe
Swynes grease vi ounces, of the oyle of Egge if you can gett it ii s.
of unwrought waxe iii ounces of May butter an ounce, and of ye
Juyce of grownd Ivie, and of howselicke ii ounces, and boyle all these
togither & stirr it often for burninge, and seethe it till it be some=
thinge thicke, Then straine it and laye it uppon fyne Lynte

thinn P'ved.





thinn spread, and make it as broad as the Sore place, and
it will heale it. Alsoe take the inner pill of Elder
and frye it wth other thing written for burneinge and Skalding.

Alsoe take Planten, Night shade, Howselieke and Hollyhock
leafes and Seethe them with Swynes grease and Maij butter.

ffor a Skaldinge.

Take vnwrought Waxe, Maij Butter and ground Ive
leaves and boyle them togither and straine it, and it wilbe
lieke a Salve, and wth a feather laye it on the Sore place
And Seethe some Ivie leaves besides in water and Bores
grease or Maij butter and when the Sore is annoynted
laye the leaves vppon it, And put the oyle of Egg to
the Salve.

ffor a skaldinge.

Take Shomakers Shredes and seethe them in runninge water
tilll they be thick and tender and straine the ffatt once
or twise and make oyle of it, and laye a Cypresse
vpon the Sore, and laye the oyle vppon the Cypres
and soe laye it to the Sore.





48
A good Medycyne for a Sore Head or
for any Sore in any place

Take Oyle de Baye ij. ounces, the fatt of a Hogge half
an ounce of ffrankencense and Brimstone in Poulder
of eache a quarter of an ounce, Baye Salt brayed
a groate weighte. The iuyce of femetorye Sorrell
Planten of eache of them an ounce and mingle
them togither, put to it a little Waxe melted and
halfe a Spoonefull of vinegre and make a Plaster
therof and laye it to the place t is Sore.

ffor Breakinge out an Oyntment.

Take Sixe handfull of Sauge in Maij, and seethe
it in freshe Butter vnwashed, and when it is halfe
sodden awaye straine it and annoynte with it.

ffor a Sore Itchinge

Take Baye Salt and drye it in an Oven two or three
tymes, then beate it and temper it with a quantitie of
Hogg grease ans soe annoynte the itchinge place,
and it will Sore Itches.






ffor a Cancer./

Take A pynte of vinegre a penny worthe of Greene Coperas &
a penny worthe of Allome, and Seethe togither. and
when it is cold washe the Canker wth it, And put into the
powlder the Iuyce of Cinquefol; and a good quantitied of
howselieke leaves, else you must have burnt Allome
and put the powlder therof vppon the Sore, And it will
heale any Canker if it be well applyed Morninge and
Eveninge, Proved often.

ffor a Canker

Take halfe a pynte of white vinegre, and put it to a quarte
of honey after that the honey is softlye boyled and cleane
Skimed over a softe fyre. Then put therto halfe a hand-
full of the Croppes of Sauge, and as much burnt Allome
as a Wallnutt, and a Spoonefull of baye Salt. And lett
it boyle halfe awaye, and washe the Sore therwithe pved





49
It is alsoe expedient requisite & necessarie to Chirurgions that have cares
vnder their handes to have in tender consideration the extreame paine, smarte
and Agonie that their Patient doe susteine and Suffer in healinge their
Infirmities. In Consideration wherof it behoveth Chirurgion to make for them
Comfortable and holsome thing. As Restoratives Electuaries, Tysons
and good Syrropes to comforte them in tyme of their Agonie & payne, to
thintent they may be the sooner relieved, & restored agayne to their healthe
and for that cause I mynde to shewe you the makeinge of Conserve of Roses
and many other good Conserves &c.

Conserve of Roses is made in this wise viz.

ffirst gather e fayrest flowres of Roses that you can fynd, and take awaye all the white
from the leaves, Then take what weight you will of those flowres when they be
small brayed in a Morter, and put therto twise the weight of Sugar, and
braye them well togither. then put it in a glasse, and sett it in the Sonne by
the Space of fiveteene dayes, and every daye stirr it wth a wooden slyce
and at the xv.. dayes ende put therto the third parte of the weight of the flowres
of Roses and stirr them well togither. and put them in a Boxe well Searced
or in a glasse well closed. and soe keepe it for it will last iiij. yeares And
if yo Conserve be not strong ynoughe of e Roses in the first yeare, then
take the flowres as you did before and braye them in a Morter verye
cleane and wringe out the Iuyce in to a fayre vessell and mixe your
Conserve and e said Iuyce togither, and lett it stand in the Sonne in
a glasse vessell as longe as it did before tyme and stirr it liekewise
and then your Conserve will be the better and the stronger.

Conserve of Violett is made in this wise.

Gather the Violettes in the Monethe of Aprill and plucke awaye all the greene
Stalkes from the flowres and braye m in a fayre Morter, and put therto as much
Sugar in quantitie as you did to the Conserve of Roses, and sette it in the
Sonne xxx.tie dayes ore mre till they be perfectlie fyned. Then
put it in boxes as you did the Conserve of Roses and if it be not Stronge
ynoughe of the flowres, then you may strengthen it the next yeare lieke-
wise as ye did e Conserve of Roses.






Conserve of Rosemarye flowers thus made. Viz

Gather your flowres in the Monethe of Iune, pick them cleane and
take nothinge but the cleane flowres, Stampe them and take the weight
of them as you did before of e Roses and violett and put therto
lieke portion of Sugar and lett it stand in the Sonne as longe as
yo Conserve of Roses did till it be fyned, and keepe it as you did yo
other Conserves ffor this is Comfortive & Cordiall.

To make Conserve of Roses an other waye.

Take Roses before e Sonne Rysethe and for pncipall the budd of them
and clipt awaye all the white next the knobb, and stampe them
small the Smaller the better. then put powlder of Sugar to m
and after braye them till the Rosett hathe fully rubified the Sugar. Then take
all & put it in a Pann, and put therto a pound of Honney dispumat
and sofylie wth a lente fyre let the boyle till the honney be consumed
then take them of and putt them in a pott & you must stirr them till
they be colde. Some men vse not to boyle them, but reason will
the contrarie.

How to make Conserve of Damecynes

Gather yo Dameceynes in the latter ende of August for then they
be not fullye rype, then sett them on the fyre in a pann of water
till they boyle then put e water from them, and lett them Coole
And when they be neare cold straine them thoroughe a Cullender
and when they be soe strained put all that is soe strainedin an
earthen pann & sett it over e fyre and stirr it well, and if it
waxe over thicke put therto a little of the liquor it was sodden in
and boyle it softlie over an easie fyre, Skum it cleane and lett it
boyle till it waxe thick And then put as much Sugar as will Suffuce the quantitie
therof & stirr it well for burneinge till it be well standinge. Then take it
from the fyre, and stirr it till it be cold. Then put it in a Boxe that is well
seared or in a vessell of pewter or Glasse, or els yo labour is in vayne.
And this Conservative is verie holsome for them that have the Axes.
And if you have noe Sugar you may make it wth honney: then make it
as I said before, Save that the liquor that the honney is sodden in
must be often sett on e fyre and often taken from the fyre till it be thick
& cold; And this is the difference of makeinge Conserve of damesins
with honney & sugar. That wch is made wth Sugar is good for the Sicke
personnes, and t wth honney for them t are in healthe.





Conserve of Quinces is made in this wise. viz.

Gather yo Quinces when they be rype cleave them and pick out the Core
then pare them and put them in a Brasse pott full of water, and seethe
them therin till they be tender. Then straine them thoroughe a Cullender
and after thoroughe a strainer, then put it in an Earthen pann over
the fyre and stirr it a good while till it be neare standinge. Then put
in yo Sugar or yo honney and boyle it till it be standinge and then
it is comfortive to the bodye.

To Conserve Quinces in Syrrope allwayes reddye to be served
whole or in quarters./

After yo Quinces be pared and Cored, Seethe them till they be tender and
Softe, then laye them out till they be cold, in the meane tyme take of the
same liquor ij Quartes or more accordinge to the nomber of the Quinces
that you will keepe, and put therin the Cores and some other small quinces
cut in small pieces, Seethe them in the liquor to make the Syrrope
stronge. Straine them, and put into the liquor being two or three quart
one pynte of Rose water and for everie quarte of Liquor one halfe
pound of Sugar. Seethe them agayne over a softe fyre togither
of Coles, till the Sugar be insoporated wth the liquor, then put in yo
Quinces. Lett them Seethe softlye till you perceyve t yo liquor be as
thick as life honney, then sett them to Coole, and take them out. Laye
them in a Traye or Treene platter, till they be cold. then take j
one ounce of brused Cinna mome, and some whole Cloves put them
wth some of the quinces in the Syrrope, and when it is cold, laye a Larde
of quinces in your glasse called a Gestilon glasse, or an Earthen pott well
glased. Then strewe a little of yo Cynnamome vppon the Quinces
then powre some Syrrope, Laye on an other Lare of your Quinces and
agayne of yo Spice and Syrrope and soe forthe till you have done.
and Cover them over wth Syrrope about two fingers, Cover them close
and wthin two or three dayes looke to them and when you fynd your
Syrrope sunke put in more and soe reserve them. these are to be
Served into the table wth Syrrope.

To preserve Quinces Redd.

Take of e worst of yo Quinces and cutt them in peeces and put them into water
and boyle them till the water be of the color of a pale Clarret wyne,
then strayne it out. Then Core yo quinces and pare them, and put to
every pynt of that liquor a li. of Quinces and a li of Sugar, put m
all togither into the pann, and let them boyle open till they growe
tender, and the skum taken awaye, then Cover m and lett the whole
tyme of boyleynge them be three howers. keepe them wth turning
and boyle m as close covered as you can.





Pottage of Quinces is made in this wyse, viz
Take ye paringe & the Cores of Quinces, and Seethe them as
tender as you cann, Streyne them fayre wth all the liquor
that they be sodden in. Then putt all the matter into an
earthen pann & sett them over a softe fyre, and stirr them
well til they be thick. Then put therto a quantitie of Sugar
or Honney, and if you will have it thick shortlie then put in as
much grated bread, as is convenient, and when it is thick
put therto poulder of Ginger Cynnamone, Gallingall,
Cloves, Mace and Graynes and stirr them well togither
Then put it in a close vessell of Earthe or of woode, and it
will last halfe a yeare.

Chard of Quinces is made in this wise.
Take a quarte if Clarified honney two ounces of Pepper
small searsed mingle them well togither. Then take xxxtie
Quinces and x Wardens, pare them and seethe them in
good worte till they be tender, Then braye them in a morter
boyle them till they be well medled and thick, Then take it
from the fyre and stirr it well, and when it is neare cold put
therto poulder of Ginger, a quarter as much of Ballingale
as much of Cuvell well pouldred and mixe them well togither wth
a slyce, Then lett it Coole and put it in boxes. And yf you will make
Chard of Wardens then put xxxtie Wardens and x Quinces
and make it as before./

A good waye to make Conserve of Quinces, Pved.
Take your Quinces pare them Core them and then way them,
and take to everie pound and halde of Quinces a pound of
sugar. Then put your Quinces to the fire in what you will
boyle them in and put so much fayre water to them as
will halfe cover them, Cover them close and then lett
them boyle in that water till they be tender, then power
in your Sugar and never stirr your Quinces, let them
boyle close covered till they be of the color of good Clarret
wyne. Then keepe your fire quicke and stirr them contyn=
nullie till such tyme as they come to that height as they
come cleare from the skillett syde.





A Syrrope of all manner of informities in mans bodie.
Take Hope, Horehounde, Savorye, Loveache, and Emulacampane
Stampe them and straine them. Then take liquores well brused
Figge and Reysones well broken, and put it all to the liquorache
boyle them softlye over an easie fyre till it be well. Then Coole
it a little and straine it and keepe it in fayre vessells For
this is Syrrupus Compositus that will heale all manner of
informities that is in mannes bodie./

A Syrrope of five herbes viz
That is Femetorye, Scabius, Wylde Borrage, Sowethistell and Marye=
goulde gather thes herves in June, of eache of them in licke quantitie
but of Scabius and Wyld Borage, for they be drye therfore you must
take the more of them after the quantitie that you will make your
Syrrope. Then Stampe eache of these herbes by him self in a morter
and wringe out the Juyce into a fayre Bason. Then take
in lieke quantitie of eyther of them and put them togither
in an Earthen pann and make this Syrrope as the other
is made before, And this is good to eate everye morninge
for all evells and Corrupted Ayres.

To make green Ginger./
Take Racenes of Ginger as many as you will & pare them cleane &
laye them in fayre ale and water, and let them steepe in the same
water iii or iiii dayes & then take out the Racenes. Then boyle ye
water over ye fyre, put in all the Racenes, when the liquor is colde, &
let itstand ii or iii dayes, then take out the Racenes as you did before, and
boyle the same water agayne, and put your Racens agayne therin, and
soe use them till your Racens be softe and well Swolne. Then when ye
water is neare colde, take a pottle of the best wyne that you can have for
the better your wyne is the better your Syrrope will be, and put therto a quart
of Clarified honey, and sett it over a softe fyre and lett it boyle easely
Then put therto ii penny worthe of longe Pepper & a quantitie of
Cloves, Mace, Graynes, Canellorna made in poulder very fyne, and
let it boyle well togither till it be somethinge thick. Then take it
from ye fyre and let it stand till it be mylke warme. Then yf you like
you may put a quantitie of poulder of Ginger. Then take the Racens
and put them into the Receipts in a close vessell till you be disposed
to eate thereof./





Sirupe of Fumetorie how it is made
Gather your fumetorie in the Monethe of June, pick it cleane
and braye it in a fayer Morter, and wringe out the juyce into
a fayre vessell and stirr it well, then take the whites of iiii or v
newe layed eggs take out the Cockbreade and worke them in
a dishe till they be white, then put half the white to the juyce
of the herbes and stirr them well togither; and sett it on the
fyre till it begin to boyle. Then straine it thoroughe a fyne
strainer. Then put therto the other part of the white of ye
Egge, and as much honney or Sugar as will suffice the liquor
& sett it over the fyre, and stirr it but little, when it beginethe
to seethe take it from the fyre and straine it agayne, then sett it
over the fyre agayne and lett it seethe easelie, till it be the
thicknes of honey. But let it be well stirred that is burne
not to the bottome. And when it is cold put it in a cleane
Pott of gen or of Stone, and stopp it fast till you will use it.

Sirope of Roses.
Beate ye ;eaves of your Roses small and take the juyce from them.
Then take to two pound of the Juyce, one li of Sugar Clarified
and one li of Honey Clarified and sett them over a fyre and let
them seethe softlye, and then take them of.

Syrope of Violetts.
Take ye Juyce of violetts cleane strained, and put to it as
muche honey clarified medled wth as much Sugar clarified
as is of the juyce aforesaid, and let them seethe softlye over a
fyre till the Sugar doth predominate, then take it from the fyre
and put it up &c.

Sirope of Absinthium for the headache that
comethe of the fumes of the Stomake./
Take ye Juyce of Wormewoode cleane purged, and put therto
Honey and Sugar medled togither. Then sett them over
a fyre and boyle them softlye till the Sugar be principall
and in the seethinge put to it an ounce of Vinegre and
then sett it from ye fyre, and when it is cold put it in a
Stone Pott./





52
Syrrope of ffennell.

Take ffennell Rootes beate them small medle the Iuyce cleane strai-
ned wth Sugar & honey cleane clarified, and lett it seeethe softlie
over a fyre till the Sugar have the dominion. then put it vp. &c.

ffennell Rootes in Syrrope for the Collick.

Take ffennell Rootes cutt them in small longe peeces.
Then Seethe them in fayre water as you may Savinge them
whole. Then take a li. of cleane clarified Sugar and add therto
a quart of Clarified honey, and softlye let them seethe, that
your Sugar seethe not highe, Then put them in an Earthen pott
and eate them as you thonke good morneinge and eveninge.

Syrrope of fumetorie/

Take the Iuyce of fematorie cleane strained and take Sugar,
& Honey cleane Clarified, & put it to yo iuyce and seethe
them as is afore said, and when it is cold put it vp.

Syrrope of Vinegre.

Take Vinegre seethe it softlye, Skum it cleane, then take it
of and put therto two part of Sugar & honey as aforesaid
Seethe them in all degrees.

Raddishe Rootes in Syrrope.

Take Raddishe Rootes, seethe them in fayre water softe and ten-
der, then Seethe them wth iiij. ounces of Suger & one ounce
of Clarified honey. Skum it and put it vpp.

Oximell

Clarifie Honey fayre and Cleane and a li. of Honey must have
halfe a pounde of Sugar Clarified; Seethe yo Sugar wth yo
Honey & puer them till it be standinge most part of honey. and
then straine them and putt them vp.





Conserve of Quinces.

Pare your Quinces and Core them and Seethe them in white wyne softe
and tender, then put to them cleane Clarified Sugar, as much as
you thincke sufficient, then sett them over a fyre and lett them
boyle softlye till the wyne be cleane consumed, then let them
seethe easelie the Space of halfe a quarter of an howre.
Then take them of and sett them on a Barrell and wth
a round staffe stirr them softlye till they be neare cold.
the greate heate past, then put therto Cinomome, Ginger,
Gallingale, Graynes and longe Pepper by even portions
And stirr it till it be cold & then put it vpp to your vse./

Conserve of Wyldings

Take wylding and pare them and seethe them in fayre water
as tender as reason requirethe & as softe as may be.Then
straine them & cast awaye the Cores. Then meddle them
with Sugar & put to them a quantitie of honey & softly
lett them dissolve, then take them of and stirr them till
they be cold. It causethe an Appetite agaynst hott
feavors & hott Agues in the Stomake.

Conserve of Wardens.

Take Wardens pare and Core them & seethe them in white
Wyne as tender aa reason requirethe till the most part
of the wyne be consumed, then straine it & put it into
cleane Clarified honey or puer Clarified Sugar and lett
them boyle wth easie fyre. Then put to them round
Pepper, Cinomom, Cloves, Mace and Ginger in lieke quantity
and of Sanders in powlder as much as halfe the other
Spyces, And put strained Dates & Almond therto. Et factu est.

Conserve of Burrage flowers

Take Burrage flowers and beate them small & meddle them
wth Sugar & after wth honey as is aforesaid & soe boyle it as aforesaid.

Conserve of Buglas.

Take e flowres of Buglas beate them Small and temper them with Sugar
then take j.li of Honey dispumat & soe boyle them vp wth stirringe
after e takeinge from e fyre till it be cold. then put it vp. Et factu





53
To make Methaglin

Take Avence, Sauge, Isope, Saverie, Rosemarie, Thyme, Peneriall
Egremonie the Root & all of Englishe Madder, the Root and all
of Saxifrege of each of these one handfull, alsoe of Puliall, Mowntane
Lavender, Horsemynte, Callamynte, Bitteny, Waybread, Rootes & all
of wyld Sauge, Burrage, Baye leaves halfe a handfull of eache of
these, Alsoe of Tansey, Mouseare, daysie, Parsley Rootes, ffennell
Rootes, Hound tonge, Peleter, Verven, the Rootes of Elenacam-
pana, Origanu, Cammamell, mugworte wormewoode a quarter
of a handfull of eache of these. Gather all these herbes before
Mydsommer for then their vertue is moste in them. Pick them
& laye eache by him selfe; And this proportion of herbes will serve
for a Pipe of Metheglin. And when you have proportioned your
herbes washe them and brase them in a Morter. Then pportion
the water by the Gallon for soe much Methaglin as you will make
and sett it on the fyre in cleane vessell & herbes therwth and boyle
them well togither. Then with a Rake gather out the herbes from the liquor
and wthdrawe the fyre. Then take the herbes and put them in a cleane
vessell and put therto a payledull or two of hott water, and lett it stand
till you can indure to straine that liquor int a pann or lede thoroughe
a Sive of Heare. Then put to everie fowre Gallons of liquor a Gallon of
Honey or more if neede be, and stirr it well togither a longe tyme.
And if you will prove whether it be stronge ynoughe or noe: Take an
Egg and put therin, and if you may see it the breadth of a Peny
aboue the liquor then is it stronge inoughe of the honey. Then
make fyre vnder the liquor & cover it close and when it beginethe to
Seethe Skum it cleane & then drawe the fyre. and when it is a little
rested put in a cleane Mashinge Tubb. And lett it stand therin a daye
and a night till it be perfectlie colde. Then ther will rise a frothe
thervppon. wch Skum awaye cleane and lette it stand an other daye and night
and Skum it cleane agayne. Then put therto a paylefull of good newe
barme, and stirr it not but lett it stand a nother daye and a night,
and Skum it the third tyme, And let it stand an other daye and night & skum
it noe more. Then clense it as you doe good Ale. and tunn it vpp in
vessell fast Stopped wth fayre Claye, that noe ayre can come out ther-
of. And if it be thus made it is as good as wyne.





To make a Tisan to cleare the Pypes./

Take a Pynte of Cleane Barley, and eyght Pynt of good
stale Ale or runninge water, then boyle then a while togither
and put therto a quantitie of brused Liquoris and a quantitie
of Annise seedes boyle them a while togither, then take Roote
of Helenacampana cleane washed & mynced, and a handfull
of Organum & a handfull of Soape & put in the said liquor
& boyle them till the liquor be halfe wasted, and then straine
it, and drinke it cold: Probatum.

A Confortative is made in this wise.

Take a pound of Dates, pick out the Stones and the
filme & stampe them in a Morter. Then take a quantitie
of honey and melt it wth the dates, & with these Spices follow-
inge. Viz. Take Gallingal, Nuttmegg, Cloves, longe
Pepper, Maces of eache of them halfe anounce, and a qrte
of Suger. beate yo Spices to fyne poulder. Then meddle
all these matters togither, and boyle it on a Softe fyre till
it be thick. Then take it from the fyre and put therto an
ounce of Ginger & stirr it altogither till it be cold. Then
put it in Boxes or Glasses & vse to eate therof everye
morneinge & Eveninge: for it will restore man or
woman that are in feoblenes & weake of nature.

To preserve Apricott wthout water

Take your Apricott and pare them verie thin and put
them into some Deepe vessell that they may be reserved
and beate yo sugar verie fyne and put to everie pound
of Apricott a li of sugar. Then put your sugar vppo
yo Apricott and lett them stand till the sugar be melted
wth the iuyce of the Apricott. Then put them to the fyre
till they be boyled enough. Any kind of white
frute may be preserved after this manner, but in any
wise they must be boyled wth a soft fyre.





54
ffor the greate and necessarie vse that ther is of Sugar and of
Honey in Conserves Syrropes and many other thing for
healthe good and comfort of man and that beinge clarified
and purefied thay are farr better vse & more wholsome
for mans bodye. It is a pryncypall thinge to know how
to Clarifie them.

Sugar is thus Clarified

One Pound of Sugar must have fowre ounces of water, and when
they be dissolved, put two whites of Egg and wth a Short Stumped
brushe Swing the water. Then take the fome of the whites of the
Egg from the Sugar disolved over the fyre and lett it not seethe
but straine it and keepe it till you occupie it as you have neede.
Everye li of Sugar must have an ounce of honey to Conserves.
To Syrropes take of eyther lieke quantitie.

The opinion of many men is. That Conserves are made but pperlie of
Iuyce of leaves, seeinge that Syrrope should be added therto for
liquid. But your leaves to be beatensmall and medled wth Sugar
mixed wth honey. Neverthelesse it is to be considered that rawe Sugar
is flegmatique vnlesse it be clarified. As it appearethe by Sugar
Candye how it is altered by Clarifieinge. Therefore the purer
yo Conserves are made, the greater creditt it wilbe to the maker
& soonest healthe vnto the patiente.

But put noe Honey to Conserves vnlesse it be a Small quantitie
To a li. of Sugar an ounce of Clarified honey. But vnto
Syrropes put as much honey as Sugar as hath bene said, and soe
decoct everie conserve.

Honey is Clarified in this manner. Viz

If you will Clarifie a quarte of honey put therto halfe a Gill of
cleare water and seethe it over an easie fyre till the water be welled
agayne, and Skum it clean and then it may be put in potions
or other medycynes or Conserves wthout perill. or els not./

To Clarifie Honey with Sengrene.

Put yo Honey in a Pann & sett it over a softe fyre, and when it beginethe yo
boyle put thertp the Iuyce of Sengreene & lett them boyle togither and Skum
them cleane, and lett it boyle till it be as thick as it was in the beginninge
and if you have iiij. Gallons of honey put therto a pottle of the iuyce of
Sengreene, And soe you may make yo pportion after that rate.







How to make greene dryed Apples./

Take yo Apple while it is smale and greene about
the biggnes of a walnut, then skald them wth a
leysurelie fyre till the peele may be taken of
Then peele them and put them into the same
water agayne and let them stand vppon Embers
till they become greene. Then take them from
the Core saveinge the stalke and the Core whole
togither, Then take the pulpe and put it into a Dishe vppon a Chaffinge Dishe of ^Coles and drye it
ther the space of halfe an howre. You must take
a lieke quantetie in wayte of sugar and yo stuffe,
your sugar beinge made very fyne, boyle them togither
one howre wth contynuall stirringe. Then laye
your Coffins made fitt for the Core of the Apple, and
when yo stuffe is readie, fashon yo aplle to yo
owne liekeinge with the Core and the stalke put
in the Coffin made of a Card. To make it the
best waye put in Amber Greece. and drye them
vppon a plate.





55
Medicines for the head Ache.

Agaynst the payne pf the head cominge of an Ague: Take a handfull of sage
& choppe it smale wth salt, and put therto two or three spoonefull of vinegre, & set it
on the fyre, puttinge therto a few crummes of wheate breade and put it in a lyne
Clothe as hott as may be suffered, fro one eare to the other, and vse it for it is a good med^ycyne

A nother for the same.

Take Bittony, Alehoofe & Cammomell ana.Springle those over with a little vinegre
and warme them over a chafeinge dishe of coles, and them hott to the hinder part of yo
head, and behinde bothe your eares.

an other.

Take Hemlock and seethe them till they be soft as papp, then laye them to yo heade
wher the payne is, and let it lye all night, and in the morninge laye on an other
hott playster of the same, and soe doe two or three tymes, and yow shalbe sound.

an other

Heate Charvell and Rosmarye betweene two tyles, and laye them to the hinder pte
of the head betweene the Crowne and the Nape hott.

ffor the Head Ache.

Take Redd Rose leaves or oyle of Roses, Rosemary, Margerum,
Camamell, Bitteny and Lavender and stoppe the eares wth it.
And if you will purge the head put Pelletorie of Spayne vnto it
And this will helpe him. Alsoe still the herbes and laye the
water to the forehead and to the pulses, or seethe the herbes in
runninge water, and straine the water and laye it as aforesaid.

To Clense the head and to put awaye the filthe and
to fasten the teethe that be loosened.

Take the Roote of Pelletorie Spayne and chewe theron often
tymes iij. dayes and it will clense the head and doe awaye ake-
inge, and fasten the teethe that be loose./

ffor an Akeing head.

Take a Rose Cake and laye vppon a lynnen Clothe, and put
powlder of Nuttmegg vnto it and a little rose water
and soe laye it to the head and it will give ease.

ffor to take awaye the payne in the head or for deafnes

Take Margerum and bruse it, and stopp the eares wth it and
it will take awaye the payne.

ffor the Head Ache./

Take Cammamell flowres & Rosemarie flowres & Lavender
of eache a quarter of a handfull, and beate them in grosse
poulder, put Cummin in poulder an ounce & Margerum in poulder
and put all this poulder togither in a bagg of Cotten or
Sarsenett, and make the bagg as bigg as the Palme of yo
hand. And make two bagg and laye one to the Crowne
of the head at night & the other in the morneinge and
when you take awaye the one, warme the other & laye it to
the same place.






ffor e Head Ache.

The Seed of Ivie medled wth Vinegre & oyle of Roses
helpethe the headache of ot be annoynted therwth.

ffor the Megrom in the head.

Take iij.d weight of the Roote of Pelletorie one Penny
weight of Spikenard and grynd them small togither
& boyle them in good Vinegre. Then take a Sawserfull
of Honey three Sawsers full of Mustard, and when
the liquor is boyled doe the Mustard and honey togither
& medle them altogither; And of that let the Patient
vse halfe a Spoonfull at a tyme, and hold it in his
mouthe as longe as a man may saye two Creedes,
then Spett it out into a vessell and after take more
& doe soe tenn or twelue tymes, and wthin a little
while after thou shalt eate. And then afterward a
little before Eveninge vse this x. or xij. tymes, and
alwayes spett it out, And when thou goest to bedd washe
cleane the mouthe & drinke a draught, and vse this
iij. dayes and you shall see much glutt & fylthe come fro you.

An other for the Megrom in the head.

Take an ounce of Gallingale, an ounce of Ginger,
halfe an ounce of Nutmeg a quarter of an ounce
of Cloves, a penny weight of Camamell flowres
dryed, of Spiknell a penny weighte, of Anniseedes
a quarter of an ounce, of Helenacampana halfe
an ounce, of Licorishe, & Sugar of eache an ounce, And
temper all these togither in fyne poulder and lett the
Sicke vse this powder. One Spoonfull at once, and it will
helpe by God helpe.

ffor the Megrom or for the Ague.

Take Stonecrope a handfull of newe made Mustarde a
farthing worthe, and of Ale a pynte, and stampe the herbe
and put the iuyce into Ale and Mustard, and straine
it & drinke it leuke warme; And if you take it to purge
the head, put the iuyce of Pelletorie into it. And this will
take the filthe out of the head. Proved.





56
ffor the greatest and oldest payne of the head./

Take the Iuyce of ground Ivie put it in a Spoone and snuf
it vpp into the nose. I purifiethe the head Mervelouslie
and takethe awaye the payne. Very well proved.

Alsoe the Iuyce of Ivie put into the Nose helpethe the
Polupe in the Same.

ffor Impostemes in the head, or for Singinge in the head,
or for any deane in the head or deafenes.

Take ivie that frowethe in the Ashe tree, and pare of the
outermost of the Mosse, and the outermost barke and take e
myddle barke wth the stick and cleave the stickes and soe still
them take of the same water, and put a little in the Eare
on that side that is greived, and stopp the eare wth black
wooll, and lye with the Sore Side vpper ward. pbatum.

ffor one that hath bene deafe a longe tyme.

Stampe Antes Egg and put therto the Iuyce of Swynes
Cresses or Knott grasse, And take two or three dropps at
a tyme in to yo eare when you goe to bedd stopping e
eare with black wooll/

An other for deafnes.

Take the Iuyce of an Oyster that wch runnethe
forth when you open it. And put a good quantitie
therof wth a Spoone in the Eare when you goe ot bedd
and stopp yo eare wth black wooll, and it will cure the
deafnes. Proved in old men that have bene a verye
longe tyme deafe./






ffor the Pynne & the Webb & to cleare the sight./

Take Redd Rose leaves, wyld Thyme, Redd ffennell, Selendyne and
Rewe or Verven, and seethe these herbes in runninge water,
very well an straine the water & not the herbes. Some take
but Rose leaves, Rosemarye, Thyme & Isope, and seethe them &
straine the water, And put a little Allom to it. And these
two Medydynes have bene proved diverse tymes and dothe
alwayes helpe, And put a droppe in the Eye at a tyme,
If these herbes be sodden in white wyne it is pure good./

ffor the Pinn and the webb in the Eye.

Take three leaved grasse that hathe a shaddowe of white in it and
take the iuyce of it and droppe it in the Sore Eye, and it will
kill the pinn & the webb./

Agaynst the payne in the Eyes or the Webb./

Take Howseloeke, Violetts, Selendyne e white of an Egg
ffennell, Rosemarye, and the water of honey, and take for
Rosemarye Strawberrye if you will, All these waters be good.

ffor the Pynn and the webb in the Eye.

Take Daysie leaves and Rootes iij. handfull washe them
cleane and stampe them, then straine them and take the whites
of two Egg and beate them and put the Cleare of them into
the Iuyce of the daysies, and halfe a Spoonefull of honey & a
little Coperas white, and temper all these togither, And soe
droppe the iuyce of all into the Eye Eveninge and morninge
as the patient lyethe in his bedd, and it will helpe the pinn and
the webb. But he must forbeare Egg oynions, Mustard & all
stronge drinkes and Wynes, and keepe out of the wynd, and
vse this till it be whole.

To breake the Pearles beinge over growne on the Eye.

Take Rose water & put therto a little white Coperes. Then
take daysies that have a white flowre, wth a redd Ringe
about the edges, the leaves and the flowres, and of it be
in winter take the Rootes and put the iuyce therof to the
water, and it will break the Pearle beinge droppped in e Eye.

ffor Sore Eyes.

Take Howslieke t is white and still it, and take Seaven Spoonefull
of this water and drinke it fastinge, and vse this./





57
ffor Runninge Eyes./

Take black Snayles and seethe them in runninge water, and take the
grease that is on the water, and annoynte the Eyes. or still them./

ffor Wateringe Eyes./

Take a Redd Cole and annoynte it wth the white of an Egg,
and laye it to the wateringe Eyes when you goe to bed./

ffor to Clarifie the Eyes and for dymnes of them./

Take Rewe Howselieke and Selendyne and Stampe them wth
a little honey & put it in a lynnen Clothe, then put it between
two basons close and still it over a pott seetheinge over a fyre,
and take the water and put a droppe in the Eye at a tyme.

ffor dymnes of the Eyes./

Take Rewe and Red fennell and stamoe them togither and strai
it, and lett a litttle therof fall vppon the ball of the Eye, And
doubles it is a pretious water for the Eyes and diverse tymes
pved./

ffor the Sight of the Eye doctr Hawswell

Take womans mylke and Rose water, pf each of them a Sawser
full and put to it the whites of two Egg beaten soe that the
Skum arise then take linnet or fyne flax and wett it in these
three aforesaid thing beinge temperes togither and soe wett
laye it to the Eyes nightlye, And it will helpe it whether it
be a blood or other wise hurt. Probatum./

A pretious water for the sight of the Eye.

Take Howselieke, Redd fennell, Rewe, Bittenye, Egremonye
Pimpernell and Sellendyne of eache a lieke quantitie,
and washe them cleane, and stampe them and seethe them
in a quart of white wyne, till the liquor be almost sodden
awaye, then straine it and putto it three spoonefull of honey
and seethe the liquor & it fayre and Softlye & clarified
straine them agayne and put it into the Eye, a dropp at a
tyme, and soe doe often but lett it be cold when you vse it.

Oyle of Rosemarye flowres stilled in the Sonne
or in Sand comfortethe Synnewes, wasteth the webb,
and all other payne in the Eyes, alsoe Spott &
Pimples in the face.

Take Rosemarye flowres, and fill a glasse full, stop it close wth a lynnen
Clothe wth mastick and burye it in Sand a monethe or more till
the flowres be consumed to water, and straine it and purifie it
in the Sand./





To Clense the face or any other place.
Put dragagant a Night in Rose water, and in the
morninge, put therto Boras and a little Campher
and Annoynt the face therwith.

A Medycyne for Rednesse and Pimples on ye face.
Take a Spoonfull of the juyce of Sorrell, the white
of one Egg beaten into an Oyle, Two Spoonefulls
of Sallett oyle, halfe a Spoonefull of Vinegre, halfe
a Spoonefull of Rosewater. Beate all these well
togither and soe use therof with a fether./

For bleedinge at the Nose./
Take ye poulder of Mumme & put into the Nose, or make a plaster
of the poulder and the Glace of an Egge and laye it to the browes.

To stint bleedinge at the Nose.
Take a little redd Sage and burne it uppon a Cole that it may
smoke, and then rubb out the fyre and put it to your nose, and lett
it not longe carrye ther but take it out a while and put it
in agayne, and doe soe twise or thrice and it will stoppe
the bleedinge. Alsoe the bone of a Carpes head beaten to
poulder and given the bleeder to drinke is verie good./

For bleedinge at the Nose or any other place or wound,
or for Spottinge of blood.
Take Planten leaves small and greate, howselicke leaves & Bitteny
leaves and stampe them in a morter wh baye Salt and laye it
to the nose And if it be for a Sore take noe salt. And this hath
bene often tymes proved.





for the Same
For Spotting of blood.
Alsoe take Mynte, Rewe, and Bitteny and seethe them well in good
Mylke and give it to drinke it at morneing & at night.
Mallowe leaves woodbyne leaves & Adders tonge leave are specyall
good for the same. But Woodbyne leaves to clensethe gore blood.

A poulder to stoppe blood.
Take Sanguis dracoms Gumm of Arabie, Bolus Armamack and
make them in poulder. Alsoe the hott donge of a hogg is good alone by it self.

For Spottinge of blood.
Take ye fayre of Bitteny and temper it wth Gotes milke, And lett
the patient drinck therof two dayes./

A medycyne for the Toothe Ache./
Let ye ptie grieved bynd his head verye hard about wth a cloathe and soe laye himselfe
downe uppon his bedd uppon the same side that his teethe doe ake on
Then take a little Angelica, Fetherfewe Cressis seede, and some little
quantitie of the oyle of bitter Almondes pounded togither in a morter,
and afterwardes betweene your fingers force some three drops of the juyce therof
into the eare that lyes uppwardes of the ptie grieved, and soe let him dispose
himselfe to sleepe.
for ye Toothe
Ache.

For the Toothe Ache.
Take an ounce of the Roote of Pelletorie of Spayne in poulder, and a peny
worth of Ginger and as much Pepper beaten to poulder and
finelye sersed, And put all the poulders togither, and temper
them well togither, Then put a little of this poulder over the
Toothe and it will take awaye the payne, and make the mouthe to
water, and Spett out the water as it comethe. But looke you
take of the poulder of the Pepper and Ginger xxtie penny weight
for ye poulder of the pelletorie.

An other for the Toothe Ache.
Take ye second barke of white Hassell, a quantitie of Pepper
& Baye Salte and beate them altogither and then make of ym
small Balls of the bignes of peasen, and then put them
in Lynnen or Cypresse and knitt it fast wth thrid. Then take
Vinegre in a Swacer, and boyle the balls in it uppon a Chafinge
dishe of Coles. Then take eache of the balls one after another
and laye them hott to the sore toothe or in it, And it will helpe
it pved./
If the Toothe be hollowe take Henbane and beate it to poulder
and melt it wth waxe, and make a little pellet & put it into the
hollow toothe.





For the Ache in the Toothe or for
Swellinge in the Cheeke./
Take Freshe Butter and melt it wth a little Waxe and
Frankencense and put to it a little Pepper wth three dropps
of Aquavitae and melt them altogither, and if the toothe be
hollow stopp it wth this, and annoynte the gummes and
Cheeke wth it. And keepe out of the wynd three dayes./

26250

For the Mouthe that is full of Bladders
or in greate heate.
Take Honey and Wyne Vinegre of eache a Pynte, and sett
it over the fyre and Skum it as it rysethe, and put unto it
a Spoonefull of burnt Allom in poulder, and half a Spoonfull of
baye Salt, And lett them boyle altogither halfe an howre
and put it in a glasse and annoynte the sore place. pved.

An other for the Same./
Take Sauge, Cinquefol and Woodbyne leaves of eache a handfulland seethe them in a quarte of Runninge water till they be softe,
Then put in a peece of Allom as bigg as a wallnutt and iii
Spoonefull of Hunney, And straine it thoroughe a Clothe when
it is well sodden, And then washe the same mouthe therwith
softlye; And keepe a Spoonefull in your mouthe a greate
while, Then Spett it out and take an other. And use this
And put a spoonefull of Honey unto it. Proved./





A Soveraigne & approved remedie for the
Squmantia or Sore throate./
Take Sauge, Cammamell, Woodbynes and Cullombynes
of eache a handfull, Angellica, Dragones, Planten
Mouseare, Bayes the five leaved grasse, Rosemarie and
Violette of eache a quarte of a handfull, Three Jewes
Eares Boyle all these a Sufficient quantitie of run=
ninge water one howre, Straine it and put therto of
Roche Allom two ounces and of honey one Spoonefull,
Then let them boyle one quarter of an howre more. Take
of this water and all to washe and gargill the mouthe
and throate therwithe, and when it is well clensed let the
patient Swallowe downe some of the water at every dressing
And use it thus five or Sixe tymes in a daye till you be well.

An Oyntement good for the Same.
Take Sauge Woodbynes, Callumbynes, Cummamell Ange
lica, Dragones Planten, Mouseare & Rosemarie of eache
halfe a handfull, Poplar leaves, heaven Ladder Larks
Tonge, Orches that is the Cocke wth Spotts in the leaves
Serpents Tonge, Lovage, Smallage, Bonesett, Growndsell
dill, wormewoode and fetherfewe of eache on handfull
Boyle all these in the pound of May butter clarified three
quarters of an howre. Straine it and wth two ounces of waxe
make therwth an Oyntment. With this annoynte the place
outwardlye. And make a plaster soe broad as will cover
the griefe all over. Use it morninge and Evenine till
you Syne remedye. Proved by one Person an hundred
tymes and more when the Phisition could doe noe good
euther by blood lettinge or otherwise./





A Medycyne for ye Swelling in the
Throate, and for the Stomake.
Take Malmsey halfe a pynte & as much freshe
butter as an Egge and Clarifie bothe togither. Then
take Nutmege and a little Englishe Saffron and
make them to poulder & put bothe these poulders to=
gither to the Malmsey & butter, and boyle all these
togither a little, and put a little Treacle therto, and
give it the sicke to drinke as warme as he can
drinke it & as often as he will. And lett him be layd
in his bedd, and cover him wth many Clothes that he
may Sweate and after this sweate let him be keept
close in his chamber three dayes that he take not
the ayre. And this will helpe him wth Gods helpe./

To make one have a Stomake to eate./
Take ye water of Sentorie and make Conserve of
Burberies with it or els take Conserve of Barberies
and put water of Sentory unto it, and lett it stand
iii dayes in the Conserve And then eate of it
fastinge Conserve of Wyldinge is good for
the same.

For ye Glutt in the Stomake.
Take Sentorye and seethe it in good stale Ale &
when it is sodden, and when it is sodden stampe
it in a Morter and seethe it agayne wth the same liquade
Then straine it, and unto two Spoonefulls of the Juyce
put iii Spoonefulls of Clarified honey. And propor=
tion your juyce and honey after this manner, And
then boyle it well togither agayne, and take therof a
little in the morneinge. /





60
ffor ryseinge vnder the Stomake./

Take Pepper, longe Pepper, Graynes, Saffron, Ginger
Anise seedes lycorise & Sugar, and seethe them all in
good stronge Ale, till it be thick. and Skum it often.
And give it the Sicke to drincke. Et Sanabitur

To destroye the heate in the Stomake/

Take good Ale and put therin Shivers of of browne
breade and lett them lye therin an howre. and boyle
it well and skim it. And drinke therof two or three
dayes and it will helpe.

ffor all evilles in the Stomake./

Take Ashe seedes, lynse seed & Cummin seedes of eyther
in lieke quantitie And give it to drincke wth hott worte
or Ale.

To avoyde fullnes of Stomake.

Take Burrage, Marygold langue de beofe of each a hand-
full, Wormewoode Cinquefol, Liver worte Sentorye, Hart
Tonge, the Rynd of fennell Rootes, & the rynde of Parsley
rootes of eache of these halfe a handfull, and seethe all this
in fayre water till halfe be sodden awaye and then put as
much Sugar as will make it pleasant to drincke. And
soe drincke therof everie daye after dinner & Supper
three or fowre Spoonefulles at a tyme.

To make a Plaster for the Stomake.

Take yarrowe Redd fennell Redd mynce Burrage, Rewe
and fether fewe, Clote leaves Peretorie Egremony of every
one in lieke quantitie, and put therto the grease of a Barrowe
hogg and for a woman the grease of a yolke hogg. And
seethe them altogither in good Ale and make a plaster
therof and laye it to the Stomake, as hott as may be suffered
three tymes.





ffor the Stomake in greate heate and
for the Ague and Pestilence

Take Violett leaves or the flowres, Endiffe, Borage Straw-
berrye leaves, Tormentill and Scabious Stampe of eache of
these herbes a handfull and straine it, Then take the Iuyce and
a pynte of white wyne & mylke and make therof a Possett and
wth a little Sugar give it the patient to drinke warme, but
none of the Curde. Lett him drinke a little and often. And if
you seethe the herbes in the possett Ale, it is the best waye, after
the Curde is taken awaye.

ffor him that Can not keepe his meate.

Take Endiffe water and Mynt, and seethe the Mynt till the Iuyce
be in the water, and straine it, and seethe it wth Sugar, and
then give it the Patiente

ffor the Liver, and to destroye wicked
humors in the Stomake.

Take Scabious seethe it in wyne & drinke it, and it is good for
the Liver & to destroye evill humors in the Stomake.
And drinke it fastinge and you shall never gave Imposteme
breedinge vppon you. And ther is noe man lieveinge t
knowethe all the vertues of Scabious:
It purgethee the brest. It puttethe awaye old Agues and ever
keepeth a man in lustie liekeinge

Sentorye is hott and moyste in iij. degrees. It is good for Synnews
It is good for the Stomake makeinge an Electuarie therof
wth Clarified Sugar & Relented well thicked, and eateth therof
and it will make one have a good appetite to his meate
Alsoe it is good for the dropsey and many other Sicknesses,
And it hathe more then an hundred vertues.

ffor the Liver groweinge to the side.

Take wormewoode, Cammamell, Hayhove, Persley, fennell
Anis, Comen, and the bark of an Ashe. and boyle, all these
togither in two pottes of water and wyne and drinke therof.



Take a good quantitie of liver worte and brase it a little and then
seethe it wth good stronge Ale, with a quantitie of Rubarbe and
drinke e quantitie of a Spoonefull everie morneinge.





61
Paine in the
Side ffor the payne wthin the right side wthin the Bodye/

Take water of Endiffe and liverworte and make brothe
and drinke it.

ffor Shortnes of wynd and brest

Make poulder of Anise seedes Cynomon and Ginger and
Elenacampana Rootes, and put to them as much Sugar, and vuse it.

ffor the ryseinge of the hart and
streightnes of the Brest./

Take the Iuyce of Redd Cole and lett it boyle well in Wellwater
and put awaye the fome and Skum it cleare, and when it is
well sodden put in a penny worthr of Saffron, Then take of
Honey and Sugar one li. and soe make an Electuarie and
vse therof Morneinge and Eveninge nyne dayes and you
shalbe whole Deo volenter/

Or els this

Take horhound, Isope, Marche ffennell Rewe, Sunsleke, Puliall
Clary and Nepp by even ptions, and put therto the powder
of Pepper & Honey & seethe all these in possett Ale or
well Water, and drinke a quantitie therof Eveninge &
Morninge. And this helpeth The brest, the Sydes, and the
Melt and is good for the Coughe.

A remedie for the Coughe, Tissick and fleame

Take Lycorishe x. penny weight Isopedryed viij. penny
weight, Anise seed vjd waight, Rootes of Elenacampana dryed
a C. penny weight, Sugar Candie xijd weight; Make all these
in powlder and take therof everie morneinge and to bedward
iijd. weight, If you take small Raysons and bruse them small
and put them in the water and lett it stand still awhile; and vse
therof as you have neede, And drinke that powlder wth that
water it is verie good.

ffor the Coughe and him t takethe Cold.

Make a tost of bread and laye the best Treacle of Ieane you can gett
on bothe sides of the tost, wth a little aqua vitae vppon it and when you
goe to bedd eate it, & drinke not after it that night, and eate an
other in the morneinge and fast two howres after





A Good Medicyne to avoyde fleame

Take parsley Root and fennell Rootes, Isope and Bittenie
and seethe them in good Ale wth Liquorishe and a quantitie
of Clarified honey and vse to drinke it and you shalbe
well God willinge.

An other good Medicyne for fleame.

Take a Pynte of Endiffe water & a halfepenny worth
of Gentium, and of Ginger as muche, and shredd
them small & put them into the water, and lett it
stand still awhile and vse therof as you have neede,
drinke it and it will purge you cleane.

ffor the Stiche

Take dryed Acornes or Coles of an Ashe Tree and drinke
the powlder fastinge in the morneinge a Spoonefull at
a draught. Or els take the Budd of an Ashe Tree, the
blacke beinge taken awaye, & take but the greene of
the Budd when they be tender, and make poulder
of them and put a Spoonefulll of powder to three
Spoonefull of drinke and drinke it warme. This
Medycyne never faylethe.

ffor him that hath greate Thirst.

Take the Root of Lovage and Stampe it and temper it
with water and give the Sick to drinke three night

ffor the drye Horsenes

Take a jli of figg dates a li of Reysonnes of the Sonne,
and an ounce of Licorishe. Alsoe take Red fennell root
and rootes of Parsley and Seethe all these togither in
a gallon of runninge water to a quart drinke it

A good poulder for Moystnes & for
the wynd Collick

Take Cumin, Graynes, Lycoris stickes and Sugar Candie and
in any wise soe that they be all verye pure & good & cleane.
Then beate them in a Morter of Brasse. put therto fennell
Seede, and beate them well togither agayne, and then searse
it throughe a fyne Searse; and eate of it. And it will keepe you moiste
& from the wind Collick.





62
ffor the Spleane if it be diseased

Take Heart Tonge Camamell two lyllye Root, Malllowes
flowres of Broome, braye them small & frye them wth
butter and laye therof a plaster to the side greeved.

To make one Vomitt.

Take the inward pill of Elder that lookethe greene and Stampe it
in a Morter. Then take the iuyce therof wth Treacle and warme
it till the Treacle be melted And drincke it warme and it will
cause you to vomit.

ffor the measelles or yellow Iuandies or
any other disease wthin the bodie.

Take a pynte of Malmesey and make a possett of it. then take
sixe Spoonefull of the possett Ale, as much of water Imperial
and a Spoonefull of Treacle of Ieane, and lett the patient drinke
it as warme as he may suffer it. and soe keepe him fastinge three
howres after. And this will bringe out the disease. But looke
you keepe him warme after the disease dothe appeare.

ffor the Yellowe Iaundies.

Still Selendyne & Yarrowe and drinke therof in the morninge &
in the Eveninge iij. or iiij. dayes, And it will soone waste awaye

An other for the Same. pved.

Take Ceuell Soape and scrape it and drincke it and it will helpe

An other for the Same

Take Endiffe dryed and thinner barke of a Barbarie Tree
beaten in a Morter, and a little Ivory Scraped. And make
powlder of all these and drinke therof Eveninge & Morninge.

An other for the Same: Probatum.

Take the greene Tares or the wylde Tare that groweth in some
hedges and Stampe it & straine out the iuyce and drinke therof
wth white wyne and a little Turmerick ij. or iij. morning
fastinge & it will helpe.





ffor the Blacke Iaundies

Take longe wormes & slitt them, and skowre them wth Salte
as you doe gutt then washe them verye cleane and Stampe
them and Straine them with Clarett wyne. And soe drinke them
in the morneinge fastinge.

An other for the Same. pved diverse tymes.

Tale Licorishe stickes one penny worthe and iij. ffennell Root
alsoe take vj. ffigg and two handfull of Endyffe and stampe
them in severall. Then lett them all be sodden in a quarte
of Ale vnto a pynte. And vse to drinke it blood warme.





63
A verie good Medycine for the Ague.

Take a halfe penny worthe of Aqua vitae a halfe penny worthe of
Runney a halfe penny worth of Treacle of Ieane, and a halfe penny
worthe of Graines. pound small yo graynes and put them
togither with the foresaid thing. and heate it as hott as you can
suffer to drinke it And lye downe vppon a bedd and be
warme covered, till you have surelie Sweatt. And vse this twise
or thrise. Et Sanabitur Probatum.

ffor the Same.

Take Croppes of Nettles, the Burr Roote and dandelion of eyther
of them a handfull. Bruse them and drinke them in three
pyntes of possett Ale sodden to the halfe.

ffor the Ague a principall Medycyne.

Take Sage, Baye leaves and Cammamell of eache two hand-
full and Stampe them straine them and take the iuyce and put
to it the third part of a Spoonefull of pepper, and put it all
in a little drincke And lett the Sicke drincke it when the fitt
comethe vppon him, and lett it abstaine three howres after.
Water of Cammamell is for the Shakeinge. drincke it. pved

ffor the Ague pved. hath holpen many

Take e youngeest of Baye leaves three handfull & of Sorrell half a handfull,
of Bitteny two handfull, of Sauge one handfull: And beate them in a
morter, and take the Iuyce and put to it e poulder of Pepper halfe a
Spoonefull. And stirr them together wth a Spoone a good while. And
before the fitt comethe give it to the Patient fastinge. and lett him
keepe him selfe fastinge iiij. howres after. And lett him take
this Medecyne wth a little stronge Ale luke warme

for an Ague
that comethe
of cold.   An other for the Ague that hath bene diverse tyme Proved

Take Baye leaves iiij. handfull of Ribworte, Sauge & Langedeboefe of eache
two handfulles of Planten & Strawberrie leaves of eache one handfull, and
beate all these in a Morter. then take the iuyce & put therto a little poulder
of Pepper, and a little Ale or Beare as the patient best liekethe, and
drinke therof as soone as the cold comethe. & let it be well stirred & make it
luke warme. And lett him keepe him selfe warme and fastinge iiij howres
after. nor he must not drinke iiij. howres after. This hath holpen many.





For a fevor./

Take Sauge, Baye leaves or a little Stonecroppe or Bitteny, Stampe
them in a Morter and Straine them & take the Iuyce and put
therin the poulder of Pepper. ANd put all this in Ale or Beare
as the Patient may drinle it at once, And let him drinke
before his Ague come. And it will helpe.

ffor the ffevor.

Take Ribworte, Cinquefol. & Langedebeofe and Stampe them
and Straine them. And take e Iuyce and drinke it Luke warme
before the Ague come. Probatum.

For the Gripeinge in the Belley.

Take five leaved grasse and boyle it well in runninge water
and a fewe flowres of Rosemarie if you can gett them, or of the
leaves or small stalk, and boyle them togither; And as hott as
the patient can endure it, laye it to the belley. Et Sanabitr

A present Remedie for Gripeinge in the Belley

Take halfe an ounce of Osmund and boyle it in fayre water with a
little honey, then Straine it and drinke it luke warme. et

ffor the wynd Collick in the Belley./

Take a pynte of Malmesey an halfe penny worthe of Saffron
and two Nuttmeg and braye them togither small in a
Morter, And take the wyne and put it in a Cupp and
warme as much as you will drinke therof over a ffyre,
And then put to yo poulder & drinke it Mylke warme
when the fervent Sicknes comethe vppon you And
vse this & it will helpe.

A Poultes for the stone.

ffor the Stone  Take a good handfull of Pellitorie of the wall of mallowes & Cammomyle
the lyke quantitie chopp them altogither and boyle them in three
pyntes of water the space of one howre. then take houshold
breade made of wheate grates, and soe thicken it to be a
Poultes, when it is thicke ynoughe, put into it a qrter
of a pynte of oyle of Cammomyll or of dyll or hearbe Grace,
for want of these take Sallet oyle; This beoinge done put it into a
white Cotton bagg, the Cotton syde beinge inward: Aplye it as hott
as may be endured. Then take possett ale made wth Parscelie seede, the drincke beinge
made of ale and white wyne wch is exceedinge good, lykewise possett ale made of parscelie & dill is
Verie good.





64
for the Stone A pure Medecyne.

Take greene Cherries and stampe them; and put them into
Renishe wyne and let them stand in steepe three dayes
then still them. take a draught therof and put therto a
Spoonefull of Sallet oyle and a little Sugar & drinck ther-
of first and last. Alsoe when you cannot gett Cherries
then take of Renishe wyne halfe a pynte and of fyne
Sallet oyle a Spoonefull sett it to the fyre and put a good
peece of Sugar to it and greate Nutmegg & let it boyle
Then drinke it warme first & last.

An other medecyne for the Stone

Take an herbe which is called Ramset in Maij or Iune when they be
seeded leafes and all, and drye them in the Shadowe and
not in the Sonne. and make therof poulder, and vse therof
every daye in thie pottage or in thie drincke. And this
will breake and destroye the Stone.

ffor the Stone.

Scrape two Spoonefull of white Castle Soape into a pynte
of Ale and heate them well in a pott by e fyre, till the Soape
be consumed into the Ale. And soe drinke it fastinge in e
morneinge as warme as you can Suffer it. Abstaine
three howres after from meate & drincke, walkinge &
stirringe about in the same Space. And lieke wise at night
three howres before you raste. And vse this Nyne dayes
togither more or lesse as you fynd it worke.

An other for the Stone.

Take the Red barke of the yeugh tree dryed beaten to poul-
der, and Ieate & beaten alsoe to verie syne powder and
very fyne Searsed and beinge medled drinke them wth wyne
or Ale blood warme. And vse five or Sixe tymes






An other good Medecyne for the Stone often pved.

Take Thyme, Cammamell, Ramses, Beane Coddes, paretorie
of the Wall & Saxafrege, laye them in white wyne
a night & still them, and drinke of the water & it will helpe.

Alsoe parietorie. Thyme and Parseley, Seethe them
tender and laye to the privities warme. Then Seethe
Thyme Parseley and Parietorie in white wyne
tender and straine them. and to it a Spoonefull of
Aqua vitae and let the patient drincke it. probatum.

Alsoe drinke the wyne that a Reddishe roote fynely
Sliced and fennell hath bene layd in all night.
All these are good for the Stone.

ffor to breake the Stone in the bladder.

Take Allexanders Lovache and water Cresses of
eyther lieke quantitie, and boyle in a gallon & a halfe
of fayre Runninge water, and put therto a quantitie
Sugar of fayre Clarified Sugar or Sugar not clarified,
or Lycorishe. And drinke it Eveninge & Morninge
and Soe contynue it twentie dayes And it will
breake it without fayle

That the Stone shall never wax hard
in the bladder after it is broken.

Take of Grummell Seed and Saxafrege of eache a .li.
halfe a li. of Coleander Seede, a quarter of a .li. of
Sorras white and Redd. And gryne all these small in
a Morter. And everie daye eate a Spoonefull therof
in tie pottage. Et fiat.

To make an oyle for the Stone to serve e whole yeare.

Take Parsley, Suthernwoode & Parietorie of the wall and
seethe them wth Swynes grease till it be greene, but burne
it not, and Straine it, and annoynte the patient wth it warme,
at the Navell & small of the belley.





65
ffor the Collick and the Stone.

Take a handfull of dandelion, Thyme, Avence, Parselley
Stichworte, Camamell, or Pelletorie of the wall of eyther
lieke quantities. Washe them fayre, Stampe and Seethe them
in a quarte of Ale to a pynte. Then straine the herbes &
sett the liquor over the fyre and put therto a pynte of
white wyne and poulder of Lycoris, Ginger, Cloves, Mace,
Anneseed, Long Pepper, Small Reysons and Saffron of
everie one a liekr=e quantitie a halfe penny worthe and three
penny worthe of Sugar. and lett them seethe alltogither
a little while, and Straine it and give the patient five
Spoonefull in the morninge and five in the Eveninge
blood warme ix. dayes first & last.

ffor to breake the Stone and to make one make water.

Take three handfull of psley, ij. of Thyme, iij. of Sentarye,
iiij. of Sampier two of Allexander leaves and one hand-
full of Cammamell And seethe them togither in fayre
water from a pynte vnto a quarte. then put to them
two Spoonefull of Aqua vitae: Then Straine the liquor
and give the Sicke to drincke. And after laye the same
herbes warme to the Small of the Belley in a Clothe
And it will cause the Stone to breake and voyde it.
Lett him drincke it fowre dayes togither. If he be
Sore grieved seethe it in white wyne, for it is better
then water.

A drinke for the Stone to breake it wthin the bladder
and to put it out, and to amke one pisse. Probatu.

Take Sampiere and Perietorie of the wall and still them togither
And take fowre Spoonefulles of the water and drinke it wth
White wyne or Stronge Ale; And if you cannot gett Sam-
piere then take Cammamell, ALexander and Parsley
and still them wth the Parietorie of the wall. divers tymes
pved.





ffor the Collicke and the Stone a very pure medecyne.

Take Parsley seede, Broome seede, Gromell seede
Allexander seede ffennell seede, Planten seede
or Coleander seede of eache of these a quarter of an ounce
Nuttmeg beaten very fyne halfe an ounce, Sugar
beaten verie fyne & searsed thoroughe a fyne Searse
three ounces, and put all these togither and lett them
be well mingled; Then take of white wyne eyghte
Spoonefull, and as much of the powlder as will fill halfe
a wallnutt Shell, and put it into the wyne and lett
the patient drinke it three tymes, and it will helpe.

And if the Patient be very sore, take an Oyntmt
called Altea and Oyle of Roses of eache of these an ounce,
and annoynte the place wher the sore is agaynst the
fyre as hott as may be Suffered And it will cause the
Stone to a voyde in short tyme.

A pretious Remedie for the Stone and to make
one to make water wthin halfe an howre, and
that will breake the Stone wthin Tenn dayes. pved.

Take Virga Aurea, and make it into fyne powder, and put ]a Spoonefull therof into a newe layde Egge softe rosted, and
give it to the patiente to drincke in Ale or in White wyne
in the morninge to his breakfast, And let him not eate
three or fowre howres after at the leaste. And then he shall
make water in lesse then halfe an howre. And yf you vse
this Contynuallye the Space of Tenn or Twelue dayes,
It will cause himto make water, and voyde out the stone
wthout any payne or griefe.

ffor himt is stopt of his water and for e stone Collick

Take Radishe Rootes Scraped and layd in white wyne a night. and
straine it and give it the patient to drinke and it will make
him make water. pved.





66
ffor the Collicke

Take Mustard seede, ffigg and vinegre, Stampe them altogither. Then
take them and laye them to the Belley cold.

ffor the Collick and to make one pisse.

Take one handfull of Thyme and three handfull of Parsley and
Seethe them in white wyne or Renuinge water till they be
tender, Then put therto three or fowre Spoonedull of Aqua vitae
Then strayne the said liwuor and give it to the Sicke. And after
laye the same herbes to the Small of the Belley in a Clothe
And it will cause him to make water. pved.

ffor to make one pisse

Take Rewe and Parsley and Stampe them and Seethe them in
white wyne and Straine it, and put to it Sugar, and put it in
a glasse and drinke two or three tymes.

ffor the Strangarie

Seethe the under kynde of the younge branches of the Hasell
in small Ale vntill halfe be consumed, and drinke a good draught
therof and it is a present Remedye. Vse it till you be hole.

ffor them that cannot hold their water

Take Gootes Clawes and burne them in an Earthen pott all
to powlder and eate of the powlder in pottage. And it will helpe.

ffor one that pissethe blood.

Take Amerowes and Milefol of eyther in lieke quantitie and
Stampe them & temper them with Gotes mylke and drinke therof.

ffor to Restore mans Nature agayne lost by weomen

Take mylke of a Cowe that hath given mylke a longe tyme and t
in xij. Monethes hath had noe Calfe. and take alsoe as muche red
wyne and myngle them togither & drinke it and this will
searche every vayne. Alsoe it is good for bleeding beneathe./





ffor a Woman that hath lost hir flowres
This Medecyne never faylethe.

Take the Roote of Gladen which is lieke the flowre deluce and beareth a
yeallowe flowre, groweinge in drye Moores; and Seethe it in vinegre
or wyne, and when it is well sodden sett it on the ground, and make
hir stride over it, soe t noe Ayre goe from hir but to hir Privitie
This never faylethe. But take heede she be not wth Childe.

ffor a woman that hathe to muche of hir Flowres

Take the foote of a hare & burne it to powlder, and lett hir drinke of t
powlder wth Small Ale first and last.

ffor to Staye the ffluxe of flowres in weomen.

Take a quantitie of Sperma Cetti and dislove it in Redd wyne
vppon e fyre and lett the patient drincke it as warme as she
can suffer it in the Morninge & at night.

To make fflowres to goe.

Take Aresesmarte and Seethe it in Water till it be tender and
sett it vnder a hollowe Chayre; And lett the woman sitt theron
bare, soe close hir about with clothes that noe Ayre goe from hir but to &c

A Plaster for Vncleane fflowres.

Take Mynt, Verven, Mother woorte, Polipodie, vnsett Leekes,
Mallowes, Organu and wheete bren and Seethe them wth white wyne
and make a Plaster & laye it vnder hir Navell.

ffor Throwes in a Woman

Take vervayne sodden in water, and make Almond Milke
therof and lett the Sicke drinke it.

ffor a woman that lacketh Throwes in hir labor

Take iij Croppes of Neppe and as much of Bitteny and iij
Croppes of Redd Nettles, and Stampe it & Straine it wth
the drincke that shee drynkethe.

ffor e whites in a woman

Take a Lymmon and Slyce Rynd and all and lett it lye a daye &
a night in fayre runninge water, Soe much as may be dronke at
one draught. pved.





67
ffor the Mother.

Take ffrankencense, a Rynde of Cinnamome and a fewe Cloves,
and lett hir sitt in a close hollow Chayre wth Clothes close about
hir Legg. Then cast this poulder vppon a hott Tyle vnderneath
hir That the Smoke may ascend vpp into hir bodye. Then lett
hir stand and take Arsefeteda or burnt feather and hold at
hir nose.

An other for the Same.

Take the Gumm Lemney, And then take a peece of Scarlett
Clothe and cutt it round lieke a shillinge, and strike the
Gum on the Cloth, and laye it over hir Navell that
hath the mother and soe lett it lye till shea be well.

ffor the bloodie flux a good Medycyne.

Goe to any Lyme Kill and in a Lyme Stone you shall have a rounde
ball lieke an Egge wch is called a flynt Egg breake it and therin
you shall have a kynd of flowre which flowre you shall put into stronge
Ale or Mylke Sodden and drinke it. pved.

ffor to Stopp any Laxe.

Take Redd wyne and put to it Cynamome in fyne powlder halfe
an ounce, of Bolearmoniake iij. penny weight, of fyne Chalke in
poulder halfe an ounce. and temper them altogither with a little Sugar
and blood warme drinke it. and lett him not drinke in Tenn howres after
Nor lett him eate any Butter. Alsoe Seethe gum Arobake in fyne
powlder in redd Rose waterand drincke it wth the wyne.

To staye the fluxe.

Take iiij. Nuttmegg pricked full of holes, and steeepe them in vinegre
one night. Then take them and rost them in Embers and beate
them small to poulder and drinke of this poulder in Redd wyne
everye morninge fastinge







ffor to Stopp a Sore Laxe.

Take the Ryne of a Pomgranade and Stampe it to poulder
and put to it as much Chalke wth a halfpenny weight of
Cynamon. And drinke it wth good stronge Ale blood
warme. This hath bene pved diverse tymes by great men.

ffor the fluxe.

Take Beae wax and Seethe it in Mylke till it be melted and
let the partie greeved eate it downe as hott as he can suffer
it. And in twise eateinge of it, it will helpe him.

ffor a Laxe or dissentarie an approved good medecyne.

Taye Reysons of the Sonne and pull out the Stones of them
and rubb the Stones drye wth a Clothe, and then beate them
to powlder in a Morter, and let the patient take a good Spoone-
full of the powder at a tyme and wth beare or Ale let him
drinke it downe, and he may Staye the Laxe as he will
him selfe wthout any danger. It beinge taken iiij. or v.
times in this manner will Staye a verie greate loosnes.
diverse tymes pved.

ffor the Runninge of the Raynes pved.

Take two knockles of Mutton, gashe them well with a knife,
and breake well the bones and Seethe them iij. howres in iij.
Quart of newe mylke with these herbes in it: viz. Comfarie,
Sheaperdes purse, knott grasse and Planten of eache a
handfull. and in the Seethinge skum awaye the fatt,
that e mylke may be the clearer let yo herbes alsoe be Cutt thoghr not very small, and lett the patient drinke
therof Eveninge and Morninge, till he be hole. This hath
holpen diverse. If you keepe your herbes all the yeare gather
them at Mydsomer and drye them in the Shaddowe, and they
will keepe in vertue all the yeare & the better pved.






68
ffor weomens sore Brest not broken

Take Sauge and Margold that beare the black Seedes and Nettles
of the Sharpest of eache a handfull, and bruse them altogither,
and soe laye it to the brest and it will keepe it from breakeinge.

ffor a womans Sore breats brolen or not broken.

Take Oyle of Roses, Beane fflowre e youlk of an Egg &
a little vinegre and temper them altogither, and sett them vppo
Sout Embers, as it may be Skant Lue warme And then wth
a feather strike it vppon the Sore Breast Eveninge and morninge
and at Noone. Vse this and it will helpe.

ffor a Sore Brest.

Take a pottle of Runninge water and a greate handfull of
Sauge, and let it seethe to a quarte. Then take the liquor & put
therin a pynte of white Vinegre, and three Spoonefull of
goood honey, and Seethe all these vppon the fyre e Space of
halfe an howre Then dipp a Skarlett Clothe in the liquor
and laye it close about the Brest. and vse it soe three or
fowre tymes in a daye alwayes warme. And it will
helpe. pved diverse tymes.

An approved good Medicyne for the Stone

Take white wyne and make a possett, take younge elder
of a yeares growethe and take the inner barke and
stampe it and strayne it into the wyne before the
milke be put to it, and drincke as much of it as he
can. eveninge and morninge nyne tymes dayes
togither in the fall of the leafe or in the springe.
and walke vppon it and it will disolue the stone
in the bladder. make it not at the first to stronge

Take a Hare alive and strangle it and then only take of the Skin and put it in whole
into the Oven and drye it till you may beate it into powlder and then drinke of the
same in white wyne or beare, and this is an approved good medycyne for the Stone.





Diverse kynds of Laxatives. Necessarie
bothe for men & weomen

Take Skamone, Rubarbe, Sugar Candie quantitie for quantitie
but more of Rubarbe then of any of the other. to the value of
all Sixe pence halfepenny. viz. Skamonie ijd Rubarbe iijd
Sugar Candie ob. Pound all these togither, and drinke it
with a little quantitie of wyne or Ale.

Memorandum. He that taketh this Laxative or any other
that is dangerous: Must take it 3. dayes before the Change
or 3. dayes after. 3.dayes before the pryme or 3. dayes after
3. dayes before the full or 3. dayes after the full. probatum.

A Purgation clled Diacredij./

Take of honey a quarte and of Sugar a .li. and Seethe them till
you can make a droppe to stand on yo finger, lieke frost congeled,
vppon e howse Eaves. Then take it of, an in the Coolinge
put to it 2. . of poulder of Skamonie, and cast it on e
cold borde. and when it is cold cutt it in Losenges and put
it vpp. for it is a Stronge Laxative for him t can beare it

A Laxative for the Collick Substantially
and many tymes pved verie good

Take Clare and Nepp. Stampe them and Straine them
thorough a Clothe, and make a possett of the strongest
Ale you can gett. and looke that you have as muche Iuyce in
a manner as Ale but not fully soe muche. And before
you cast yo Mylke to make yo possett See you have a quan-
titie of good freshe butter that never Salt came in nor
washed wth water, and make the possett of all these
and as hott as the patient can drinke it, give it when
the fervent Collick comes vppon him: and Cover him soe
hott vpon a Bedd that he may Sweate, and by the grace
of God he shalbe well pved.





69
An Easie Laxative

Take Sene & Alesander of eache an ounce, of ffygg and Licorie.
halfe an ounce and Seethe them in a quart of good Ale and put to
it an ounce of Sugar Candye, and Skum it Cleane and straine
it. probatum.

An other Easie Laxative./

Take three Cornes of Spurge of Ginger & Sugar of each a
dragme and make therof a poulder and eate therof in the
Morninge an howre or two before you ryse. and vse this twise
Et Sanabis.

An other Laxative.

Take 3. Cloves, and to everye Clove 3. graines and to everye
graine a Corne of Spurge, and meddle them altogither and
take noe more at a tyme then will Cover a pennye.

An other Laxative

Take halfe an ounce of the powlder of the Root of Polepodie
of the Oke and as much of Sene in poulder. and take five
ounces of Honey and Seethe it. and put to it the poulder of
the Polepodie Seene & Aniseseed Lycoris and Sweete fennel
seede in pouldewr, and lett it Seethe till it be thick. and make
rownde ball therof and eate one or two of them at a tyme
fastinge./

A Suppositorie Laxative./

Take Camamell, Mallowes & Myntes wth a good quantitie
of Maij butter and a great handfull of graye Salt and
Seethe all these togither in a good quantitie of runninge
water to a pynte and with a Pype give this Suppositorie
Et fiat./

An other good Laxative

Take Succorie, Endive violett leaves strawberry leaves, a fennell & a parsley
roote with the pith taken out Rayson of the Sonne and figges.

Seethe them all in fayre water and when they are well sodden take of e
clearesr of the water some 3. or 4. spoonefull and put in it the wayt
of 2d in Sene, and the weight of 6d in Aniseede and the weight of 4.
in Rubarbe and a little Cynamome whole and let it stand vppon *

*embers all night
then straine it
and put too it
two Spoonefull
of roses the Syr-
rupp put to it after
that it is well strayned and
this will serve
twice./






ffor the Sciatica in the Hipp

Take a Tenche, Cutt of his head and Tayle, and take out all
the bones, Then Sprinkle it wth Cummin Seede beaten into
fyne poulder. And applye it to the Sore hipp at night goeing
to bedd and in the Morneinge take it awaye.

An Excellent Remedy for the Gowte
ffor Ache and payne in the Ioynt.

Take Mylke of a Colored Cowe and wheate meale
and meddle them together and Seethe them till they be
thicke, and stirr it well, Then cast in the Iuyce of Ache
or Smalledge. Then Spread it plaster wise on a
Clothe and laye it warme on the Knee or Ioynte.

A pure Medecyne for the Gowte.

Take ijli of Virgin Waxe a li of posett a qrter of Stone
Pitche made in poulder, halfe a li of Rosen, as muche
of deere Suett, & a qrt of Cloves as much of Mace xijd
weight of Saffron, And put them in a Vessell of two
Gallons over a Sharpe fyre, wth a quart of good Redd
wyne & as muche of white wyne, Then put in yo wex
cutt in small peeces, yo perosett, Stone Pitche and yo
Rosen, and when it almost consumed, then put in yo deere
Suett, and let them boyle well togither, and stirr it
well wth a Slyce for cleaveinge to the pann side.
Then take an other pann and washe it wth fayre warme water
and then take yo liquor & straine it into t pann & sett it over
the fyre agayne & lett it boyle a little longer. then take it from
the fyre. then take Cloves and Mace well beaten and searsed
in a fine Searse and as it Coolethe cast in yo Spyces, and
when it wexeth cold, then cast in yo Saffron, small grownd as
is possible, And when it is almost cold take it vpp and put it in
a Boxe or Boxes. And when the Gowte is come take and make
a Plaster of it to e patient. and it will heale him. pved.





70
ffor the hott Gowte

Take Hearbe Grace and Cellebdyne of eache a handfull
and three Spoonefull of blacke Soape. pound it and straine
it thoroughe a Clothe and annoynte it wth a feather and
Cover it with tewed Sheepes leather.

ffor the Colde Gowte.

Take a pynte of good Ale clarefied over the fyre, put therto
a handfull of Baye Salt, and stirr it well a good whyle. Then
put therto two Spoonefull of blacke Soape and beinge sodd
togither annoynte the patient. But first rubb him with a linen
Clothe halfe an hower.

ffor the Gowte.

Take a quarte of newe Mylke, and put therto the donge of a Cowe or Oxe
and seethe them togither till they be thick and warme laye it to e place
wher the Gowte is.

ffor a Gowte or Swellinge in the Knee a Poultis

Take a quart of howse Snayles, halfe a pynte of honey & a li of
blacke Soape, the yolkes of Twelue Egges and a .li. of fifgg. beate
them on a lynned Clothe, and Strowe on it some Sanguis dra-
conis beate into Small powlder. and laye it to e Sore viij. Dayes vnremoved

An Excellent medecyne for the Gowte.

Sena 3 ounces
Turbit halfe
an ounce/
Mecho: 2
ounces
Hermo: one
ounce.
Nut: Oyn:
et Mace of
each 3 dragms
Cloves & gall:
of eache one
dragme
Poly. one
ounce

Take of Senna .iij. Turbeth  js. Mephocan  ij. Tamarisc
iij.m. Hermodactilis  j Nuttmegg Ec j. Cinamom  iij.
Mace  iij. Cloves  j Gallingall  j. Polipodiumque  j Roman
wormewoode halfe an handfull, red Sage halfe a handfull of
Egremonie three handfull All those that are by weight
are to be beaten to powder and wth the rest all
put togither in a flannell bagg and hange it
in a Stand of Ale of Thirtie pyntes and
soe drinke the Ale in the morninge fastinge
or yf you will in the after noon about fowre a clock





A generall Purge./
Take of the rootes of Parscelye, Fennell, and Asparagus
of eache two ounces, of Byttonie, Balme, Hope, Bourage,
Buglosse, Enisse, Succorye, Violett and Sorrell of each
one handfull: Boyle these in a Pynte and halfe or in
a quart of water uppon a softe fyre till halfe the liquor
be consumed, and soe strayne it hard. Then take halfe
a pynte of this liquor, and put into it an Ounce of
Seene, of Rubarbe three Drames lyced, Gynger
Synnamom and Anniseede of eche the weight og viii
and let them infuse in a close vessell att uppon embers,
(but not so hott) for twelve howres or more. Then
lett it take two or three playes, and soe strayne out
the liquor and put therto three or fowre ounces
of Syrrope of Roses, and yf you will a spoonfull
of Vinegre and a lyttel Cynnamonne water, and
soe divide it into two portions for two severall tymes.

A dramme is
the weight of
viid or of a frenche
Crowpul

A Purge.
Take halfe an ounce of Sene Rubarbe a quarter of
an ounce, Anise seedes a drame Cynnamom half
a drame, this is to be boyled in halfe a pynte of
fayre water till the better part be consumed, then
strayne it and wringe it out hard thoroughe a
course clothe and dissolve it in an ounce of Syrrope
of Succorie wth Rubarbe or els Syrrope of roses.

7 or 8
of baye salt graynes

Roses wth Agrick wch is best to purge fleame, or instead of this Syrope you may boyle ii
scruples of agrick wch the best being sliced them & to correct it put in 7 ot 8 graynes
Take halfe a pound a pound of Sarsaperillia rootes sliced and cutt
into ynte peeces fowre ounces of Lignum Santis in smale Chipps,
three drames of Licoris an ounce and a halfe of Sasafras shaved
or sliced thinn Infage and boyle these in sixeteene pyntes of water
in a close pipkin Tenn or twelve howres togither, at a gentle fyer
Then phaps ther wilbe tenn pyntes remayninge. wherfore your pott Caster you
have once or twuse scumed of the foam, must be well closed wth a cover
when this is strayned thoroughe a cotton bagg hand cold, you may use it
for your ordynarie drinke, for 28 dayes togither. Do: for:





Philosofers and Doctors wch by their learninge studied many
things yt belonge to Physique & Chirurgerie, by the wch they have
well approved by their Scyence; That the Hearbes, frutes and Flowers
that be growinge uppon the Earthe are Comfortable and Mederynable
for mens bodyes: For lieke as ther are fowre Complexions in mens
bodyes that is to saye: Sanguine Complexion wch is hott & moiste,
Flegmatique Cold & Moiste, Colerique hott and drye, Melancoli=
que Cold and drye: Soe they fynd by their learninge that
Hearbes groweinge uppon the Earthe have the fowre Complexions
Wherfore they have devised and wrought and committed to
Writeninge the Natures and kynds of diverse hearbes to
helpe and Comfort men in tyme of Sicknes.

Absythium
Absynthium is an Hearbe in Englishe called wormewod, an Herbe
soe commonly knowne that it needeth noe description of this read pline.
It hath many Vertues. It is Laxative. It comforteth the Stomake
It Clensethe the Harte. Neverthelesse sometymes this Hearbe hindreth
digestion and hurtethe the Stomake if it be not rightlye used.
It must therfore be sodden in Rayne Water and it must stand all night
wth the mouthe of the vessell open in some cleane place that the ayre
may come into it And in the morninge drinke a quantitie therof
fastinge and abstayne till noone, and then eate freshe in eate, and
use this three dayes and it will comfort the Stomake, and clense it
of Coller, Glutt and Fleayme. It will asswage the Swellinge of ye
Wombe and kill wormes therin. It will purge flowres that have bene
longe in a womans bodye, if it be mynistered as a Suppositorie wth a little
Woolle. And it will put out an Abortive. Alsoe take Cereporontayne, Spikmard
oyle oliffe & boyle it well wth Aysell & the Juyce of wormewoode, then straine it
and drinke it and it will put awaye all wilbe about ye harte. It is called Can
dura, and of the Liver yt is called Apatica. The Juyce dronke is good for the
Jaundies. The leaves therof tempered wth Aysell is good for ye mydriffe. It is
good to put awaye dronkennes and tempered wth honey it is good to put awaye Swellinge in ye
mouthe if it be drinke, and it putteth awaye ye blacknes about the eyes & clensethe ye sigetalfe
ye Juyce on ye water still & put into ye Nostrille dryethe ye moystnes of the head. The Juyce mixed
wth ye gall of a bull beinge put in his eare yt hath noyse in his heade will helpe him presently.
dry it & lay it amongst Clothes & it will destroye moathes. and laye it on a sicken limb
head eare he know it & it will make him sleepe. The Juyce will kill mytes in ye head if it be washed
therwth. The Nature of this hearbe is hott & drye lieke unto fyre & hath two Spices. To have
the Juyce, gather it in May. To keepe, when ye flowres Springe.





Abrotanum. Sothernwoode.

Abrotanum is an Hearbe called Sothernwoode in Englishe.

The vertues an properties therof.

The Seede therof brayed and drunke with water healethe the Stone and the
Palseye. And drinke it wth wyne, and it helpethe the byteinge of
Venemous beast. The powlder of this hearbe medled wth Barley
Meale vnbyndethe hard Apostemes. And drye it &
meddle it wth wooll Oyle and annoynte the place that lackethe Hare
and it will make it growe agayne. Alsoe Seeethe it and vse it. ffor it
helpethe the Synnewes & the Breste & it destroyethe the ytching of e fleshe
Drincke it with wyne & it helpethe the Raynes of the backe and the
paynes of woomens Secrett. It closethe the flowers. It clenseth e brest
and It makethe good vrine. The Savor therof drivethe Snakes
Adders and other Venemous beast out of e place wher it is. Alsoe
seethe it in water and drinke it & it helpethe e cold fevor. Or else
Seethe it in Oyle and therwth annoynte the bodye before the ffevor comethe.
The Iuyce therof drunke sleaethe wormes in the bodye. Alsoe
Seethe it in water with Cromes of white bread & wth a fructe that is
called Malacidonia & it dothe awaye a Sicknes called Empatickes
And Stampe it wth Boores grease or with Tallowe and make a plaster
therwth and it will drawe out Thornes or Slivers out of the fleshe.
and if it be dronke wth wyne or layd privilie vnder a mans bedd
head it encouragethe him to Venerie. And t drinke keepethe a
man from Speakeinge in his Sleepe.

The nature of Sothernwoode

It is hott and drye in the third degree of e nature of e fyre.

Acedula. Sowrdock in English.

The vertues and properties therof.

Eate in Somer and it maketh a good stomake. Stampe it and laye it to the Belley
that fretethe, to the hott Podagra the burneinge gowte, to the Swelling
Eyes and it healethe m all. Alsoe e greene leaves boyled in oyle oliffe healeth
the old headache if it be applyed therto. And drinke it wth wyne and it killeth
wormes in e bodye, It restrayneth the flux. It helpeth him that hath dronke
Venome. The Iuyce therof clearethe e sight; Alsoe he that beareth this herbe
about him shall not be bitten wth Serpents nor wth madd Dogg, yf one hath
his Eyes closed wth Rhume or gummed take the iuyce therof and annoynte
the Eye lidd therwth & it helpeth them. This herbe is cold and drye
in e third degree. and is of the nature of the Earthe.





Asphodillus   Lege Plmium.
Asphodell or Cenchef or  Centum Capita is an hearbe the leaves wherof
be lieke Leekes & bearethe a yeallow flowre and round Codds, the Seede
is lieke Oynion Seede.

The vertues and properties of Asphodell.
The Branches Stamped and droken heale the dropsy Also the
leaves & the flowres dronke wth wyne healeth the byteinge of veno
mous beasts and wormes. The juyce wth the Roote a little  Ivrie &
Saffron sodden togither wth old sweete wyne cleane strained is good to
heale runninge Eyes. Alsoe the Roote beaten to poulder meddled wth
a little honney and annoynte the place therwth that lacketh haire
and it will make it growe agayne. Alsoe take the Juyce therof
and wett a Clothe therin and rubb the Morsewe therwth and it will
have it awaye.

The Nature therof hott & drye of ye Nature of Fyre.
Agnus Castus
Agnus Castus us an hearbe called Futtisane or Parkeleaves. This
hearbe hathe leaves wth Synnen & lieke Planten and bearethe a
yeallow flowre wth black berryes when they be rype and growethe
in wooddye and drye places.

The vertues and properties of Agnus Castus
Phylosofers affirme that the Juyce and Seede of this hearbe as it may
be used helpeth Chastitie. It openethe the powers of the bodye and
letteth out wvill humors, and dryeth mans seede. Seethe it wth Fennell
seede & Aysell and it is good to destroye the cold dropsy. Alsoe Seethe
this hearbe wth Smallage and Sauge in water & Salt and bynd it to
the hinder parte of the head and it helpethe the Lyturgie. And
eate it rawe and it engendrethe the headache. And lett man or
woman bare it about them wakeinge or Sleepeinge and it will
quenche the Lust of Vendrie. And it destroyethe hardnes & stopping
of the liver & the Melt.

The nature of it is hott & drye.

Agrimonie otherwise called Eupatoria of R: Eupator.
It is described in Plinie
It hathe leaves lieke Tinsey but greener and a yeallow flowre, the
Seeds are lieke a beard brushe & will hange on ones hose; The properties
If it be eaten greene wth the Roots it helpethe ye akeinge of the Stomake
& wombe. the ooulder therof dothe the lieke effect. And tempered wth
Aysell it is good for a Sore that is hurt wth fyre Seethe it wth meate
& it is good for ye ache and ye Sore of the Melt
It is hott & drye.





Vide Plinium Alesander or Stanmarche Hipposelinu grace

Alexander or Stanmarche soe called is a common hearbe
It hath blacke Seed wthout flowres. The Properties & vertue
Put the leaves therof in Pottage and it will destroye all
manner of Apostemes.And the Seede therof Eaten every
daye destroyeth the Stone and helpeth the tremblinge Palsey.
It cureth the wringe and Tormentes of the Gutt. The same
beinge boyled & dronke with honied wyne helpeth the Stranguary
and difficultie of makeinge water. The roote sodden in wyne
expelleth Stone and gravell by vryne. It puteth awaye alsoe the
paine of e loynes flankes and sides. Taken in drinke or
applied as a lyniment it healeth the bytinge of a madd dogg.
The iuyce therof drinke heatethe them that are reddye to Chill and
be frozen wth cold./

Ach.

Ther are accordinge
to Plinie three kynd
of ach. li:xix. Na: Hist.
1 one growinge of it self
in moist growndes with one
leafe & a Smothe & plaine
called in Greeke Helio seli-
non. i Smallache;

2 with more leaves in
drye places named
Hipposelinon .i. Alisan-
ders.
3 found in Mountaynes
called oreoselinum.


1. Mountaine Ach or
Persely of the hill.

And as for the garden
Ach comonly called
persely ther be many
kind therof.

Ach hath these Properties

It is a good hearbe for Sore Eyes, Sore Pappes, and for the
heate & burninge of the Stomake. The Iuyce medled wth
the Cromes of white bread made in a plaster swagethe
the Swellinge & akeinge of the Eyes. The Root sodden &
dronke are good for the Coughe. It encreaseth mylke in a
womans breast It destroyeth venome. Seethe it in water
& drinke it and it ceaseth castinge. Vse to eate Ache fasting
Rawe and it will make one well coulored and it destroyethe
the cotidian fevor. Drinke Ache and fennell togither & it
destroyethe the dropsey. It helpeth the Spleene, and puteth awaye
freckles. Alsoe a Plaster made of Ach, Egg and dust of
a Myll in lieke quantitie, helpeth evill healed wound & sore
Savored.  This hearbe is hott and drye.

Gladiolus. Acorus. Gladiatus. Pettie Gladen. Flags or Swordwort

Acoras is an hearbe called Gladen. The vertue and propertie.
The Roote Sodden in Wyne and dronke helpeth the Coughe, and those that
be Invenomed & It healethe the Lymmes that are Shronke wth Cold.
The Roote therof put into a wound. Stancheth the bleedinge therof.
It is hott and drye.






73
Alleluya. Oxis. Cuckowes meate woodsorrell or Sorrell de Boise.
or woodsowre. or Stokeworte.

Alleluya is an Hearbe that groweth in Woodes. and hath three leaves
theron foldinge downeward and a little white flowre.

The vertues.

This hearbe yf it be wrapped in the leaves of the Redd docke and rosted in
Embers and laïd to a wound or Sore. It will frett out all the deade
fleshe therin. It will destroye wartes & Cornes. It is singuler good
to be given to one that hath lost his Stomake and appetite to his
meate. They alsoe that have a Rupture and their Gutt fallen
downe eate therof to verie good vse & successe. Also gather a good
quantitie of this hearbe with the Rootes. Stampe it wringe out the Iuyce
into a cleane Vessell, then take the Clearest from the drosse,
and it will take out yron Mouldes out of Clothe, layeinge them
on a fayre Clothe in Sommer and wth a feather annoynt the Iron
Mould often therwith, and as it dryeth in still annoynte it vntill
it be as white as the rest of the Clothe. It is hott and drye./

Allium. Garlicke. Lege Plinium lib:9. Cap. b.

Allium est Triaculum Rusticorum called Garlicke.

The vertues and Properties.

It Vnbindethe Stoping and Evill wynd in a mans bodie and
maketh good wynd, But it is contagious for the Sight, It healethe
the byteinge and stinginge of Adders. Noe venemous beast will touche a
man t annoynteth him self wth the iuyce therof. The iuyce myngled
with Honey is good for byteinge of Hownd. for bruses, hartm payne in the
bodye and Bladder. Alsoe lett Garlick be layd in a Pann of Coles
and let a woman stryde over it, that the Ayre may ascend vp into
hir Secrett and it will bringe fourthe the second burthen of hir
child. If it be eaten Rawe or sodden it will clense e lung and cleare
the voyce. Seethe it with Centaurie and it healethe the dropsie, and
dryethe evill humors of the boddye. and it helpethe franticke
men and the fallinge Sicknes. Drinke it wth Coriander and
wyne and it helpethe the Iaundise Seethe it wth Beanes and
rubb the Temples therwth & it is good for the head ache.Alsoe Seathe
it wth fatt Porke in growle and it is holsome for the wombe Braye
it wth Swynes grease and it asswageth Swellinge. and seethe
it in Sweete Mylke and vinegre and it killeth wormes in the
bodye. And whosoe vse to eate first therof every daye. It
will keepe him from evill ayre & from the Pestilence. It is
hott & drye.







Althaea Holy-hocke. de Altheaea lege Pliniu lib.20. Cap. 21

Althaea is an Hearbe called Holyhock and wyld Mallowe. The properties
If it be Shredd wth Sheepes Suett and layd to the Podagra it will
heale it in three dayes. If it be sodden in Vinegre & lynseede
and layd to a mans side it will drive out all evill wynd and
evill gathering togither in a mans bodye.
It is Temperate betweene hott and drye./

Amarusca

Amarusca is an hearbe called Maythe or Mayd weede or dogg ffennell
It is like to Cammamell and it very common.
The Iuyce therof Dronke healethe the Canker. The Pipes of the
Emerodes. Therbe two Species of them. One beareth a white
flowre and the other a Redd, and it groweth to common amongst
Corne. Annoynte the Squinantie with the iuyce of this hearbe
two or three dayes agaynst a hott fyre and it will helpe it in
short tyme. Stampe the Stalke of this hearbe and all and give
it him to drinke that hath lost his Speach Soddenly by Sicknes
or otherwise and it will make him speake agayne in short tyme.

Amees.

Amees is an hearbe called Ameo, Wood nepp or Penyworte
It hath leaves like Elder but they are lesser, And hath a
longe branche & it hath flowres and seed lieke Perselie

The Properties

If it be dronke wth honey it killeth wormes. It heateth the
Stomake t is cold. The liver and the Reynes. and it helpeth
the byteinge of venemous beastes. It provoketh vryne t
is wthholden by grosse humors. It loosnethe greate wynd
It breaketh the Stone in the Bladder It purgethe the
Raynes & Matryce if it be dronke wth Honey.
It is hott and drye./

Anabula Centemalles wyld Spurge

Anabula is an hearbe called Centemalles or wylde Spurge It groweth vppon
a plaine stalke, and beareth noe leafe but at e top, and ther it groweth broade
& of rownde compasse & when it is broken e iuyce is lieke mylke.

The vertues and Properties

Take it when it is younge and old Barrowes grease and boyle them in white
wyne vntill e wyne be nighe consumed then let it Coole a while then put
therto quick Silver that is killed wth fastinge Spettle & Ashes Stirr them
well togither and everie daye annoynte the drye Scabb therwth and it
will heale it. The mylke therof will kill Wart. And is good for e Toothe ache





74
Auancia

Auancia is an hearbe called Hares foote It bearethe a yeallowe
flowre, The Propertie and vertue.

If it be dryed & dronke in powlder wth wyne it Sleaethe the fevor
and is very good for a Cancer. And it is comfortable for the
healinge of wound and other diseases. It comfortethe the
Stomake and makethe good digestion

Anet.

Anet is an hearbe called Dill. The properties

It maketh good vryne, and asswagethe evill wynd in the
bodye, and destroyeth the yup. The Seede therof burnt
and strowed vppon a wound will heale it in short tyme.

And yf a man be Scalded on his members by a woman,
laye that poulder to them and it will heale him. Alsoe make
a Plaister wth Honey mixed with the same poulder and laye
it to the Emeroid and it will heale them forthewth.
It is hott and drye./

Anisium. Arnicetum

Anisium is an hearbe called Annyse. The Properties
It vnbyndeth and breakethe vnkynd fleame that engendrethe
in the Lung and putethe evill wynd out of the boddye. It open-
nethe the Stopinge of the Liver and Mylt. It encreasethe
mylke in weomens breast. And it provokethe man or
woman to the worke of Nature. It makethe good vryne.
and temperethe the wombe. t is laxative. and makethe one
to Sweate. Alsoe drinke three Spoon full of the iuyce therof
when you have an evill Stomake and it will open it and cast
out the Corruption therof by vomitt. Alsoe take the seede &
Stampe it and drinke it and it is good for him that hath a payne
in his Codd.This hearbe is called sweete Cummen. It
may be keept in vertue three yeares. It is hott in the third
degree.






Apium Rijsus.

Lege Pliniu
Et Annotationes
D. Hollandi in
Marginem lib. 20
cap. ii dicitr
Apiastrum la:
Ranunculus.
1. Crowefoote
called flamula
our Speerewort
or Apium Risus.

Apium Rysus is an hearbe called Chervile or herba
Scelerata. It hath Small leaves lieke Humlock
but they be sweete in Savor and bearethe a small white
flowre with longe Seed lieke otes. He that bearethe
this about him ther shull noe Iugler doe him harme
and he that drinketh it wth wyne, shall make water
very well. And it ceasethe the ache in the Raynes and
in the bladder. and dothe vnbynd evill wynd from
the sides, the Stoppinge of the wombe and of the Liver
And it helpethe to heale wound. And wthholdeth Castinge
Alsoe a plaster of this hearbe tempered wth Aysell
destroyethe wyld fyer and healethe the Canker. This
hearbe is one of the Smallages and is called Apium
Rijsus Crowfoote or Ache It groweth on Sandye grownd
or on gravelie land. This hearbe brayed in a Morter
wth newe Swynes donge made in a Plaster and
layed to a botche will breake it in short tyme And it
may be gathered all tymes of the yeare.

Apium Domesticum

Apium Domesticum the second Smallage or Stonmarche
or Marche It is common & hath a stronge Savor: It maketh
good vryne. It openeth the Stopinge of the Liver. The
Seede therof dronke make the hard a womans wombe. and
the propertie is. It will drawe all evill humors in a mans
boddye to the Stomake & the wombe. And it is forbidden
to weomen wth Child. and them t have the fallinge Sicknes
Alsoe it ingendrethe the Pestilence and therfore it is dange-
rous for weomen t have sucking Children to meddle wth it.
for feare of madnes or the fallinge Sicknes But it is good
for Ache and Bruses. It is hott & drye. ffor the Stranguarie
Take the Iuyce of Smallage, Saxifrage & Phillipendula Seethe them
togither & Straine them and put to a little Sugar and
drinke it and it will cause one to make water presently. pved.





75
Apium Silvaticum

Apium Silvaticum is an hearbe called Serfoyle it groweth
lieke woodbyne and hath a white flowre lieke a Lyllie but they
be hangeinge. the properties
Stampe & temper it wth Honey and it is good for the Cancer in the
Mouthe. Drinke it wth wyne and it healethe the akeinge in the wombe
Alsoe Seethe it in wyne or water and washe the head therwth and
it helpethe the evill called the Vertyne. Alsoe frye it wth Oyle
Oliffe and freshe Sheepes Tallowe and it is good for sore Syn-
newes and Lymbes that be taken wth cold And some saye t
Chervile dothe the Same. It is hott and drye in the third degree.

Apium Ranarum.

Apium Ranarum is water Crowefoote. It hath yeallowe flowers
It hath a stalk of a Cubit highe wth many branches & growethe
in Watrye places. It is one of the Smallages. Laye it in wyne
and oyle till it be rotten then straine it and sett it over the fyre
with wexe and make therof an Oyntment wch dothe give greate
comfort to the Spleane that is grieved by Melancholie humors,
by reason of abundance wherof heavines comethe.

Apium Emerodarum.

Apium Emerodarum land Crowefoote it hath leaves
lieke Rames foote and bearethe a yeallowe fflower. It hath a longe
Stalke and growethw in Meddowes and moist places. This
hearbe sodden in wyne is good to laye vnto the Emerodes
and the Pyles when they bleade or be Swolne and the pouder
therof is good for the same.





Arnoglossa.

Arnoglossa is a common hearbe called Planten or waybreade

The vertues and properties.

If one have the head ake let him take e roote therof and hange it
& hange it about his neck and it will helpe him in Short tyme.
And if one hathe an akeinge in his wombe lett him frincke
the iuyce therof and aswage the payne. Alsoe if
a man hath a Swellinge in any part of him let him
Stampe this hearbe & laye to it & it will asswage it. The
iuyce therof dronle comfortethe the brest & helpethe all
diseases in the bodye. Alsoe Stampe the Seede hereof to pouder
& strowe it vppon a wound and it will aswage the heate &
burneinge therof. Alsoe the Iuyce temped wth as much
vinegre & dronke Stoppethe the fluxe and tempeth the
the wombe. And drincke the Iuyce therof with wyne, and it
destroyethe e venome & byteinge of Serpentes & adders
& madd dogg. and destroyethe wormes in the bodye if
it be stamped and layd to the Navill. Alsoe take the Iuyce
herof & temper it wth the glare of an Egge cleane puryfied
& wett cleane flaxe therin & laye it as a Plaster to Sore eyes
and it will heale it. and for Swellinge and ryseinge in e
mouthe take e Iuyce & hold it in e mouthe & it will asswage the
Swellinge. Stampe it with honey & make a plaster therof &
it clensethe and healethe wett wound. Alsoe Seethe it and make
wort and eate them and it healethe the dropsey. the Iuyce therof
dronke healethe the fallinge evill the frensey and the Canker &
helpethe the heate and Swellinge of the eyes. and clenseth e
fleshe about e gummes and putethe awaye the Toathe ache.
This herbe and Tansey sodden in wyne and dronke Staunchethe the
Menstruous flux. The Seedes therof dronke are good for Sores
in the bladder and for the Raines of the backe. the Root therof borne
about one necke will free him from Tetters. The lesse Planten that is called
Ribworte will doe all these thing aforesaid. And the iuyce therof
wth wyne given to a woman wth child to drinke will make reddie deliverance
of the child & of e second burthen. alsoe e Iuyce dronke Stoppethe the bleedinge at e
nose. The Iuyce mixed wth vinegre honey and poulder of Allom healethe canker
in e mouthe. The Iuyce mixed wth e Iuyce of lettuce & Aysell wth a little wheate
flower made in plaister, & laid to e right side healeth e Iaundise if it be vsed. cum multis






76
Arthemesia

Arthemesia is Mugworte. It is lieke Wormewoode but is more
greene. the Vertue and properie therof.

If a woman drincke the Iuyce therof in the tyme of hir flowres wth
wyne it will cause hir to Conceyve a Child. and causethe a wo-
man to be delivered of a Child Or put in hir Secret it healpethe the
mother of swellinge and hardnes. It is alsoe good for the Iaundise
and makethe one well coulored. Alsoe make pouder therof and of hore-
hownd and strewe it vppon the teat of the Emerod and it will
heale them if they be first annoynted wth freshe grease. Alsoe
make a plaister of Mugworte and laye it cold to the Navell of a wo-
man t is wth a dead Child and it will make hir to be delivered.
The Iuyce therof dronke healethe the Stone in the Raynes of the backe
and makethe one to make water well. And if one goe a iourney let
him beare this hearbe with him in his Shoes and he shall not be fainte
nor weary of the iourney. Alsoe annoynte the Soles of yo feete at yo
goeinge forthe and it comfortethe greatelye. And Stampe it wth freshe
grease & it helpethe Chafinge, Itchinge and Clawinge of hand legg
& other lymbes. If this hearbe be keept in a howse ther shall noe
wicked Spiritt have power to doe harme or abyde wthin the
howse. This hearbe dronke in Must is good for many evill: for it
comfortethe the harte, the Stomake and all inner part of the
bodye in many diseases. Alsoe, make poulder therof and drinke
it wth luke warme water & it is good for byteinge of venemous
beast. Whosoe annoyntethe his bodye therwth and oyle oliffe
every daye shall have noe ffevor nor Shakeing hand. Laye
this hearbe vnder a sicke mans head that cannot sleepe nor
take noe rest he is liekelye to live yf he take rest, but if he can
take noe rest it is liekelye he will dye. It is hott and drye in
the third degree. The pouder of it layde vppon the pyles
healethe them.





Astula Regia.
Astula Regia is an hearbe called Woodroff It is lieke
a weede called Cratche weede or Chickens meate and
soe it savorethe when it is greene and when it is drye
it is very sweete. If one have a disease in his
mouthe let him boyle this hearbe in wyne and washe ye
mouthe therwth and the patient shalbe healed.

Astrologia Longa.
Astrologia Longa is an hearbe called Madder. It hathe leaves
lieke to ye Mader Warants and is one of the Spices of
Mader And hath branches ye lengthe of a Cubitt wth
many small branches comeinge out of the Roote, and the
branches have many small knotts and bearethe somwhat
a white flowre. If it be dronke wth wyne it will unbynd
the stopinge of the Liver and will wynde that are stopped
wh'in the bodye. Alsoe this hearbe clensethe wounds that patry:
fie and wax rotten. drinke it wth wyne and it will purge
& helpe all manner of Venome yt restethe wh'in the bodye.
Alsoe the Juyce therof & the Juyce of Gladen and Honey
mixed well togither and annoynte therwth the Gummes &
Chawes & it will take awaye all the blacknesse and fylthe
of the teethe. And drinke the Juyce therof wth Warme
water and it helpethe the Splen, the Fevors the Crampe
the Podogra Morbo Caduro, the Sore of the wombe and
the Palsey. The Smoke therof drivethe evill Spirits out
of the howse and comfortethe Children and helpethe the
Hickhock. Some men call this hearbe patience.
It is drye in the first degree and hott in the second.
It is attractive of Colorique Complexion and of
Orientall kynd Maskalyne.





Astrologia Rotunda.
Astrologia Rotunda is an hearbe yt some men call
Gallingale. The leaves therof are somethinge lieke to the leaves
of Barr save yt they be greene about and white underneathe
and hath but one branche. The vertue.
Ipocrates saythe, if it be dronke wth warme water it is
medicynable for those yt are stopped in the brest, and for ye
fallinge Sicknes the Podagra and the Crampe.
It florishethe as it were Bitternie but the flower is white
and must be gathered in harvest. And it is one of the
Spices of redd Madder and is hott and drye of the nature of
the fyre. It is best in Physique, the rootes are better then the
leaves if it be gathered before it bare flowres. The pouder
hereof and the Juyce of Mynts waste the dead fleshe. And make
a Tent wette wth honey and this pouder, and it healethe the
Fistula and Smartinge Scabbe beinge cast uppon them.

Asterion
Asterion is an hearbe called Lunaria. It growethe in highe
places amonge stones. It Spineth by night. It is found most
by Sheepherds in the fields. It bearethe a yeallow flowre hole
and round lieke a Cocke bell or lieke the flowre of Foxe gloves.
The leaves of this hearbe be of an Indian blewe and have the marke
of the Moone in the myddest of the leafe, as it were three leaved
grasse rownde as a pennye. This hearbe hath a Redd stalke and
smellethe lieke Muske and the juyce therof is yeallowe and
it growethe in the newe of the Moone wthout leaves, and everye
daye it encreasethe a leafe till the Moone be att the full, and
everie daye after it loosethe a leafe till the moone be at the
Wayne. It growthe in greate quantitie wher it growethe.
Whosoe eatethe of this hearbe after the full of ye Moone when
the Signe is in Virgo It wil helpe him of the Fallinge Sick=
nesse. Alsoe if he beare it about his neck it will doe the same
and helpethe him wthout Doubt. /





Auricula Maris.
Auricula Maris is an hearbe called Mouseare. It hathe
small leaves lieke those of Gratia dei, greene about &
white beneathe wth a yeallowe flowre, and it gorwthe
creepeninge uppon the ground wthout a stalke. The Juyce
therof is lieke Mylke and the leafe hearie lieke a Mouses
Eare. If you drinke the juyce it healethe the Quinsey
And ye Juyce therof is good to heale all kynd of wounds.
Alsoe the juyce dronke wth wyne and stronge Ale, and
annoynte the Raynes wth the blodd of a Foxe, and it is
Soveraigne medysyne for the Stone. And take the
juyce therof and the juyce of Millefollie and drincke it
wth white wyne and it will cause one to make water freshlye.
Alsoe if one that is Sicke drincke the juyce if he keepe
it he shall live, and if he doe not it is token of deathe.

Arthemisia media.
Arthemisia media the Myddle Mugworte. It helpethe
the Strangurie & the Payne in the bladder. Alsoe take halfe
a pynte of wyne & put therto a dragme of Mugworte –
Tagantes and give it to him that hath the fever, wth warme
water and it will helpe him. Bruise it wth Vinegre and
Laye it plaisterwise to the Sore Brest or sore sied and it
helpethe wh'in three dayes. And for payne in the Synnewes
seethe this hearbe in meate oyle and laye it to the griefe.

Arthemisia Mimma.
Arthemisia Mimma the least Mugworte is called
Matricaria & hath a Savor lieke Elder when it is bruised.
Braye Mugworte while it is greene wth Oyle of Almonds
& make a plaister therof and laye it warme to the brest and
it will make it whole wthin five dayes. And laye it under the
Threshold of the howse & ther shull nobodye have power to
doe hurte wthin yt howse. Alsoe the juyce therof meddled
wth oyle of Roses annoynted warme on sore Synnewes or
Shrinkinge





or Shrinkeinge Synnewes or Shakeinge hands and wastethe the
payne: It is said that the Goddesse Diana did fynd these three
Mugworts & their Vertues and she gave them to Centaurus
wch proved the Vertues of them diverse tymes. And therfore
Diana is named Arthemisia. It must be gathered in May
and July./

Atriplex.
Atriplex is an hearbe called Arache or Orache it hathe vertue
to Loosen ye wombe It molefiethe all harnes and healethe
the opilations caused of the said hardnes. This herbe put
in plaister healeth the Pearle in the Eye and clearethe the
sight and Chopped and layed in Apostemes it refreshethe
and Coolethe them. The Seede is good for them that have
the Jaundise by opilation or stoppinge of the Liver.
The drinke that Orache is sodden in is good for the
Jaundise. The water that the Seede is sodden in wth the
Roote of Rapes and a little Vineger dronke in greate
quantitie purgethe the Stomake of Fleame and Choler
and is good agaynst a disease called Sacerignis or Hell
Fyre beinge stamped and applied therto. And it will
helpe the Pogagra or Gowte & the Swellinge of the feete
if it be brayed wth honey and Vinegre and applyed.
it is cold in the first degree, and moist in the Second./

Asarabacca.
Asarabacca hathe leaves much lieke to a Violett leafe but that
it is a more darke greene. Drincke ye wyne or ye Water that
this hearbe is sodden in and it provokethe uryne and flowres
in woomen and it is good agaynst the opilaton of the Liver
caused of cold matter. It is good for ye Mylte the dropsey
Siatica passio and the Matrice It yealdethe good Coler to those
that have ye Ioteries or the Jaundices. It purgethe the wombe
It breakethe fleame and causethe Vomitt. And is almost as
vehement to pvoke Vomitt as white Eleber or Peletorie
but it is not soe stronge. And therfore the naturall
strengthe





Strengthe of the patient ought to be considered that it
shalbe mynistred unto and of what complexion he be
whether he be leane or fatt, for it is more given unto
fatt men then unto leane. And thus it ought to be given.
Take Thirtie leaves of Asarabacca and laye them in
Wyne all night and in the morninge beate them well
& give them to drincke wth the same wyne, or else
in the tyme of ye yeare seathe them wth fatt Porke and
give it to the patient to eate, and after drinke stronge wyne.
if you will. Thirtie leaves is to be given to the strongest
complexion and to other after the strengthe of their nature
And when it is given in wrightinge in this wise Asarabac=
caria then it is mente ye rootes and not the leaves.
but when the leaves, they be expreslie named.
It is hott and drye in the third degree.

Avena.
Avena is a grayne called Otes. It hath lieke vertue
as Barley. Take Otemeale grots cleane fryed and
beate them in a Morter and put warme water therto by
little and little, then straine it thoroughe a cleane
strainer, and seethe it till it be thick: then put therto
a good quantitie of Almond mylke and Sugar and
this is very comfortable for them that have the hott
sore Ague. And it is a Sovereigne thinge to rypen
an Aposteme. It is cold and moist in the third degree./





Balsamum/
Balsamum is an hearbe called Bawnie or Melissa. The vertue
Steepe it in wyne till it be thoroughe wett and make water therof
by distillation and drinke a Spoonefull everye morninge fasting
and it norishethe the brayne and refreshethe the wilts and mak=
ethe one to have reddye remembrance of any thinge he hath
done or shall doe. Alsoe it is good for a cold Stomake, and
maketh ne to have a light hearte, and keepethe him from
heavines. It strengthenethe the Vaynes and Synnewes
It will helpe them wch have lost their Speache. It helpethe
the palsey. And if one hath hurte his Tonge let him wett a
blewe clothe in this water and laye it theron and it will
heale it in shot tyme, and it is good for all other diseases in
the Mouthe. Alsoe it is good for Sause fleame faces, for it
makethe pure fayre visages. It causethe a woman to conceyve
and helpethe all diseases of weomen. And for the fallinge
sicknes take the juyce therof and drincke it wth a little Treacle
fastinge and it will helpe in short tyme. It healethe the goute
the Aposteme, the palsey the efvor quarten, and it breake=
ethe the stone and makethe it to avoyde wthout any
payne. It avoydethe poyson and healethe the sore in
the bladder. If you Sprinkle of this water uppon
Rawe fleshe ther will noe corruption come therto
And if a vessell of wyne be changed put of this water
into it, and it will come agayne. Alsoe the juyce mixte
wth Oyle Oliffe and the head that akethe annoynted therwth
it will put awaye ye ache and payne. The Juyce dronke
bringethe forthe the second burden of a woman and medell
it wth vinegre & oyle and it helpethe the Podagra from
swellinge and mekethe it whole. This herbe sodden in
water is good to washe him that is Skabby or sore of bravell.





Basilica

Basilica is an hearbe called Basill. Ther are three
kynd one hath leaves much lieke Rewe wth flowres
& Savor of ffrankencense, an other hathe a blewe flowre
and the third is called Garifolaton, The vertue of that
wth the blewe flowre is. Eate it fastinge in the Morninge
and it will make a glad hearte & put a quakeinge and
Suspition. it healethe the burneing Choler. It helpethe a
Cold Stomake and Comfortethe the brayne. It makethe
one to sleepe well. Alsoe for swellinge of Sore eyes.
The Garifflaton is strongest in medecyne, and he com-
fortethe the Stomake and makethe good digestion. It is
good for the Cardiacle and the black Choler and for
fleame. Alsoe put this hearbe into the Nostrill and
it will vnbynde the lowe bondes of the brayne. And if
one swell of bloodlettinge braye it and laye it to it &c.
It is good. for the eyes.

Balsmita

Balsmita is an herbe called Horsemynt and is
common. Some men call it water Mynt for it growethe
muche in water & savoreth ranker then other Mynt
It comfortethe the Stomake, makethe good digestion.
purgethe well the bodye and makethe one to sleepe
well The Iuyce therof medled withnwyne and honey
is a good drinke to put Coldnes out of the Stomake
& evill wynd. Seethe e Iuyce in wyne and give
it to a woman that travelethe wth Child and shee
shalbe easelye delivered. ther be two Spices of them.
It is hott and drye.






80
Barba Iovis

Barba Iovis is an Hearbe called Iuberb or howselieke.
If one have an Aposteme within him take this hearbe in the
beginninge of the said Aposteme wth redd Coriander and
Tallowe. Stampe all these togither in manner of a plaister
and laye it to the Aposteme and destroye it And of one be
burnt with fyre or Skalede wth hott liqour: Take the iuyce
of this hearbe Oyle of Roses and waxe and make an oyntmt
therof and annoynte the Sore but the first three dayes after
it is hurt and it will helpe it. Alsoe the Iuyce is good to helpe
all wicked heat, Swellinges and hardnes. The Iuyce
Stamped with Crames of white breade Coriander and Swynes
grease helpeth all Swelling Sicknes. It is cold and moiste.

Baucia

Baucia is an hearbe called Skirwitt or Pastinaca. Ther be
Two kynd of them. It is good for them t have bene lateleie
Sicke and for Melancholick persones if they eate them Rawe
or sodden. It is better greene then drye. Ther is a confection
made of this hearbe t encouragethe a mans lust of the
world and causethe good digestion. Seethe the root in the cleare-
rest runninge water, and when they have sodden a good
while cutt them in small peeces and fashon them rounde &
longe, then straine the water and seethe them agayne with
honey till they be thick as honey, and stirr them well that
they cleave not to the pann, and in the myddest of their
seethinge put therto blanched Almond, the seed of pyne
aples blanched, Ginger Cynamme, Gallingall Pepper,
Maces & Nuttmeg and put them altogether and stirr them
till they be well. And eate therof when you will for it
greatlye comfortethe.





Bardana

Bardana is an hearbe called Lappa Maior. It is e
Clott or Burres that growe on fatt grownd. the Roote stamped
wth a little Salt healethe the byteinge of a Madd Dogge.
It helpethe the hott Ague. And for stinkeinge wound
washe them with the water that it is sodden in, and make
an oyntemt therof, mingled wth a little Salvister and
greece picle and vinegre and laye it therto. The Iuyce
of the leaves dronke easeth the payne in the bellie.

Beta

Beta is called Beetus. Some saye it swellethe the head,
and Gallen saithe it is not good for them that have much
Gall but he saythe it is good and holsome for those that
be flegmatique and he affirmethe that it is holsome
for the Stomake and makethe a good color He that
vsethe it with vinegre shall have good talent to his meate
It neshethe the Stomake. The Iuyce of it and hownd-
bitt, or the water stilled and mixed togither, and honey
& Eysell dronke helpethe him t hath lost his Speache
sodenlie. The iuyce therof put into ones Nostrill
dothe put awaye all evill humours out of the head.
Eate it or drinke it & laye it to the byles and it will
helpe them. The Iuyce therof fastenethe the heare
of the head if it be washed therwth. drinke it with
wyne and it makethe one to sleepe well and maketh
a Nurse to have store of myke. It ceasethe the flixe
It comfortethe e sight and putethe awaye the swellinge
of heate. And Diascorides saithe ther are two Spices
therof: the one blacke and the other white. It is hott
in e first degree and moyste in the seconde degree.





81
Betonia

Betonia Bittenie or Bishopes worte. Stampe
this hearbe and laye it to a wound in the head and it will heale
it shortlye. if it be refreshed everie third daye it will heale
the better and drawe out broken bones of e wound. Alsoe
meddle the Iuyce of Bittenie with warme water and drinke
it fastinge and it will break the webb in the eye, and clense
e sight, cease the wateringe of e eyes and make them cleare
if it be applied. And if you have Ache in yo eares, take e
Iuyce of Bittenie and a little Rose water and warme it and
put it into the Eare and stoppe it with wooll and it will make
you whole. And if one bleede at the nose take Bittenie and
Salt and Chafe them well togither and stopp the
nostrill therwith that it fall not out and it will stanche
Presentlie. Take Bittonie and Seethe it in wyne or
Vinegre till the third part be wasted, then hold it in your
mouthe till it be cold, and it will helpe the Tootheache .
ffor the Coughe take two ounces of the pouder of Bittenie and
Seethe it wth honey over an easie fire and eate therof nyne
dayes. And if a mann cannot digest his meate take
iiij. ounces of this pouder and medle it wth clarified honey
and drinke therof and then make small pellett of the said
pouder and honey as much as an hasell nutt, and eate everie
daye three of them. and drinke everie daye of the medecyne
wth wyne iij. Spoonefulles and it will help.Alsoe if a mans
yard be Swolne or sore stampe Bettenie and temper it wth
wyne or vinegre and laye it therto. Take Bittenie
and Seethe it in warme water yill the third part be wasted,
then take out the hearbe and stampe it, and laye it warme
to the feete for the Podagra. Alsoe take every daye a
quantitie of Bittenie or the pouder therof fastinge and
that daye you shall not be dronke. This pouder eaten wth
honey fastinge is good for the Stomake, the Coughe, the
Tisect & many other diseases. It is hott and drye in
the third degree.





Bicula

Bicula is an hearbe called Bugell ther be two Spices
therof. The vertue of the first. Stampe it, and drinke
it with wyne and it clenseth the Redd Choler and purge the
the burneinge of the Stomake & of the harte and it
clensethe the blacke Choler that is called Cardiuea
and helpethe evill humors of the lung. Alsoe
the Iuyce Mingled wth wyne if it be cast amonge
people at a feaste it will cause them to be glad and
merrie

The second Bugell hathe leaves somwhat rounde
of a sadd greene. his flowers blewe. It will heale
wound in a mans heade if it be Stamed and
drunke wth wyne. It Strengtheneth the broken bones
in the head. And they are bothe hotte & drye.

Bearefoote.

Bearefoote hath vertue to soften and Rype. Seethe the hearbe in
Bores grease and laye it to Apostemes of the privie Members
and it will heale them. Alsoe for payne of the Mylte and drynes
of Synnewes that be Shronke. Take Barefoote and Bittenie
and laye them longe in Oyle Oliffe and sett them on the
fyre and put therto Virgin Waxe and make an Oyntment
therof and it will helpe. In this oytement the leaves are
to be vsed whiles they be greene. It is hott & moyste in e first degree

Berula

Berula is an hearbe called Beler. It hath leaves lieke
Skirwitt and growethe in waters and hath a longe stalke
The virtue of this hearbe is verye pretious to rype Sores
Byles & Botches. for it is hott and drye.





82
Burago Domestica

Burago Domestica Is an hearbe called Borage. It clensethe
the Red Choler and it is good for the Cardiacle and apostemes
that doe engender of blacke Choler. Borage put in wyne
makethe them merye that drinke therof. Dicit Borago
gaudia Semper ago. and that daye you drinke therof you shall
not be poysoned. Alsoe braye the roote of Borage and temp
it wth a little stale Ale and Saffron and it healethe the Iaundise
for this herbe is hott and moist in the first degree.

Borago Silvestris

Borago Silvestris is wyld Borage or Calleworte. this hearbe
hathe greate leaves and eben longe not soe broad as other Borage
and hath a blew flowre wth a greate roote. it groweth on drye
growndes and on waye sides.

Bugale

Bugula is an Hearbe called Brome Bugell, and some call it
Self heale Thevertue therof. It will heale a wound in
any part of a mans bodie wthout helpe of other thing. It
breakethe and destroyethe the Rhume in ones head and the
Stopinge and akeinge, ffor it is hott and drye and ther be two
Spyces therof.

Brokelempe.

Brokelempe is an Hearbe much lieke Mynt. and if it be brayed
and meddled wth Sheepes Tallowe and made hott in water or in
manner of a Plaister snd layd to any manner of Swellinge
It will in short tyme asswage it.





Barnetta.
Barnetta Burnett hathe leaves lieke Tansey and blewe
flowres. It hath virtue to destroye grosse humors and to cease
and staye the Laxe: It openethe the Stoppinge of the Liver
and it makethe good uryne. Drinke it wth wyne and it helpethe
the Jaundise. The juyce of this herbe and honey dronke togither
unbyndethe the Sore under the rybbes and sore Pappes. Therbe
two Spices of this hearbe one growethe in gardens and hard
ground & the other in Meddowes and other places.

Bursa Pastoris.
Bursa Pastoris is Sheepherds purse. It is to be gathered
in June in the wayneinge of the Moone. This hearbe
Stanchethe blood at the nose if the patient beare it in his right
hand greeene or drye. Alsoe the pouder therof dronke wth wyne
helpethe them that are brused or have the laske. And if a veyne
be Cutt drinke the Juyce of it and it will stanche the blood. It
healeth wounds and keepethe them from Softninge. It is hott & drye.

Brisma.
Brisma is called Cucurbita agrestis or wyld Slepp It
growethe in hedges and hathe agreate roote Ther are two kynds
therof, the black and the white. That wch beare the redd seede
is called the black and the other hath a white seede. The black is
the best. It is good agaynst Spasma. that is a certayne
Crampe or goute. If ye roote be hanged about the patients
nack it will helpe him shortley. The Juyce dronke three
or fowre tymes helpethe them that Spett blood. Drinke the Juyce
therof wth vinegre and that weeke you shall not be dronke.
Alsoe drinke the broathe that it is sodden in wth honey and it will
take awaye the payne of Collica paslo & Ilica passio. Alsoe
for the kings evill Canker or other Sores: take ye roote of Briomie &
Astrologia in lieke quantitie and beate them wth honey and grease and
laye it therto. Alsoe for them that have broken bones in their hands
or other places: Take xli Croppes of Briony and three ounces
of glasse broken and boyled togither in iii Cyathes of wyne
till the





till the two parts be wasted, then straine it and give it the patiente
Hypocrates saythe That a man had all the Fingers of his hands
eaten and knawne wth Sicknes, and he used this medecyne and
made him whole. Alsoe take the leaves and seeds of Bryonie and
burne them to asshes and meddle them wth the Fayre of the same
hearbe & make an Oyntment and therwth annoynte warts and
they will fall of: The Juyce holden longe in the mouthe healethe
the Cankered Gummes. And Seathe this hearbe in fayre runninge
water and therwth washe a womans sore pappes that the mylke is
corrupted and Crudded in and it will mortifie and case the payne.
Alsoe take the Seeds that growe fowre togither and it helpethe
the Fevor Quarten if it be dronke before it come. Alsoe the water
that the budds be sodden in pvoke one to make good uryne, and
makethe a woman that lakethe mylke to give milke plentifullye.

Baglossa.
Baglosse is an hearbe called Lange de beofe or wyld Borage. The leaves are full
of pricks and bearethe a yeallowe flowre, and it must be gathered in June and
July. The roote sodden in water is good for them yt have the fevor Quartto and especyally
the Buglosse yt hath fowre stalks groweinge on one roote wth seedes Seethe
the roots therof and give it the sick to drincke. Alsoe Stampe this hearbe
wth honey and Cromes of bread, and make a plaister therof and laye it to an
Aposteme and it will breake it and purge it. Alsoe the juyce dronke wth
honey comfortethe the weakenes of the hearte, and lettethe sigheninge. The
water yt Buglosse hath bene sodden in helpethe agaynst abundance of redd
Choler, the drye Choler & the blacke choler. It Comfortethe and establishethe the mynd if man.
And if it be eaten wth Lettuce it maketh good Temperature and give blood for ye
coldnes of Lettuce temperethe ye greate heate & keepe the well Chastitie and
for Consolation of Companie take the water of Buglosse hath bene sodden
in and Sprinkle it about the howse or place, wher Companie is togither and it
will make them all reiayne and be merrye. Ther are three kynds of this herbs
The first bearethe a flowre blewe of a Skye Couler. The second bearethe
a white flowre. the rots blacke wthout and white wthin. and hathe greate
stalkes lieke Catts tayles. The third hath a yeallow flowre wth many leaves
full of pricks & therfore some call it Aspergo or Asparell. But that
wch bearethe the blew flowre is best in medecyne. It is hott and moist
in the first degree. /





Calendula.
Calendula is an hearbe called Marygowld. Solsequium.
Helitropium, Solmaria, Sponsa Solis. Some call it Calendula
because it bearethe flowres all tymes of the yeare. The
Juyce therof dronke or eate wth a reare Egg provokethe
weomens flowres and comfortethe the Stomake. Alsoe the
Juyce therof put into ye Nostrills of one that is payned
wth the tootheache will ease him. And if one be bitten
of any Venomouse beast eate this hearbe and it will heale
him. The Juyce therof dronke helpethe the stoppinge of
the Liver. And it hath the vertue that Endiffe hathe.

Camelion
Camelion is an hearbe called Wolfe Thistle. It bearethe
a redd flowre the leaves are sharpe. The vertue of this
hearbe is this gather it when is the Sonne is in Capricorne
and in the newe of the moone and that daye you beare
it wth you noe evill thinge shall hurt you. /

Canabria
Canabria wyld Hempe, Holy Rope or dum nettle
the leaves be llieke Hempe. Rubbe them uppon the
pulces of him that hath the fevor and it helpethe him
It growethe by waters:

Caprisolium
Caprisolium is Woodbyne. The vertue is: to heale wounds
Cankers and Blisters, Akeinge of Teethe and Sore
in the Tonge. And it helpethe agaynst stinginge of
Bees & Waspes. And Stampe it and laye it to wounds
and twill drawe out the blood. It is hott and drye.





Capillus Veneris
Capillus Veneris is called Mayden haire or water worte.
It hath leaves lieke ferne but they are smaller. It groweth
muche in walls and Stones, and in the middest of the leafe
ther is a stringe lieke blacke haire. If it be dronke wth
wyne it will destroye and breake the Stone and destroyethe
all manner of venome. /

Canapis
Canapis is Hempe ther are two kynds of them the Common
& the wylde. The wyld is hott and drye in the second degree
for payne and Swellinge in the brests meddle this hearbe
wth grease and as a plaister laye it to the Sore and it will
cease the ache and the Swellinge And it rypenethe all
Apostemes and breakethe them. The Juyce of the Roote
meddled wth Capons grease and vinegre annoynted helpethe
the Pose, the goute, that comethe of Cold and if it be
meddled wth nettle seede it wastethe cold Impostemes and
breakethe them. /

Cardiaca
Cardiaca as an hearbe called Vylesper it hathe leaves
lieke the wyte nettle and it will pricke somethinge uppon ye
Tonge and it bearethe a little seede in small Codds.
If it be eate or dronke it is good for the fallinge Evill

Eidanum Earthe nutt.
Earthe nutt or Eidanum is an hearbe that hathe leaves
lieke fennell wth flowres and small stalks and growethe
in woods and meddowes. And if it be Stamped and layed
to a sore wound it will fetche out all the dead fleshe out of
the sore. Alsoe make a plaister therof and laye it to a place
that lackethe haire and it will restore it agayne./





Carduus Benedictus.

Carduus Benedictus called St Marye Thistle it bearethe
a broad leafe full of white strik and in the topps of the
stalk bearethe a greate burr full of sharpe prick. Hange
it in a howse xiiij dayes till it be drye. Then laye it vppon
a fayre Clothe in the sonne and when it is thoroughe drye
beate it to pouder. And if one feele him self grieved wth
a prickinge of the pestelence take the same pouder wthin
xoj howres after the saod priclinge beginethe the quan-
titie of a walnutt or more, and as muche Treacle and a spoone-
full of the water of Dragons and mingle them well togither
and take it vpp wth the poynte of a knife and eate it wthin
xij howres and it will cause e sicknes to breake out in diverse
places; and this medecyne is as pretious for poyson. Keepe
well this pouder for it is worthe gold and hathe bene well
proved.

Carawaye.

Carawaye is a gentle hearbe and Comin looseth his
strengthe wher Carawaye is psente. If it be stamped
and dronke wth stronge Ale it will destroye all evill
wynd in  the bowell. It puttethe awaye the Coughe, and
healethe them wch are infected wth frensie, or bitten with venemous
wormes or beastes. This hearbe medled wth vinegre healethe Scabbes.
and makethe haire to growe in bald places or head if they be annoyn-
ted therwth. And drinke it with stale Ale and it healeth the
menstrewes and swellinge of the flank. Eate it or drinke
it and it causeth good digestion. It Sleaethe wormes in the
bowell. It helpethe castinge that comethe of flesume. It
puttethe out evill wynd of the bodye. It moystnethe the Stomake
and makethe good vryne, And if it be eaten it destroyethe itche,
and Scabbes It comfortethe the wynd and clearethe the voyce.
It is hott and drye. Dum Carawaye carui tunc sine febre fui.






85
Cassula maior. Orpyn./

Cassula maior is called Orpyn It bearethe a Crymson flowre vppon
one Stalke The vertue of it is. If it be Stamped and layed to a wound
it will heale it without helpe of any other thinge.

Cassula minor.

Cassula minor is an hearbe called Stonecropp. It groweth lowe, and
sometyme vppon moiste walles and howses. the vertue of it is If
it be dronke with beere wyne or Ale it keepethe him from lecherie
that drinkethe it.

Calus Domesticus

Calus Domesticus is Cole or Caboche. The vertue therof is it will
heale all freshe and old wound Alsoe washe the Canker with hott wyne
and after Stampe this hearbe with wyne and laye it therto, and it
will cleare the Canker. Alsoe take Barlie meale and mingle
it wth the iuyce of Cole, Hearbe Grace and Coriander, well stamped
togither and it will heale the Podagra, the sore Toes that be
chaffed with goeinge and Swellinge. Alsoe the vryne of him
that vsethe to eate Caule is a Soverainge thinge to washe Synewes
that be dryed and shronke. and the Children that be washed wth
this vryne it will keepe them in good healthe. And he that vseth
te eate Cole it preservethe his sight cleare. And it makethe a
Nurse have plentie of mylke. It clensethe the menstruewes
and castethe out e dead Child out of a woman. And it is comfortable
to the Stomake. And if it be softlye sodden it mollifiethe the wombe
and if it be muche sodden it stoppethe the wombe. Alsoe Stampe
Cole wth Allom & vinegre and it healethe the liver and it maketh
haire to growe wher it is beare. and it helpethe the Swellinge in the
privie members, and muche the better if it be sodden wth Beanes. Alsoe
Seethe Caule and fenegreeke togither in vinegre, Straine it and
drinke it, and it helpethe the streines of Synewes & e Podagra if you
make a plaister of e hearbe and laye it therto. Alsoe burne the stalk
of Caule & e Ashes therof medled with old grease made in Oyntmt
healethe e payne in the rybbes & of the sides. And the seed mixed wth
vinegre helpethe Sores. And drinke it & it avoydethe wormes out of the bodye
Th Iuyce of Caule put into the Nostrill puttethe out fleame out of e
heade, and purgethe e brayne, e brest and e voyce. Alsoe the pithe of e
Stalk eaten keepe a man from dronkennes. Alsoe take vpp the
Roote and let it touche noe more the ground, and let him that hath freckles
beare some therof about his Necke and it will take them awaye.






Centaurus maior.

Centaurus Maior is e greater Centaurie or Earthe Gall It hath leaves
lieke the lesse Centaurie but t they be whiter. It bearethe yeallowe
flowres in the topp of the Stalke. If it be sodden in wyne &
dronke it healethe the sickness of the lyver and it drawethe evill
humors from the milke a thinge that hath bene well proved. The
water t  this hearbe is sodden in is good to washe woundes & to washe
a Canker. It growethe on drye grownd and on hill It is hott/

Centaurus Minor

Centaurie the lesse is hott and drye. If it be stamped and layed
to a wound it makethe it to goe togither that hath bene ill healed.
The water that it is sodden in, is good to washe Synnewes t be shronke.
The Iuyce dronke in wyne or Ale pvokethe flowres and castethe out
an abortive. Drinke the Iuyce in wyne and it helpethe the evill in
the wombe. Gather it in harvest drye it in the Sonne, make
pouder therof and drinke it wth stronge Ale or wyne, and it helpeth
them t have dronke venome, or be bitten wth any venomous beaste.

Chelidonia

xttirundo
Chelidion.

Chelidonia is called Celendyne, ther be two kynd of them, and
bothe are good for the Eye sight. Plinie saythe t the younge
Swallows cannot see vntill e Dame dothe touche their eyes wth this
hearbe and therefore the Swallowe is called Chelidonia Celedyne wherof
this hearbe hathe his name. Take the iuyce of the flowres, and seethe
it wth honey in a cleane vessell till it be thick, and that is a
principall medecyne for the Eyes if they be often annoynted therwth.
Alsoe stampe e roote therof and temper it wth wyne or Aysell
and vse to drinke therof often, and it helpethe the Iundies.
and the Toothache & will kill wormes in the Teethe if the
roote be holden in the mouthe betwene the Teethe, and it ceasethe
the ache, and it helpethe the fistula; the Canker, the Collick,
and many other diseases. It is hott and dry in the fowrthe degree;





86
Cepe.

Cepe called oynion. Some saye t it is contagious to the sighte and to the
head. Gallen saithe it is not good for them t have sicknes in e gall. But
it profitethe muche to fflegmatique men Plinie saythe that it is good
for e blood wthin a man. it makethe good Couler It neshethe the wombe
And Stampe it with honey or vinegre or seethe it in wyne and it will
heale e swellinge of the hand and all Apostemes wthin three dayes.
Alsoe Stampe oynions wth Salt and hearbe Grace and it will heale the
bytinge of Dogg that are madd, & of Adders. Alsoe the Iuyce of oynions
and womans mylke helpethe the payne in the eares. The Iuyce dronke
wth water helpethe them that have lost their speache. And the Iuyce
put into the nostrill puttethe evill humours out of the head. Eate them
or drinke the Iuyce of them & it purgethe womens flowers. Take e
Iuyce of an oynion and mingle it wth Capons grease and annoynte the
feete t be Chaffed wth labor & it helpethe them. Alsoe the iuyce garguled
in ones mouthe aswagethe the Toothe ache. Seethe oynions in oyle and
eate them with bread & it helpethe to heale the sores in the mouthe. and
healethe the bloodie flix. and for the head that lackethe haire annoynte
it wth the iuyce of an oynion and it will growe. And drinke it &
it makethe a good apetite and ceasethe the stinkeinge in the mouthe.
and is good to annoynte sore eyes. Stampe oynions and laye them
to the Emerodes and it healethe them. It is hott in the third degree
and moist in the fowrthe.

Comin./

Comin hath a stronge savour. The leaves are lieke Coriander. It hath
many branches comeinge out e stalke. Take it in meates and make
pouder of e Seedes & drinke it in wyne or old Ale and it will put evill
wynd out of the Stomacke and the Bowelles and makethe good diges-
tion & good vryne and makethe one freshe of Couler. It Stoppethe
the Fluxe and lettethe Lecherie It is good to heale the bytinge of venemous
beast. Alsoe seethe a handfull of the pouder in good wyne from a
pottle to a quarte, and drinke therof as hott as you can suffer it
Eveninge and morninge first and last and this is a Soveraigne
medecyne for a stinkinge breathe. It is hott and drye.





Cicuta

Cicuta is an hearbe called Humbock. The Roote therof eaten in
steade of Persenips causethe one to loose his witts. Albeit
ther is a Soveraigne medicyne therfore viz. Drinke stronge
wyne after it & it will helpe it. If you stampe the leaves &
laye it in plaister to a sore head it makethe it whole. Alsoe
annoynte the eye liddes wth the iuyce therof and it helpethe
bleared eyes. and helpethe the Sicknes called in Latin
Herpera in Englishe holye fyre. Alsoe put the Iuyce to weomens
breast and it swagethe the swellinge of them, and dryeth vpp
mylke. Make a plaister of the Seede ground wth Silver
Spume and grease medled therwth and it is a medicyne
to put awaye the heate of lecherie and polution of kynd.
And make a plaister of this hearbe and laye it hott to the
Podagra and it helpethe it, and all vnkynd heates.
It is hott and drye in the third degree

Camamille

Camamile is an hearbe wherof ther are three kynd and all of them
have one propertie. Drinke it wth wyne it makethe good vryne
& breakethe the stone in the bladder. and purgethe the flowers
in a woamn in hir Matrice if she be washed therwith. Seethe it
and drinke it wth wyne and it abatethe the hurt and swelling in
the Stomake. The decoction therof healethe the Iaundise and the
diseas in a mans side called Hypocondriu It goethe awaye
wthout oyntment if it be dronke wth wyne Plinie sayethe
Take five penny weight of Camamell and xl penny weight
of white wyne and drinke it Contynuallie xl. dayes and it
clensethe the Splen & helpethe all evill blaynes in the white
macule, Sebel, pam.  of the Eye that are called _________ Alsoe make a plaister
therof and laye it to a wound and it clensethe it cleane.
And sodden in water and washe the head therwth that
akethe and it aswagethe the akeinge.







Calaminte
Calamynte is an hearbe of a stronge savour it bearethe three Spyces
the one is stonye ye other is hairie & the third is waterie and all these
as Hipocrates saithe destroye mans Tallent, ableit it is hott and
drye in the third degree. Drinke the Juyce therof wth hott mylke
and it will make all the bodye sweate. Seethe it in oyle and annoynte
all the bodye of him that hathe the fevor and it will helpe him. Alsoe
it healethe the Leprosie in the beginninge. Braye it and laye it to
the stinginge of an Adder and it will heale it. Drinke ye juyce wth
wyne and that healethe all Venome and sleaethe wormes in the bellye,
it healethe the kyneys and all evills in the sides. Stampe it and laye
it to blacke wounds and it will bringe them to their perfect couler agayne,
and doe awaye the blacknes. and doe muche the better if it be sodden in wyne
& laye to as a plaister. Alsoe drinke it wth wyne and it comfortethe the Sto=
make, & lettethe neesinge and stoppethe the appetite of Lecherie. Stampe
it and laye it in a howse and their shall noe Adders nor any Venomous
beaste have power to abyde wthin the howse. Alsoe who soe drinke the the juyce
of this hearbe and the juyce of Mugworte by the space of three dayes togi=
ther fastinge it will heale him of the yeallow Jaundise if it be curable
on warrantise probatum. /

Cenapium.
Cenapium is Mustard Seede. It hathe vertue to drawe out humors of glutt. The strength
is in ye seede. It Sharpenethe the witts and bringethe the wombe to good temper.
It makethe good uryne; It provokethe the flowres. Temper it wth aysell &
it expellethe evill fleame out of the bodye. It Comfortethe the sight. the Stomake.
the brest. wherof the Tyssick comethe, the Longs an the old akeinge of the raynes
of ye backe. It drawethe all evills out of the Bladder. It helpethe the Swellinge
about the harte, the Splene, the mawe, and helpethe all old evill wynds in the
bodye Alsoe they make Plaisters therof for Stinginge of Venomous wormes
and many other things ther are wherin Mustard Seede is used. Take Mustard
Seede and beate it in a Morter wth athird parte of Cromes of white breade,
drye Figgs and honey and Aysell and make a plaister and laye it to everie
disease afore named and it will helpe. Take ye Seede and the Roots and Stampe ym
wth newe Must or ever it be wyne, Strayne it, and that drinke is comfortable
for the Splene, the Stomake and the heade. Oyle made of the Seede is a
pretious Oyntment for ache & for the Synnewes. Alsoe the Seede stamped
wth Ale and barrowes grease is good for the vaynes in the neck. The
Leaves & ye Stalke burnt & the Ashes dronke is good for the fallinge sicknes. The
Seede stamped wth Figgs is good to eate for the Lethurgie, the Sleepinge disease
The Seede brayed wth barrows grease helpethe the Leaper, & puttethe awaye
Skabbs & Skarfes if they be annoynted therwth. It is hott & drye./





Centimodum.
Centimodum is an hearbe called Pusser Sparrowe Tonge,
Strill or Swypies Cresses. It is hott and drye. The juyce therof
dronke wth good Ale or white wyne breakethe the Stone in the bladder.

Columbina
Columbina is a Columbyne, It is hott in the third degree. Ther are two
kynds of them, one that bearethe white flowres and the other blewe, and
bothe are lieke but for the Color & have one vertue. The juyce dronke wth
water castethe out abortives. It helpethe the Coughe and Bruses.
Drinke it wth Aysell and it dryethe the Splene. Drinke it wth wyne and it
purgethe the Flowres. It helpethe the Dropsey in the beginninge. It healethe
greene wounds. The Juyce meddled wth a little honey is good to annoynte
sore Eyes. Alsoe stampe it wth oyle and annoynte the bodye therwth and
it puttethe awaye the coldnes and bringethe it into temperate heate./

Colorago
Colerago or Colorage is and hearbe called in Lattin Perfricaria in
Englishe Arse Smarte it is commune and growethe in wett lands.
Ther are two kynds therof.

Coriander.
Coriander is cold of nature. Galen saythe, Take Coriander and
drinke it and it kill the wormes in the bodye. Make a plaister of Coriander
Rosen Aysell & honey & laye it to the swellinge of a mans Codds & it will helpe
it. And make a Plaister of the juyce therof wth white bread and laye it
to any place that akethe & it helpethe. Take the pouder of the Seede
and give it him to drinke that hathe the fevor quotidian before the
sicknes come uppon him, and it will helpe. Soe many Seedes
as a woman eatethe at once soe many dayes hir flowers shall
stand.

Consolida Major.
Consolida Major is Comferie of some Consolie it bearethe greate leaves.
broad and longe. The vertue is. If a man be brused wthin the bodye
Take the roote therof & rost it well in hott Embers and lett
the Patient eate it wth honey when he is fastinge, and
it will heale him in short tyme. Alsoe the juyce dronke
healethe and knitethe broken bones. And if a veyne
be broken in ones nose Stampe Compfarie & give him
the juyce to drinke in stale ale & the blood will stanche.





Consolida minor.
Consolida minor is an hearbe called Daysie Broseworte or
Boneworte. The vertue therof is. Stampe it & laye it to a botche
and it will breake it. Stampe it & drinke the juyce and it will
knitt broken bones togither. and that drinke will asswage
akeinge & swellinge. And if one be brused wthin the bodye,
make pottage of this herbe and Comforie wth porke if it
be in the season therof and lett him use to eate the pottage
& it will make him hole. It is a kynd of Comfarie./

Costmarie.
Costmarie hathe leaves that be hott in operation whosoe eatethe
them it makethe him to have ill digestion of his meate. It maketh
good uryne. It Comfortethe the sight. It helpethe the Coughe.
Eate wth honey or stampe it, & it clensethe the bodye of Moles,
Spotts and Freckles. The roote therof sodden, stamped and
layde in plaister to a wound it will drawe out broken bones.
The seede therof sodden in wyne and dronke healethe the
menson Costmarie, Bytteny and Oxe gall, mixed togither
healethe the Morsewe & the blacknes of Strokes if it be
annoynted therwth. Whosoe usethe to eate therof in butter
or in Sawse it comfortethe him to ye worke of kynd./

Cresses.
Cresses is an hearbe wth these vertues Stampe the seede and
mixe it wth Barlie meale & it helpethe the Uncomes in ye face
that rise wth Quitter and abatethe the akinge. The Juyce therof
abatethe the Toothe ache if it be put on that side that akethe. And
that juyce fastnethe the haire of the head. The seede therof
dronke rastethe the dead Child out of the mothers wombe.
The smell therof makethe Adders to flye the place wher it is.
The juyce therof dronke with Aysell helpethe the Splene. Make
a plaister therof viz. the Seede barrow grease and Aysell
& it helpethe ye payne in the Thyes. Cresses and Goose grease
myngled togither will kill Lyce and Mytes in the head
The leaves stamped & sodden in Goates mylke supplethe
the brest & abatethe Coughe./





Daucus Asimus

Daucus Asimus is an hearbe called Dauke or Birdesnest it hath leaves
lieke Hemlocke, it bearethe a white flowre. It is good to heale a
dropsey, and the byteinge of all venomus wormes and beast
It vnbyndethe the stoppinge of the liver & Mylt & wombe
of it be stamped & dronke. It is hott and drye.

Dens Leonis.

Dens Leonis is an hearbe called Dan de Lion or Lyons toothe
Stampe it & drinke it wth Ale and it helpethe the Quotidian
fevor. drinke it before it comethe.

Ditanie

Ditanie is an hearbe t healethe the byteinge of all venemous
beast. make pouder of the seede and drinke it wth wyne. And
stampe the hearbe & frye it wth freshe grease and laye it to the
sore and it will drawe out all the venome, Cease the Ache, &
doe awaye the swellinge. And it is good for Morbo ladueo
to take the pouder of dittanie & of Castor and to let the
sicke drinke it wth the iuyce of hearbe Grace, & put some
therof in the Nostrill. Alsoe if one be diseased wth
cold about the harte seethe figg in wyne till they be
broken, and then clene them thoroughe a clothe, and
put therto two dragmes of pouder of Dittanie
& let the sicke drinke therof first in the morninge cold,
and last in the Eveninge warme. And if a wooman be
wth dead Childe, take the iuyce therof temper it wth
Wyne and put it in a Horne and doe it in hir Secret
And if yron or thorne be in ones bodie let him drinke
that drinke and it will soake it out. It is hott and drye.

Ditanie Minor

Dittanie minor is drye of nature. Stampe it wth oyle & Rosen
& annoynte a sicke mans head therwth and it will abate the head ache.
The smell therof avoydethe corrupt humors from the eyes.
A plaister therof made wth Aysell is good for the Stomake.
It purgethe fleame from the harte and the Lung. The foresaid
plaister breakethe an Aposteme and is good for the Raynes of
the backe. This hearbe hathe leaves lieke e greater Dittanie
but they be whiter & lesser and hath a sweete savour.





89
Dragancia Masculina

Dragantia Masculina is an hearbe called Serpentyne or
Bassilike. It is good for Stinginge of Adders,  also make
pouder therof and take two part therof & the third part
of vnsliked Lyme and mixe them togither wth vinegre, as
a plaister laye it to a Canker & it will heale it. Alsoe take
the pouder therof and temper it wth old wyne & let the sicke
drinke therof in winter and if it be in Somer take the greene
hearbe of Bassilike for it hath more verue then the pouder.
The pouder blown int ones nose dryethe the runninge of
it. This hearbe destroyethe the Coughe and helpethe the
festringe of wound. It growethe in Woodes & on hilles & hath a
stalke lieke an Adder. and the leaves are somewhat sharpe at
the ende. It is hott and moyst in the third degree. and it is
to be gathered in Iune and Iulie.

Dragancia faminia

Dragantia faeminia Is an hearbe that hathe leaves lieke
Ivie but they have white blott vppon them. It bearethe a yeallowe
flower and a stalke of two Cubitt in lengthe in manner of
a croked staff, lieke a Snake, and it bearethe seede aboue lieke
a Closter of grapes. and when the seede is rype it is yeallowe:
Make powder of the seede and meddle it wth oyle and put it in
his eare that cannot heare & it will helpe him. The iuyce
therof put into the nostrill wth a little wooll purgethe the head
& the nose. Alsoe stampe the roote therof. & the roote of a white
Vyne & temper them with honey and it is good to heale a Canker
in Wound. He that annoyntethe his hand wth the iuyce of the
toote of this hearbe he may take Adders wth his bare hand &
they cannot hurt him. Take e iuyce of the hearbe and annoynte
the eyes therwth and it putteth awaye the darknes of them
And if a man drinke the iuyce wth wyne it stirreth him to
the desire of a woman. This hearbe growethe in moyste
& drye places.





Herba Cruciata

Erba Cruciata is an hearbe called Crosworte. It bearethe small
leaves much lieke Cockle & a small stalke and hath white flowres
lieke a Crosse on one branche. And it is good to heale all wound.

Herba Iohannis

Erba Iohannis bearethe a yeallow flower and hath many stalk
runninge out of one stumpe. Stampe it and drinke it wth stale
Ale it is goof for all fevors. Alsoe keepe this hearbe in a
howse and noe evill thinge shall have power to come therin,
X or doe any hurte If it be gathered on Mydsommer Eve before
the sonne rise and sett it in fowre Corners of the house &
make a Crosse in Nomine patris &c

Herba feri.

Herbe Christofer Masculyne hath leaves lieke Crowsope but they
be whiter & bearethe a yeallow flower. It is good to drinke
for the plague pestelence & for the frensie. And take the roote
therof & of Pugell & Stampe them togither and drinke the
iuyce wth stale Ale by a good fyer and it healeth the stitche.

Herba feri faeminia

Herbe fer feminyne is an hearbe that hath leaves lieke
herbe Peter but they be not fullie soe white It groweth
by water & hath a longe stalke.

Herba Roberti

Herbe Robert hathe leaves lieke hearbe Bennett. The stalke therof
be redd with a little redd flowre, and hath a stronge Savour
lieke the Chafinge of a foxe. It is good to heale wound
The powder therof killethe the Canker. It growethe in
shaddoed hedges.





90
Herba Petri

Herbe Peter is called Cowslopp or Pugle. The vertue. The
Roote is good for the Stomake that swellethe. It causethe good digestion
It helpethe all sicknesses in the bodye. If it be dronke it maketh
good vryne. It clensethe weomens monthlye flowers. drinke
it wth wyne, and it healethe all venome or bytinge if it be brayed
& layed therto. The seede therof is good in Electuaries. But it
is ^not good for Sicklie folke to smell nor drinke. It is hott & drye in the
third degree.

Herba Gualteri

Hearbe Walter hath leaves lieke to Persley but they be smaller
Fayre and greene they seeme as bright as Silver bothe aboue
& vnder the leaves. It Springethe in februarie and seedethe in
June. The vertue is. It is a verie good Clenser & healer
of wound.

Erba Ive.

Hearbe Ive hath a roote groweinge even downe into the grownde, wth small
leaves by the ground. The vertue therof is. If a man hath a swelling
in his Eares take this hearbe and seethe it in ....... of  h
in wyne, oyle and Commin, and make a plaister therof & laye it
to the Eares & it will heale them. Alsoe the knobb of the roote dryed
and made into powder & dronken maketh one Laxative. Alsoe
take the knobb & the rootes and laye them asteepe in rose water
& sett it in the sonne till the rose water be consumed, and doe soe
twice or thrice and rubb yo face wth the powder therof, & washe it
wth water of roses & it will make yo visage puerlye fayre
& cleare. This powder dronke putethe awaye the Superfluitie
of fleshe. It is hott and drye.





Herba Benedieta

Herba Benedieta is an hearbe called Bennett or fetherfewe,
The vertue therof. It will keepe maydens Pappes from waxeinge
greate. The iuyce therof mixed with the Spume of Silver & Swynes
grease aswagethe the hott Podagra or Gowt & all hot evell.
Alsoe the water of this hearbe is a Soveraigne thinge to
annoynte sore Ioynt that ake if they be well annoynted
against a fyre. It Comfortethe the Stomake & aswagethe
the fevor Quotidian. It is good for the Crampe that comethe
of cold. Stampe it and laye it to the bytinge of venemous
beast. Temper it with Aysell for the morfewe. It ioyneth
broken bones beinge stamped and layed to. The roote
stoppethe the monthelye Course being dronke.
It is cold and drye.

Ebolus

Ebolus is an hearbe is an hearbe called Walworte. Ther be
two kyndes therof: the one white and the other the other blacke,
The white is more violent in operation from the blacke. Yf
a woman put it into her secrett it purgeth and clenseth
an Abortive, The poulder therof Snuffed into the nose
Dothe drive awaye the payne in the head. and medle the
poulder with the iuyce of Sellendyne and hearbe Grace and
it clensethe the sight. Put none of this poulder into pottoge
But this put in mylke will kill flyes that lye theron. The
water that this is sodden in helpethe those that be madde,
yf they drinke therof in the beginninge of their madnesse,
It helpethe the dropseye, the Melancholie and Curethe morbu
casucum, It clensethe the Leper, It ceasethe the gnaw-
inge in the stomacke. Ipocrates and Plynie will that
you give not aboue x. pennie weight to the man that you
will clense, nor in any wise to give it to old men children, nor
weomen with Child, but to sutch as are stronge of nature./
Alsoe let one seethe Walleworte in water with willowe leaves
Ache






91
Ache, Bittonie, verbine and Loveache and let one bathe
him therein and it helpethe the bruses and acketh of everie
part of his bodye. Stampe it and drincke it wth wyne
and it helpethe the palsey, and drawethe togither the
humors and expellethe blacke Choler and fleame,
It comfortethe the sight The roote stamped and layde in
playster dryethe the dropsey and the swellinge therof. And
the hearinge alsoe yf it lye to the eare two dayes. It
clensethe and it helpethe the toothache you must give
but five penny weight of the roote. It is hott and drye
in the third degree.

Etropium Helitropium
Etropium is an hearbe called Sponsa Solia or Cuory it groweth
in fast groundes and in meadowes and is a divyne hearbe of
the bodye of the sonne, and hathe Croked branches the flowre
hathe the Color of the sonne, and is cold in the second
degree, The iuyce of this hearbe healethe the bytinge
of venemous wormes and beastes, and is good for
the stoppinge of the mylt that comethe of Cold, and
for the opilations of the raynes The iuyce droncke
wth powder puttethe venome out of the bodye in short
tyme Bruse this hearbe and laye it to a mannes
Coddes and it will quenche the heate of Leacherie

Eupatorium

Eupatorium is an hearbe called wyld Sauge Saliva agrostis
It is hott in the first and drye in the second degree.





for a tetter

Take ashes of ashwood Blacke soape and
pouder of pepper mixe and anoint and at .2:
or .3 dressings it kills





92
x A Medycyne to take awaye the heate in the
face.

x Take the fatt of a pullett that never layed egge, one
ounce, a qrter of an ounce of Camphire, a qrter of
of an ounce of Lythurge of gold, as much of siluer &
leade Lythurge, beate yo Camphire & yo Lythurge
& mixe it wth the fatt of the pullett and putt it
into a pott or glasse and whensoever they fynd any
heate or ytchinge in the face annoynte it therwth.
especyall at night.

To make a bagg to comfort & strengthen
the Stomacke.

Take a handfull of wormewoode as muche
of Minnt dryed redd rose leaves that have
not bene stild, or in the sommer freshe leaves
of the redd rose. Crummes of rye bread, a
Nutmegg. Cloves, a little saffron Shred yo
hearbes smale and beate your Spice & mingle m
altogither and put them in a pewter dishe
wth a little redd rose water & wyne vineger.
then put them into a lynnen bagg as bigg
as will cover the stomacke. quilt the bagg
and applye it warme & hange it about the
necke renuinge it every daye with rose water
& vineger Sprinkled vppon it.





A Medycyne to take awaye the shaking
of the Ague.

x A little before the fitt come take Yarrowe two little
handfull and put vnder eache arme pitt one.

An other for the Ague

x Take the iuyce of Yarrowe and Planten and make
some cleare posset wth Ale or Beere, then to a
draught of the possett ale put seven spoonefull
of the iuyce. then drinke it blood warme an howre
before the fitt come. probat. vse it till you see the
fitt diminishe.

An other for the Ague

x Take Planten, Yarrowe, hearbe Grace, baye salt,
Olubanum. of eache a little quantitie, mingle
it wth a little wyne vineger spread it vppon
Lynnen clothes byndinge it as streight as they
can indure it about the wrist a little before
the fitt, letttinge it lye till the next fitt
come & then renue it.

A nother for the Ague

x Take nyne rootes of Sheperd  purse and Scrape them
put them into a lawne Clothe and laye them one by one
that they come rounde about the necke sowinge it
fast as they can endure it and soe weare about the
necke till they be drye and then yf the ague
contynnue renue it.






93
x A medycyn for a Scalding or burninge

x f Howslieke, Marrigold leaves, redd Campanie of Ale hoof Planten of eache of these a good
handfull, and a li. of freshe hogg grease, stampe
the hearbes verye smale, and put them in to a possnett
and boyle them halfe an howre, then strayne
them and keepe the oyntmt in a pott and yf
the burninge ^or scalding be in the face melt some of the oyntmt
To keep e face
from a skarr  & with a feather ^annoynt e face and lett it not be drye, night or
daye. yf it be vppon any part of the bodye or
handes then laye it vppon a primrose leafe
or Campaine.

x A Poultise to aswage swellinge or rednesse.
x Take a Pynte of newe mylke and soe on the fyre
take Mallowes & Chickweede and redd Sage
yf the swellinge come of heate
leave out e wormewood &
fetherwoode & wormewoode and Sothernwoode, violettleaves
of eache of these a little handfull, a handfull
of dryed redd rose leaves and take these herbes
and mince them smale wth a knife and put
m in to the milke and lett them boyle a while
then take a penny loafe of the fynest bread put
& grate it verye smale and put it to the herbes
& milke & lett it boyle till it be verye thicke
when it is a most boyled take a good peece of
deere suett the quantitie of a greate walnutt
Then take it of the fire & put it into a dishe and
spread it vppon cloathe and applie it to the swelling
as hott as they are able to endure it and soe dresse
it twice a daye and it will eyther swage it or
breake it. Probatum.







94





An excellent Medycyne for a Cold and to make
one recover his fleshe that is growen Leane.

Doct Mathias Take soe much Coltsfoote as will make a quart of
iuyce beinge stamped and strained, then sett it on
the fyre in a pipkin; let it boyle, then clarified wth
the whites of two Egg, beinge well clarified, let
it boyle with a good quantitie of raysons of the sonne,
aniseedes and liquoris brused a good quantitie of eache
and halfe a pynte of Englishe honey, All boyled till
it be clere, of this take two Spoonefull in the mornige
two Spoonefull at fowre a clocke in the afternoone
and two at night when you goe to bedd, Contynue
the vse of this and you shall fynd greate good in it.

An Excellent medycyne to staye a fluxe.

D Mathias  x Take halfe a handfull of Balme to a pynte of
milke and boyle it well in the milke and then
make a possett, take of the hearbes and the Cird
and then sweeten it wth Sugar, and drinle of it evening
and Morninge

Doct Mat  An Excellent Medycyne to helpe coole a greate
heate in the backe.

Take Coltsfoote and Mylke and still them togither, and drinke of
the water with sugar and rose water.

Doct Ma Alsoe to Coole e backe

Bathe yo backe wth the white of an Egg vinegre and rose water
beaten togither.
Alsoe yf neede soe require annoynte the backe wth vnguentu Rosatu
& infrigidans Gallem.





95
To pcure Sleepe and settle the brayne.

D Ma Take a good handfull of Cowslipd picked the flowers,
boyle them in a pynte of mylke, strayne out the flowres
wth this mylke and ale mke a possett, drincke of this
often wth Syrope of Cowslipp flowres the oftener &
more the better and this will pcure sleepe, and staye the
brayne that is distempered.

An Excellent Cordiall.

Take two sheepes hartes of wethers cleane washed,
putt them smale cutt in a pewter pott, and put to the a
D Ma pynte if redd roswater, a pynte of Muscadell, a branche
of rosmarie, a stick of Cynamome, strewe these in a
pott of boylinge water for iiijor howres, straine owt the
brothe, give of this wth powder of Manus Christi.
made wth pearle, the oftener the better. Season it wth
oiyce of Lemons.

A Playster for to kill wormes in a Childes bellye.

Take Aloes and Myrrha and beate them to powlder
D Mathias verie smale then tske a peece of thinn leathet and laye it
Muskedyne and make a hole in the Leather for the
Navill. then strewe the poulder vppon the leather and
with a hott knife make it to cleave and when the vertue
of that is out make an other.

A Cooling glister

Take a quarte of mylke, sett it to boyle then putt a good spoonefull
of the ioyce of Lemons, then lett it curde take a pyntt of the
whaye put in it iiijor spoonefull of browne sugar, a little butter
and the yolke of an Egge, minister it blood warme
Alsoe you may boyle Mallowes, violett leaves with barley and then
straine it, and with a pynte of this liquor iij. ounces of Syrope
of violett a Spoonefull of oyle of roses and the yolke of sn Egge
make a glister and minister it blood warme







A Clister good for the yellow Iaundise

D. Mathias
Do. Rogers
Take of frenche barley halfe a handfull, some three pyntes of
fayre water, boyle them, and add therto of Chamomell, bete
borage, Cichorie, mallowes, violett leaves, pellytorye of
the wall mullett of each a handfull. of lynt seede an
ounce, then beinge well boyled togither, take a pynte therof
and disolue therin an ounce of Diacatholicon, three drambes
of specierum hierae simp: Gal: two ounces of browne sugar
Candie, two ounces of syrop of roses, some three sponefull
of oyle of Almondes and the yolke of an Egge mixe them
all well togither and moderatlye warmed let it be ad-
ministred about 5. or sixe a clocke





A remedye agaynst the ffallinge Sicknes  .....
96

Take live ffrogges by rhe hynder legges and strieke them vppon
the heade and amaze them, and before they be dead slitt
the back and take out the liver and the mawe and wype
them verye Cleane and drye. Then take a wyld Cole-
worte leafe wrappe them one by one in pleat in the leafes
and put them in an earthen pott that hath never bene
vsed, and close vpp the lid very Close that no ayre may
goe out and bake them in an oven with braed, then when
they are very drye beate them to verye fyne powder
and searse it. Then take an ounce of a deadmans scull
that dyes with a sound Harte, and an ounce of the poulder
of Pyonye rootes. To everye ounce of Pyonye rootes &
the dead mans scull you take two ounces of the
frogges and give them to the patient at one tyme as much
as will lye vppon a frenche Crowne, assoone as he feeles
the disease cominge vppon him. p probatu

The Liver of an huge greate Toade that hath a pearle in his head. boyled
and dryed & beaten to powlder,

A most excellent Plaister to knitt a ioynte that
hath bene displaced when put in the place agayne

x Emplastrum Stipticum Paracelsi.
to mollyfie Vnguentum Altheae cum gummis/

A most excellent playster

x To Bath your Legge
Rx Muskadine A Quarte }
Cammomill flower }
Redd sage Leaves } of Eache
Redd Roses poulder & leaves} a handfull
the Toppes of Rosemarye}
the flowers of Cowslippes}
The flowers of St Iohns wort}
And Nuttmegg Grated}
Boyled togither






To clense the Stomacke of ffleame.

x Take a quarte of runninge water, put into it two ounces of ffrenche Barley
two Stickes of Licoris cut in thinne slyces, one ounce of Anniseedes
a quarter of a pound of reasons of the Sonne, stoned let these
boyle to a Pynte, then straine the Liquor out, and put into it an
ounce of sugar Candye. Then everye Morninge heate iij or iiijor
Sponefulles and drinke it.

ffor one that is troubled wth ffleame.

x Take a quarte of Ysope water and a quarte of Coltfoote water put with it licoris
anniseedes and reasons of the sonne stond, of each a lieke quantitie let them
boyle almost halfe awaye, then straine it, and set the liquor over a soft
fyre and put some sugar therin, and anon it will be a syrope, then vse to
eate a little wth a licorise sticke when yow are troubled wth ffleame.

A Drinke to Comfort the Stomacke

x Take a quarte of Aquacomposita, put into it fowre penny worthe of
Cynnampme slyced thinn, two penny worthe of Dates slyced, a quarter
of a pound of reasons of the sonne ston'd, three flakes of mace
one Nutmegg slyced a quarter of a pound of sugar. When all these
have stood a fortnight, then cleare out the drinke into a bottle and
fill vpp the forenamed thing with Aquacomposita for they must not
stand longe drye, nowe when yow feele yo stomack ill, drinke a little
now and then.

An approved Medycyne agaynst the newe burninge sicknes

Take halfe a pound of frenche Barley, boyle it in two waters a
quart at a tyme, then change it into three quartes and put in halfe a
pound of reasons ston'd, one penny worthe of Anniseedes, one penny
worth of licoris, boyle all these togither from three quartes to
three pyntes, then clense it and drincke of it often in yo burninge fitt





97
Doctur Willowbyes water very good for all manner
of diseases.

Take Gallingale, Cloves, Quibebes, Ginger, Melelott, Cardimom
Mace, Nuttmeggs of each of these two drams, and of the iuyce
of Salyndyne a pynte, mingle all those made into poulder
wth the iuyce, and put therto a quarte of the best Aqua vitae
and three quartes of white wyne, Then distill all togither
in a glasse still, Yow myst drincke therof in Sommer everye
weeke one spoonefull, and in winter two.

An excellent medycyne for the Coughe of the Lunges.

Take ffennell seedes, Anniseedes, Helicampane rootes of eache
two ounces, Hysope and Horhownde dryed of eache one ounce,
of Ginger an ounce of Liquoris two ounces; Beate all
these into a fyne poulder and searce them. Then take a pynte
of fyne honey and Clarifie it verye well, and put therto halfe
a pound of Sweete butter, then putt all these spices by little & little
into the butter and honey and then put to it of the Syrropes of
Hysope, horhownde and of Helicampane of eache of them two
ounces, And then keepe it all well stirred till it be colde. And
eate the quantitie of a Walnutt at any tyme when yow are troubld
wth the Coughe but Chiefelye first and last morninge and evening

A Cordiall brothe.

Take mother worte, Liver Worte, and longe worte, of Egrymony
Hartes tonge, ffennell Rootes Parsley rootes Marche Mallow
Rootes of eache a hand full, of Succorye liekewise a hand full
Reasons of the sonne on li. stoned, Currence one pound, Sixe
*a manchet dates, a *loafe of bread cutt in halfe, a legge of veale, two
Gallons of water, Mayden heire a smale quantitie boyle
all these wth a softe fyre till halfe be consumed. then take
yo veale and stampe it in a Morter, and put it in agayne
into the liquor & lett it boyle a little while, Then take it of
& strayne it. yow keepe it and drincke it morninge &
eveninge






ffor an Humor in the Eyes

Take Tuttye of Alexander one ounce beate it
exceedinge fyne, put it into a quarte of white
wyne, put therto one ounce of Redd Rose leaves
well dryed, boyle them all togither till halfe be
consumed, put into the eyes two dropes at once
It helpes all humors in the eyes.

ffor to staye a Reughme

Take of Rubarbe the wayte of vjf. oyle of Amyseedes
ijd wayte of lycorishe three ounces, Pennidice
three ounces, orras three ounces, Gumdragon three ounces
fyne sugar halfe a pounde, put the Gum verye fyne
and cleane and steepe it xxiiijtie houres in sixe spoone-
full of rose water, searce all these aforesaid verye
fyne and make them in manner of sugar Cakes
drye them in winter vppon a paper by the fyre,
and in the sommer in the sonne, And be carefull
to keepe them alwayes verye drye.

A water for the Eyes to recover sight
and to clarifie it

Take three dragmes of Tuttye made into fyne poulder
and as much Aloe Epaticum in poulder, two drames of
fyne sugar, sixe ounces of Rose water, sixe ounces of
good white wyne mixe all these together, and putt
them into a vessell of glasse, and beinge close stopped
sett it in the sonne for the space of a Monethe togither,
often stirringe and mixinge all the sd thinge togither
at the least once in a day, for the space of a monethe
that they incorporate well togither. Then vse it for
the mendinge of yo sight, by instillinge certayne drops
into yo eyes morninge and eveninge. Probatu - Dr Haima





98
A medycyne for one that is broken.

Take two heades of the fattest sheepe yow cann gett, dresse the
and seethe them thoroughely as if they should be eaten.
Strayne the brothe and take 2. handfull of Mallowes two
handfull of Smalage and put them into the brothe, then
seethe them vntill the hearbes be consumed to peeces,
Then take the hearbes out ofnthe brothe and laye them
to the sore, wth the fatt of the brothe as hott as the patient
can suffer it, vse this 3. or 4 tymes. Dr Haiman.

An other for the same

Annoynte the sore with oyle of Eggs.

An Excellent powder to pserue and restore sight
uerye good against all stoppinge of the spleene

x Take wywbright when it is most flowred & clippe of the leaues
and flowers of the topps of the stalkes, dry them ether in the
sune, or by the fire tyll they will goe to powder, then beat them
in a morter vntyll it be smale, then take to euery ounce of that
powder, one ounce of sweete fennell seede bejing put into powder
then take a pritye quantitye of mace, or nutmegges to mixe wth it,
and when you take the powder, put to it as much fine sugar
as the quantitye of powder you take.

for the tysick

? thak tre iiii quarts of small Ale and put into it a quarter of a pound
of figes sliced as ma resones of the sunne stoned one ouncw of fenell
sed, on ounc of carawae sed one ounc anysede on rout of parsly
on rout of smalidge, on rout of fennell tak out the pithes of all
and let them boyle to gether thell half the ale be consumed
kepeing it close coufred then take it ofe the fier and
kepe it in a close pot all to gether and drink half a pint
mrning and when yow go to bead





A speciall remedy for a cough consumption
& for seuerall other diseases

+ Take 2 spoonfulls of e sirrop of domaske roses, 2 spoonfulls of e
sirrop of violetts, 3 dramms of succus rosarum, one ounce of
Manna: pound e Manna & strayne, it & mingle it with
the other things & take it in a little posset drinke in a
morning fasting and aftward drinke some posset drinke
warme an houre, or 2 after.
Gen: Blackwall.

A Medicine for keeping e small pox from
pitting and to take away e rednes
of the face.

Take a pint of white wine & a qr of a pound of figs,
slice e figs very small boyle them in white wine, till
halfe bee consumed. And when the small pocks begin to
dye, bath the face very well with this liquor warme;
then take the leafe of a hog, & put it on a Spitt &
roast it & let it drop into red rosewater, & beat
the rose water, & that together, & anoynt e face
aft it is bathed with this. You must use this often, till
they shall bee of and aftward, to take away e rednes.
And after to take away the rednes
Anoynt e eyes round about wth saffron & milke to keep the
pockes out of the eyes.
Eat conserue of red roses to keep them out of e throat.

Dr Burges's medicine for e plague.

Take 3 pintes of Muskadine, & boyle therein a handfull
of Sage, & a handfull of rue, until a pint be wasted,
then strayne it, & set it over e fire againe, then put
thereunto a pennyworth of long pepper, halfe an ounce of ginger,
& a qr of an ounc^e of nutmegs all beaten together, let it then boyle a little,
then put thereunto halfe an ounce of Mithridate, & halfe
an ounce of treacle, a quartr of a pint of hot a.....d an-
gelica water. Keepe this as the life above all treasure.
take it alwayes warme, both euening, & morning a Spoonfull
or 2, if you beee already diseased, then sweat therepon:
if not, once a day a spoonfull is sufficient in the
plague time. Trust this for a certaine ^vnder God there is
neither man, woman, or child by this deceiued, if the head
be not possessed wth the disease. This is likewise preua-
lent against e small pox, ague or feauer





99
For the Scuruy.

Take of Scuruy grasse 4 handfulls, of water Cresses, brooklime, wild tansey,
& fumitory, of each one handfull, stampe them altogeth & take of
Nutmegs, long pepper, graynes of paradize, Juniper berryes, Sasafras,
licoras of each an ounce, of Saffron halfe a dramme, poulder
all t are to be powderd, grosly, & slice e woods, & licoras,
& mixe e powds wth e hearbes, put them inot a bag with a
wayt therein, t they may sinke, and let them worke in
4 gallons of new ales, & then drinke therof, when it is
ripe.

A medecine for a cough

Senna 8. at 1. 8
Rubarb 1. 1/2 at 1,6
Agaricke 1 1.2 at 2.6
Anniseeds 1. at 0. 2
Fennill seeds 1. at 0. 3
Licoras 4. at 0. 4
Polypody 4. at 0. 4
______________
6 - 9
______________

A Water for soare Eyes.

Take of e distilled water of white wild roses halfe a pound of e wats
of celadine fennell, eyebright, & rue of each two ounces, of
cloves an ounce, & halfe, of sugar candy a dramme, of camph-
ire, aloes succotrina of each halfe a dramme, of tutia ppard
foure ounces:
Prepare e tutia this, fire it in a crucible, & when it is red as fire
in a charcoale fire, voyd it into an earthen dish, wherein is a
quantity of white rose wat by discretion with a little white
wine t is good & strong, & reiterate this seven times.
Then pulverize it grosly, & e oth ingredients each by them selves
but you must bruize e Camphire with the sugar candy, aft
you have mixed all apon a paper, put them into a halfe gall-
on strong glasse & poure e distilled wat thereupon, & then
put to it three English pints of e best french white wine can
bee gott, & jumble all till it bee well mixed, let it stand in
the sunne for a month, shaking, or jumbling it three or four
times a day





times togeth a day: but remember alwayes to keepe yo
glasses mouth well stopped: thereaft use it.

a purging Ale verie good in e Spring

ale .i2. gallons, Sena .8. ounces, Iolop 4 ounces
rubarbe one ounce &g ^and halfe agrick one ounce and half
polopode .4. ounces, currence .16 ounces reasons 16. ounces
water cresses, brookelime, straberie leaues, Sassafrass,
Scuruigrass a pecke and half made in iuce

another

red dookes. Sena Scollopendra hermodacteles
caper rootes ashen keyes cloues aniseeds oreng pils
cummin seeds, fumiterrie Succorie Scuriuigrass
water cresses of each halfe a peck

Sgeese e bagg often in e working
of e ale





100
A Receipt of the blacke Salve.

Take one handfull of Smallage, a handfull of Hysop, a handfull
of Camomill flowers, one handfull of pare budds before
they come out, one pound of deere or Sheep suet, one pound
of barrow hogs grease.

An approved receipt for the Stone
either in the Bladder or Kidneyes
to bee made in May

Sr George Hastings
gave 100li for
this receipt.

Take Saxifrage, parsly, Time, winter savory, Iermander, Lavender, ffennle, these being
shred small, put them into a mortar, & slice 2 or 3 nutmegs: put of each of
those herbes 2 good handfulls into 3 gallons of ale; put the hearbes & ale
into a Limbecke: then take Venice turpentine (Searce to the quantity of a
walnut & beat it with two Sponfulls of English hony, till you have quite
broken e body of the Turpentine; then let yo hearbes & ale begin to
boyle, & at the first beginning to boyle put in the Turpentine &
Hony mixt together, continually stirring it till all be well incorporated
which will quickly bee; then close up your Limbecke & sett under yo
Receiver. Keepe the first quart by itselfe. which is the strongest, then
draw 3 quarts more in severall glasses. The last is much e weakest.

The Vse of it.

Take halfe a pint of white wine & put in 2 or 3 sponnefulls of e water or
more, if it offend not yo stomacke, & soe drinke it being sweetned
with sugar for yo tast, & use some moderate exercise after it
if you can.

For want of wine you may drinke it in beere; or in any water distilled
of any of the hearbes aforesayde.

To Cure the Spleene, Obstructions, heat
in the backe & reynes, gravel, stone,
melancholy & hemrods.

Take fifty pints of running waterof ffrench measure, that is, neere fourescore
English; put it into a stone pott, & add thereto halfe an ounce of Roman
vitriol, & as much sal prunella. Let them dissolve 3 dayes in e water,
& then with a pipe such as Vintners use to racke their wine with
draw out the water quietly from between the scumme & the bottoe,
soe as the grounds may remayne below. Let the body be a little
prepared with physick before you take it. Then take of e water
Sixe pints in a mornin for fourteene or 15 dayes together. You may
Sweeten it if you please with Aceta Monatan, or some other Syrrop
that hinders not the operation. You must drinke e Sixe pints in halfe or
3 qrs





3 qs of an houre.

It is better effect (the proportion of the Mineralls being as aforsyd
equally mixed) then the waters usually drunke either at the Spaur
or elsewhere receiving from thence either too much or too little
of either.

This was found out by a Counsell of ffrench Physitians for
Cardinall Richlieu.

ffrom the servant
Benj Ayloffe.
ffor Arthur Herris esq at his
Chamber in Lincolnes Inne.

A Receipt for e Stone

A singular Medicine against e stone
either in the bladder or reynes as
hath binne often pvd to the great
comfort of those that have binne
grievously tormented with that Malady.

See Gerrards
Herbal

Take nerlor grosly pounded, & drinke them in white wine. It expells
gravel & pvokes urine. The leaves of any kind of nettles, or
the seeds worke e like effect; but not wth that good speed & so
assurefly as the Roman nettle.

Nettles stampt & the juyce put in e nostrills stop e bleeding of the nose.
The juyce is likewise good agt the inflamation of the vuvoula.

An infallible Cure of an Ague.

Make mustard wth vineg & put 2 sponfulls of it into a pint of milke
ready to boyle. And it will turne it to a posset. Then
drinke a good draught of it. This will breake the fitt;
& taken e next time drive it quite away.





A notable expimt of Iohn
Bennet a surgeon at Maidston
in Kent for an Ague

See Gerrards Herbal

I. Bennt being desired to cure a bu.... boy of an ague which grievously
tormented him promised to give him a medicine & for the
psent for a shift as hee confired to Gerard tooke out
of his garden 3 or 4 leaves of the plant of rubarb, which
he stampd & straind wth a draught of Ale: & gave him to
drinke. It wrought extreamly upward & downward wth
him wthin an houre. In the end his strength overcame the
force of the physicke, & the boy lost his ague. But a
care may be had of the quantity, the former quantity beinge
too much.

Sume talpae viventis dentem & oddolorum... curat contactu.

Take e tooth of a live mole & it cure e toothach wth the touch

Take Camphire half an ounce, put it into a little bag, then beat it, &
lay it upo the pulse of the left wrist an hour bifore the
fitt, & the like upon the pitt of the stomacke, This
will infallibly cure an Ague.

For the Toothach.

Take Caranna, Tacmahac & Burgundy pitch of each an equal quantity as
mush as will cover a plaist of the bignes of halfe a crowne: Spread it upo a piece
of leath and apply it to the hollow of the necke.





Dr writs pre-
scription for
the smale pox
for Kate

Rx syr de capill. ven. j ss
Acetos. simpl j
croci puluer. et solut. in ij
Aq. Thoriac stillat. gr. ij
misce sumat cocl./. p vne
bis terve in die aut noctu.

Rz diachalat. solut. ol. ehamomel
j croci gr. & misce
extend sup lineu pro regione
gutturis

Mr Goldsmithes child

Rx pul. ex. chelis cancr copos. ..
detr cu posset pscript
hac nocte aut alia vne
put urgeat occasio.

Mr Goldsmiths child
14 r 1659

Rx pill ex aloe Cot. cum succo.
ros scruple j ♀ pill X sumantur
hora Torij sequenti mare bibat
 j manem in iusculo.

e possett drinke t is vsed at e first to bring them out
is fiue or six gigues a spooneful of harts horne a few marige
marygold flowers, a fewe sittron seeds a good licorus sticke
sliced, boile these in about .2. qrs of posset alle, being
put into a little linnen bagg. you ^must haue .2. baggs and boile e
old with e newe to make it e stronger: let them drinke
of this till they are fully come out.
at the first lay saffron baggs vnder there arme pitts to keepe
e cold from strikeing them in. and lay on e plaster for
e throate aboue written. at e first sickening. and vse e
medicine to keepe them ^from pitting, as soone as they beginn to
die wch is sett down in this booke





e 13th November 1682.
Mr ffosters prescription for K.D. 102

Rx Aq Decoctionis {
Cithoroi  vi, Sena {It wrought gentely
by Iohn Everell  Oriental  ij Crem.
apothecary at Towster Tartari  j Coriand.
ppat  ss. Coq. ad
Consumpt: tertiae ptis
Colatura ad syr. de
Cithoreo cum Rhubar:
 ij fiat potio.

Iff

e 16 Novemb 1682
Mr ffoster

Rx Aloes opt: Gum
Amoniaci in Aceto
e same apothecary soluti, et traiect p
setaceum atq iterum
insipissati an  ss
Croci Martis Antimony
diaphoret. an  diarydij
 j Cum Oximel scillit
fiat Massa Pilular:
de qua Cap:  ss singulis
diebus p 20: ant 30 dies

Rx Gum Amoniaci
 ij dissolvantur in
aceto forti, postea Colentur
et bulliant ad Consumpt.
aceti, deinde adde Cerae
parum et fiat Emplast.

Iff





the 11th of Ianuary 1682 ffoster for K.D.

Rx Spec. Diarrhod. abatis,
 ss. Troch. de Rhub.
de Cuppibus an  ij
Antimony Diaphoret.
Croci. Martis, an  iij
Mellis upt. despit muti
lib. ss fiat Elect. cui
adde Turtari vitriolati
 ij ss. Cap. quant nucis
Moschata singulis diebq
mane tantum

Rx Spec. Diarrhod. Abbat.
salis prunellae an  ss
Sacchur. albi  iij fiat
pulveris
Iff





103





104





An exellent Ale for the Scuruye

Senna Alexandriae .6. ounces, Polyrodium .4. ounces, bay berryes .3. ounces, Ashen-key
kernells, 4. ounces, sweet fennell seeds 2. ounces, roots of Saxifrage 2 ounces, Rubarb
one ounce, scurvie grasse a peck, beate all except the scurvie grasses and the
senna, the scurvie grasse you must stamp and straine out the Iuce and e Senna
you must rub to peices between your hands, stamp the rest and put the Senna to
them and put them in a course linnen^bag cloath  with a flint stone, put these into
3 gallons of stronge ale

this ale must be used in the spring from mid-march to mid may three weekes togh
together & in Autume from e beginning of September to the 15. october .15.
or 20. dayes, drinke euery morning halfe a pinte 2 houre after take a messe of
broath euery night 6 ounces if you use exercise after it it will worke the better
if it giue 6. stooles in a day and a night it will tis well if fewer not so good if
it giue more take lesse





To Make a good plum Cake

Take 2 li of e finest flower well dryed over coales sturing it so that it
do not lumper then beat 2 nug nutmegs a little cloues & mace most mace
& strow into your flower with a little salt and a qt of a pound of loaf
suger beaten & searced then worke in 2li of pure butter with your fingers so
small with your flower that it may be all broke then beat 4 yolks of eggs & butt 2 whits
and a full porrenger of pure ale yest together and strain into it then
strew in 2li of currants purely washed and picked and worke it little and
sett it in a boule couered to rise while e ouen is prepareing then put
in half a pint of pure thick creame scalding hott ^and 2 spoonfuls of rose water and sett it to rise by e
fire then pour it into e hoope with white paper and browne tyed about
e bottome well buttered and e sides of e hoope that you slip it out ise it
before you take it out halfe an hour will bake it

To make a Carraway Cake

take a li of flower a pound of butter a pound of carraway comfitts a qr
of a pint of rose water a qr of an ounce of mace one great nutmeg some 6 cloues
a little ginger salt beat and sift your spices into your flower sturring it well then beat 4 eggs
but 2 whites and a porringer or less of ale yest and straine it into the flower then melt a pound
of pure butter and dreane it from e dregs and pour it in and worke it into a little paste like a light
pudding, sett it bifore e fire to rise a quarter of an houre then pour it to a hoope with a white paper and
a browne tyed about e sides and bake it in a quicke ouen well cooled on e top with a wett broom
and lett it stand in halfe an hour y then ise it if you please

105





To her DP

The Sumeres sunn is is set
and it will rise no more
because it was his happles lucke
to marrie wth a whore

The Sumeres sunn is set
and winter draweth onn
Now little Roben Chearpes no more
alas his voice is gone

A Page a Knight a vicounte & an Earle
ffrom Scotland Came and married with an ... Girle
such foure to found weare neu seeene before
A wife a witch a murtherer & a whore

At Katherne Docke there launched a Burke
wch soare did leake but did not sinke
sumtymes she lay at Essex shore
Expecting Rigging yard good store

But sume dusasters to prevent
with wind in poops she saild to Kent
At Rochester she Anchor cast
wch Canterbury did distast
But winche: wth Elies helpe
did hold to .... this Lyones whelpe
he was weakesides and did neele
on Somm: to mend her keele

to ballance her and mend her sorte
and make her fit for any porte





106
A Medicyne for the Stone Colicke.

Take egge shelles a greate quantitie and a greate quantitie
of Gromell seedes and beate them to a smale poulder
and beinge beaten to a verye smale poulder put it into
a glasse and drinke of this powlder in white wyne
in the morninge fastinge for sixe weeke space for
a woman, and a man three monethes and this will
breake the stones.

ffor the Collicke

X A pynte of stilld parslye water, greate store of ginger
beaten, and a good quantitie of hard Sugar.

ffor runinge of the Raynes.

Take a pottle of Muskedyne greate store of honey
suckles, washe them and shred them smale shaking
out the water, and boyle them in the Muskedyne
till they become soe thicke that a Spoone may stand
vprighte. and soe eate it in the morninge in his bed
and sweate yf he Can.

ffor the whites.

The redd is + Take the blossomes of Archangell a peck everye
good for a morninge for three morning togither fryed wth two
man & e  or three eggs fryed wth sweete butter lieke a tanseye
white for a  and soe eate it vpp all with sugar yf yow please.
woman.

ffor a stiche.

+ Take a good quantitie of Acornes, a good quantitie of
Annisseed and fennell seedes a great quantitie
and drinke it in white wyne verye thicke wth the
powder bloudd warme overnight in bed and sweate
after it yf they can.

ffor the Ague.
x

Take two penny worthe of Garlicke and stampe it
and drincke it wth white wyne after it hath bene strayned
into the wyne. it will helpe an Ague that hath long
continnued in twice takinge.







ffor a Sore mouthe or Throate

x Take a good quantitie of Alume and stampe it to poulder
then take a good quantitie of redd rose water and a good
quantitie of Englishe honey and mingle these togither
over nighte and then in the mornine a good quantie
of these soe mixed and hold it a good wyle in yo mouthe
and afterward Swalloe it downe.

ffor deafnes.

x Take honey and put of it twice a daye to witt morninge &
x and eveninge and put of it into bothe the eares and lett
it runn into yo eares & head. then take a clove of garlicke
and pil of the Skin and pricke it and wrape in the honey
and laye it in yo eare but in nowe sort let it goe into
yo head. twice a daye doe this viz moringe and eveninge

ffor a Coughe that is newe.

Take a pynte of Aquavitae and a li. of Sugare
and burne the aquavitae with the Sugar till it come
to a Syrrope & then eate therof.

ffor the Mother that risethe vpward

x Take a pottle of Muskedyne and a li. of the best blewe
Currence and seethe it from a pottle to a quarte, and
take a spoone and eate it morninge or when the mother
comethe but before yow take this take iiijor pennyworthe
of Ieane Trekle, and as much Dragon water and
lett this serve foure morninge.

ffor the Mother downeward.

x Take balme water or a handfull of balme boyled in white wyne
and drinke it.

To clear the skin & take away freckles.

Take 3 pints of white wine vinegar, rosemary flowers, elder flowers, bean flowers of
each a good handfull, pumpecen seeds a good quantity, a qr of an ounce of
Camphire, bitter almonds a handful, an ounce of flower of brimstone,
the weighte of ten pence in Mercury: putt all these together into an earthen
pan, & lay 3 new laid eggs in it, till the shells be soft: then take them out
& pricke them, & put them in again. Adde a white lilly root beaten, &
straind ^in with some of the liquor.





For Spots or freckles in the face./  107

Take a quarte of springe water and let it boyle, then put therin of mercurye
the wieught of xd but let it first be killed then let the Mercurye boyle but
a little while but take it of and straine it, then take a quarter of a pounde
of bitter Almondes blanche them and beate them verye smale and put
them into the water after it is strained; and take two handfull of white
Lillye rootes washe them and beate them verye smale, and straine them into
the water, then take three ounces of venice Cer..sse and a quarter of an
ounce of Camphire and put them into the water, and stirr them wth a
sticke a good prettye whyle and vse it.

a salue for a sore legg

take halfe a pound of white leade and half a pound
of red leade and a pint sallet oile and let the leade
be searced verie fine, and boil it at first vere softly
and stur stur it stil and boile til it black

a noo a nother salue

x .. take a quarte of verie stronge worte of the first
running and boile it til it come to a salue

an excellent cooling water for a hott
tumour flowing from e matrix

take ceruse tenn drames Saccoroll sattocoll, three drames
Starche, tow drames, gum Arabeck, gum Tragagant of
each one drame, Ch Campher, Opium of each a halfe a
drame: take three quarters of a pint of plantine water
and a quarter of a pint of plantine water red rose water
and put e afore sayd things into a morter of stone you th
must put in but a spoonefull ^of the water to those things at first and breake it verie
fine and so more and more till all be disolued, all those Gums
and other things are to be sold at e apothercaries in within
Chirst church hospitall and other apothecaries, ^also ready made
vp in little round cakes sume fiue of them makes e
proportions aboue sayd. you

therty granes is half a dram





the blak plaster it is veri excellent
to strengthen a weake backe

take of oile olice oliue one pound of red leade eight ounces
of white ^led lead fower ounces of castle sope fiue ounces, let these
boile gently on a soft fier and when the colour turnes some-
what darker then oile, and t it will vpon triall on a
dish side com off with out sticking like birdlime then
put it into e pipkin wch must be large one, an ounce of
barrowes grease with halfe an ounce of oile de bay leting
them melt in e stuff off the fier  at e least while heate
remaines put in halfe an ounce of gum taccamackhacca
prepared and desolued in vineger, and one ounce of burgina
pitch together with an ounce of white bee wax when
it is made powre it into a broad pann and keep it for
your vse.

A most Excellent drincke which doth
cure all woundes inward and outward and
cankers fistulas fretting eating or filthy sores
and vlsers

Plantaine Sanicle Bugles cumferrie of each .3. hand-
fuls of Scaboius egrimony, Auens wood Bettany Dasie
roots and leaues, Bramble topps Speedwell mug wort
Charuill of each one handfull of wormwood halfe a
handfull wash them and shred them veri finly
then put ^them into a Brass pott with a gallon of spring
water and couer e pott with a wooden platter
and past it vp veri close setting it to boile
leasurly e space of .7. howers by that time e liquor
wilbe wasted to one quarte or .3. pints straine e liquor
from e hearbs and make e pott cleane and put e
liquor into e pott againe with one quart of white wine
and let them boile for the space of halfe an houer





being couered, then put in halfe a pint of e best honey
and let it haue half a score wames scuming it veri
cleane then putt it into some wooden vesell to coole
and so into ves bottles for your vse. take heare of
e quantitie of a quarter of a pint at a time made
warme at .9. at night and at .5. in the moring and
at .3.in e afternoone fasting .3. houers after it, also
if there be need squeet some with a scrarge reng scringe into e
sores

An approved good water cald e Snayle wat
good for the Iaundise, collicke in e stomake
the consumption, & the passions of e heart,

Take a pecke of harden Snayles & wash them in beare, until they leave frothinge,
then put them in a great earthen pott, or Crusible, & cover it with a tile;
make a Soft charcoale fire about it, & lay a few coales upon the tile-stone,
tile stone,
then them let them stew till they leave hissing, or making a noyse: take
a quart of earth wormes, slitt them & scoure them with water & salt
untill they bee very cleane, then beat them wth yo Snayles in a Stone
moratr to peeces, then take a pott t is fitt for your still or limbecke, &
put therin 2 handfulls of Angelica, 2 handfulls of Sallendine, then
lay therein yo beaten wormes & Snailes, upon which lay 2 quarts of
rosemary flows, a sprig of AEgrimony, of red docke root, of the inner
barke of barbery trees, of wood Sorrell, of betony of eacg of them
a handfull of rew halfe a handfull, of Fennigricke, & of turmericke
of each an ounce, halfe a handfull of beare foot, of saffron beaten
well to poud e wayt of 6d: then poure 3 gallons of e strongest
ale you can gett, & Soe cover yo pott, & lett it stand all night in the
place where you are to Still it the next day, in the morning uncov yo
pott, & put thereunto 3 ounces of e powder of harts horne, 3 ounces
of Ivory, then take it off stirring it, but Sett on yo limbecke, & make
it fast wth rye dough & put und yo fire, & Soe receive yo water;
the first is e strongest, & therefore must be kept by it Selfe.





A Dyet deinke
for
Mrs Harris.

Take water cresses, brooklime & AEgremony of each
one handfull, Scurvigrasse 2 handfulls, boyle these
in a gallon of spring water, until halfe bee consumed,
then strayne it & put to the strained liqud Senna 2 ounces
polypody of the oake thre ounces, Rubarb one dram,
Anniseeds, ffennil seed, & Caroway seeds bruized of
each two drams; Let these stand all night on hott
embers, In the morning boyle them gently until
a pint be consumed, then stampe it & put a pound
of sugar to it & boyle it sixe or seven walmes.

Take of this drinke first & last a quarter of a
pint at a time, increase or diminish the
quantity as you will have it worke.

A Sear Cloth for the Backe or a strayne
in any other parts.

Take a pint of e best oyle olive & put into it a pound of red lead, &
boyle them until it be blacke, then let it stand, still till it be almost cold,
then put in halfe a pintound of rozen, & 2 pennyworth of Soft red wax, & boyle
them altogeth over a soft fire, until it be well mingled: stir it very well
all e while it boyles, then take some oyle, & oyle a board well, & make
it up in roules thereupon.

How to make Pills of Amber wch can preserve e stomacke from
all diseases & suffereth nothing to putrify therein because it expells
all humidity & uncleanes fro e stomacke & cleanseth e same:
They wch use it often get never more any payne in e stomack:
they cause mirth, they strengthen e head & stomacke, they cleanse
e reynes & the wombs esceedingly, wch are made as follow

Take e white or other Amber & Masticke, of each one quarter of an
ounce, aloes five drachms, agaricke one drachme and a halfe,
right Aristotochis halfe a drachme: this being beaten Smal &
tempered with the sirrup of ^Roman Wormewood make therof a
mass of pill, & forme seven pills of one drachme, take alwayes
2 or 3 of them, when you goe to bed.

You were best take halfe these quantityes & so make halfe the
masse at once.





109
ffor a consumption

Take a pint of liue honey sett it on e fier and
clarifie it well then take a good handfull speare-
X mint as much  woodbetonie stampe e hearbs
and straine them and put the iuce into e honey
and boile it to e thicknes of a concerue, take
of this .3. times a daye, in ^the morning at .4. a clocke and
in e after noone, and at night lieing downe

An especiall medicine for a Consumption

Take new milke & white wine of each a pottle, put into it red sage, balme liverwort, &
Speeremint of each a good handfull, of raysons of the Sun stoned 2 pound, of figgs
one pound, of aniseeds an ounce & of licoras halfe an ounce both bruized: among
al these put a pottle of garden snailes first throughly purified clensed & taken out
of their Shells, then putt all these into a Still & Still them with a moderate fire
till they be all throughly Stilled, as long as the Still will goe, which will be about
24 houres, by no means letting the fire goe out, till the Still cease going. Into
the glasse into which the water runneth at first setting it under the Still
put halfe a pound of white Sugar Candy or very fine loafe Sugar of the finest
Sort & So let it Stand to receive the water that comes from the Still.

Before the Snailes be put into the Still, whereof there must be wth their Shells 3 pecks at the
least put them into a boule & Sprinckle them well wth Salt wch will cause them to purge;
whe they be well purged wash them in 2 or 3 Several waters to fetch of the Slime
cleare from them, when they be So done then cracke their Shells, & take them out of their
Shells, & Soe if there be by measure a pottle of them : if there be So many then put
them into the Still with the white wine milke & other things & So Still them altogether
Of this Stilled water let the patient take every morning fasting 8 Spoonfulls & So
much at night going to bed, or in the day time if he find himselfe faint & ill

Let him refraine from old cheese, Stale beere, Salt meat, drinke his drinke very warme:
Calves feet & all poultry are very good, & So be crayfish: boild Snayles in milke
are very good: to keep licoras in his mouth at all times will helpe his coughing
& at night ^eat Some Conserves of red Roses, & be Sure he keep himselfe warme
especially his necke & feet & through gods blessing next under god this will
cure him.





For the Piles

the quantity of a walnut
does it

Make a posset of Allum, that is turne the posset with a piece of Allum
putt into it, then dip two pecies of scarlet bages in them one after another,
& wrong them well; & then apply them to the piles some ten times
together as hott as you can well endure them, till they be coole
and then apply another. This is said to be a present remedy, & that
the next morning they will be gone.

Another
Take Orpine alias Pilewort, & mutton sewet; shred them small, & boyle
them together, till it lookes greene: then straine it, & anoint the
piles with it 3 or 4 times a day.

for a laske take
Take three a pills of Lint, made of holland, and whett them in beare or
sirope or anithing they can best Swallowe it, in this
is an approved medicine;





an excellent remedie fore ye headach
or ye megram

Take Barley meale finely searced & as much cumine
seed beaten & searced, mingle these with ye white of an egg
an thicke enough to mi spred like a plaster and Lay
it on ye ackeing place of ye forehead

a fine purge
A Scruple of Follop, halfe an ounce of Sirope an ounce of Sirope
Succory & rubarb, 6 or 7 graines of creame of tarter a little
sliced ginger, take this in possett drinke

another fine purge yt may be taken a month together
Take 3 sppoonefulls of burrage wath water, 2 Spoonefuls of Sirope
of Violets as so much salt of tarter as will ly upon a six pence
& fast an houre after it

To Stope the Bleeding of a veine yt is Broken
or for any Inward bleeding
Take in the month of March the Spawne of frogges & put it into a
tub & dia a peice of new linnen cloth therein, untill it be shrow
wett with it then drie it & dip it againe doe this Nine times.
take small peices of this cloth & rowle it up like a pill & swallow it
& it will stopp the bleeding.





For the Piles

the quantity of a walnut
does it  Make a posset of Allum, that is turn the posset with a piece of Allum
put into it, then dip two peices of scarlet bayes in them one after in them one after another,
& wring them well; & then apply them to the piles some ten times
together as hott as you can well endure them, till they be coole,
and then apply another. This is said to be a present remedy, & that
the next morning they will be gone.

Another
......... them small, & boyle
....... with suger

To make Jumballs uery good with almonds or without

Take a pound of very fine flower dryed halfe a pound of loafe suger beaten fine halfe spoonful a of carraway
seeds mingle them well together with e flower then haue in readyness e yolkes of 5 eggs newly
laid & one white well beaten ^for any houre together  .2. ounces ^of pure butter a qr of a pint of thick creame bare measure
2 Spoonfulls of rose water put e creame eggs rose water & butter into a pott & put that pot into
a skillet of boyling water and stir it well till all the butter be melted & a litte thickned then take it out & continue
stirring it till it be quite cold then mingle them all wth your flower into a very lithe paste then role
them into small roles wth as little flower to keep them from sticking as you can & make them up in
like e figure of 8 or in what fashion you please upon a pye plate finly buttered wth butter in a
col Cloth you may stir in a qr of a pound of blanched almonds beaten with a litte rose water
if you please to make them e better before you make then up upon the plate take some double
refined sugar mingled thick with rose water & ice them all ouer with a feather & sett them
quick in an ouen well heat t they may rise quick & when e edges are coulered take them out and
loosen them and if they be soft at e bottom set them in againe,

a very good Sirope for a consumption

Take a handfull of coltsfoot, a handfull of comfrey Roots half
a pound of Raisons de Soli, halfe a pound of figgues 3. or 4  Dates
boile them in 3 pints of running water until halfe be consumed
then straine it & put therein a conuenient quantitie of Honey
then let it stiae vpon a soft fier and scum it when of is could
take of it at any time; & ad as much lec licorishe as you think
good





An excellent medicene for ye Scurvy & for toothach comeing of scurvy
Take a pound of honey, an ounce of labt of scurvygrass, an ounce of flower
of brimstone mixe them well together & take morning & evening ye biggnes of
a smale wallnutt & fast 2 houre after, take ye whole quantite out Spring & fall

ye Lady Lewes her medicine to keepe ye Smale pox from putting
Take six penne worth of Sperma Ceti, one ounce of oile of Sweete almons
ye bignes of a Large wallnutt of butter fresh out of ye churne dissolve this
by degrees upon a soft fier, then Anoint ye face, there with, you must be
pleased to beginn ye 8th or 9 day & so continue, & in a short time ye
ye spotts will be gon, without leaveing any pitts at all./
to keepe ye smale pox out of ye throate give once a day a smale pellet
of sugger white candy beaten searest & beaten made into a past with
oile olive

pills for the Stomach
R. pil stomach cum gummi 3.i.ss Agaric Et Extract
Rudij ana Xii olei anis gutt ii J put VI pro dractim
capiat tres post primum somnum bisin hebdoni

A surrop to purg melancholy
Of the Juce of pipens a pint, of the Juice of Burrage and balme
of each a pint, clarify the Juices of the hearbs, then mingle them and
add 4 ounces of Senna picked cleane and thread & halfe an ounce of
Epithymum, and lett it stand upon embers above 12 houres then
straine it and to every pint take a pound of Suger and boyle it to a
sirrope of this take 3 or 4 spoonfulls in possett drink./

A receipt for the green sicknes or obstructions
Take a handfull of fennil roots, as many parsly roots ye pith taken out & a handfull of Couch
grass, an ounce of licoras & halfe an ounce of sweet fennil seeds a gr of figs halfe a pound of rea
sons of ye sun stoned & a gr of blue currants, an ounce of coraline prepared out all these in a bag
with a waight to make it sink & put it in 3 gallons of new ale, drink of it morning & at
4 a clock in ye afternon and use exersice; you may put in an ounce of elicompane
tin closed





A water and powder for ye teeth
Boyle abrance of rosmary in a littele more then a pinte of
water and when it is strayned adde to it fiften dropps of spirit
of vitrol or 18 dropps if it be not too sharpe

the powder
Take of mastick powdered of Sarrocolla of each a dragme of white
corall and red corall of aeach half a dragme and one drope of oyle of
Sassafrus powder and mix these altogether

To Make an Orrainge pudding
Take 2 orrings and paire ye peele thinn and beat them very
fine with tenn ounces of Suger and Twelve ounces of Butter
Then take 12 yolkes of Eggs beate them with ye Rest and put
it between two peecies of paste and bake it halfe an hour

A water for the Wind
Take a gallon of sweet gascino wine then take genger
gallingale Sinamon nutmegs grains Cloves mace anyseeds
fennelseed Carawayseed Saforn of every of them a groat
wait then take sage red mint and red rose leaves time
pellitoarys of spaine roasemary wilde time Camile flours
Lavender before it knots dry these hearbs and pick
them well from the stalkes then take of each as much
as you Can grasp in your hand then beat they spicces and
all the hearbs and put all in the wine and let it stand
12 houers sturing it divers times then still it in a limbeck
and you may draw a wine quart of the first the second is not
so good but you may give it Children for the worms and
when you have stiled it put sommuch in and some refined
suger what you think good

it is good to take often a mornings a littell fine trekell and
somtimes at night the quantity of a nutmeg of the best
methridate and a littell Conserve of bitiny or roses after it
and som posit drinke this is best to be taken after the first
and in very good health god be praised for this water hath many
vertues in it





An aproved medsen for the Collick and ye stone
take of a horse redish a inch in length and steepe it in half a pinte
of renish or white wine a hole night then take of ye pouder of ye pissill
of age horse as much as will cover a groate and of ye pouder of amber
as much as will cover 2 pence ye like of gett and also the same
quantity of the gall of an ox and having bruised all these together
having so done then of the wine take a spoonfull and put your
pouder into it forthwith sup it up and after it drink ye rest of your wine
thus doing for nine mornings together fasting under god it will prove well

A sirruppe for a Consumption
Take 4 greate handsfulls of janicle sable & of Avence speedwell
comfory agrimony woodbugle Betteny dasy roots & leaves bramble
toppsies venset unfitt hysoppe Colts foote ribwortes scabous of each of them
2 handsfull pick the Leaves from the stalks wash them in 2 or 3 waters
put them into a flashet to drain them stampe them in a stone morter
wth a woden pestell & strain for the the juce into and Earthen
basen Take too every pinte of the juyce 1lb of fine suger set it over
ye fier when the suger disolved have redy too beaten to every pin
te pound of suger the white of one egg you must beate white of the eggs
with som of the Cold juce or with fare water wrought when you have
Rought and beaten ye eggs and suger well togather let it stand over a soft fire
stiring it Continualy with A ladle til it be scalding hott that the curd may
rise by degrees then Claryfi it as you doe suger take of the Scum
straine strayne the liquer into a basen then put it into a clean skillet
still take of ye scumme as it rieseth when it is boyled to a surops hith
shall know when it is anogh by blowing to ye spoon sirop in the spoon
for then it will Candy let it stand tell it be throughly Cold in an Earthen
basen put it up into glases keep it for your use





for the yellow Iaundis

Take Selendyne and yarrow and drinke thereof in the
morneing & in the Evening iiij or iiij dayes and
it will soone wast away. 113

Beate the gum

Take gum Tragaranth small beaten, and infuse
itt 12 houres in Red rose water, let it stand
vppon hott imbers, till it come to A Mussilage

Make the mortar hott, and beat your gum
Arabeck well, and then putt in your gum
Sarcocolla, soe beat them both to geather
^with the starch and Cerusse into a fine powder, and searse them

Cutt the Opium and an scrape the Camphor
Soe m dissolue then vppon hott coales
in plantaine water, when they are
well dissolued straine them hard,
when you make them vpp into A body
take the powders mingles together, then
add your gumms dissolued to them
Soe make them vpp into a past with
as much mussilage off gum dragacent
as will serue turne.

e weight of e quantie t is put into ^a pint of water is 4 drames
and .15. graines





…

…

Emarandum that I Thomas poniard
servant to Mr Shute Esquire

Your lovinge friend

…

Memorandum

Richard …
your friend

Take ye

Remedy

Rychard Scotte

Memoradum that I Thomas Perrot of

Marti Hardman my I said
hareikam mend Portons
Unto you trios king that
you are In good Helth
The use of my writing It to
let you to Onser Tore

20 graines is a
scruple, 30 is halfe
a drame

All the imaginations
All the invintions
of man is varne and
to nothinge good but to
a … hand by faith the
merrits of Christ crucified
for Sinners wherof I am
the Cheife …


