1928/281/mss 615 (SED)

15 Upper Berkeley St
Putman Square W1

C 531

e. Libris
Lenardi G. Guthrie M.D.
1894.

Col. Reg. Mid. Lmd
D.D.
Lenardus G. Guthrie
A.D Vi. Id. Jul: MCMXIII




The Lady Sedley
her Receipt book
1686.

49





1.

A Receipt for the Dropsey.
(1)

Take Horehound, Harts tonge, Liverworth, Worm-
wood & Sorrill, of each a large handfull shred
them very small & put them in a pasty of Barely
meale, the pye must be very well closed & baked
as other pyes are, being baked take it out, And
haveing ready a stanne of 4 Gallons of new Ale
or new Strong beere, Cut the pye into little
peececes & put it into the Ale or new Beere
& Cover it close & let it worke and after 2 or 3
dayes drink of it as much as you will, Cheifly a
great draught fastinge in the morninge & alsoe
at night goeinge to bed, begin to drink it in
the first Quarter of the Moone, & soe drink it
till the Moone be at the full. If you keep an
extrordinary ^& temperate dyett drinkinge nothinge
else it will likely cure the Dropsey in 3 weekes,
But to make this more perfect put into the
Stanne of Ale or Beere a Quarter of an ounce
of the salt of Wormewood:
Probatum est.





2

To Make Snayle Water.
(2)

Take a good peck of garden Snayles in their shells
& wash them in a great bowle of beere, then make
your Chimney hearth very clean & pour out halfe
a bushell of Charcoales and set them on fire, & when
they are throughly kindled, then with a fire shovell
make a great hole in the mid'st of them & pour the
Snayles & scatter some fire of your quick coales amongst
them, & soe let them rest till they haue done makeing
a noise, And then you must take them forth, and
with a knife and course cloth pick ^them & wipe them
from the ashes & coles & the green froth that is upon
them.  Then in a stone Mortar bruise them shells &
all, take alsoe a quart of earth worms, & scoure them
with water very well divers times over, then wash them
well from their filth, then put them into a Stone Mortar
& beat them well to pieces, then take a clean Iron pot upon
up which sett your Limbeck or Still, then take 2 handfulls
of Sallendine & lay in the bottome of your pott & 2 hand=
fulls of Angelica must be Laid upon that; then put
in a Quart or two of rosmary flowers also bearsfoot
Agrimony Reddock roots, Barke of Barbary trees, wood
Sorrill, Bittony, of each of them two handfulls, halfe
a handfull of Rue of fenegrick & Tumricke of each
an ounce well beaten, then lay your Snayles & wormes
upon the top of all these hearbs and flowers.




3)

Then pour in three gallons of the Strongest Ale then Cover
your pott & lett it Stand all night or longer if you please
in the place where you means to make your fire under it
In the morninge you must put in three ounces of Cloves
beaten to powder, Six penny waight of Saffron dry'd to powder
Harts horne fyled six ounces, you must not stirr it after
you have put in the Hartshorne for it must be uppermost
then Sett your limbeck & Close it with Rye dough & make
a very Soft fire under it & recieve your water by pints the
first is strongest the next weaker & weaker, but the weakest
is usefull, the Smallest if need be may be helped with puting
in one Spoonefull of the strongest to 4 of the Smallest, It is
to be used two Spoonefulls of the strongest to 4 of Ale or Beer
or with wine, & of the snailes as much of Ale or beer or of
wine, This water is by experience good for the yellow
Jaundise & for all griefes comeinge from the obstructions
of the Liver helps the Consumption, it must be taken in
the morning & two houres before meate in the after=
noone with Some moderate Stirrings of the body
after the takinge of it &c

Aqua Mirabilis
(3)

Take of the seeds of Cardimum, Cubebes, Gallingall,
Mellelot floweres, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeggs Ginger of each
one dramme, beinge made into powder putt them into
3 pints of white wine & one pint of aquae vite, a pint of
the Juice of Sallendine put all these into a glass Still and
soe lett them incorporate all night, in the morning distill it





4

With a Soft fire in water Lett it drop on shuggar candy
or fine Shuggar put into your glass if you like with your Shugar
a Little Amber Grease & Saffron tied up into fine Cloath
you may draw out of this quantity two quarts keep one
quart which first comes by it Selfe mingle it either Strong
or Small as you list you may make ^it in winter with
the Juice of the Rootes, you may take when you please
The usuall time is halfe an hour before dinner & Supper
& before you goe to bed one Spoonefull or two at one time
it preserves the Lungs helps the Stomack, helps the
Stoppinge of the urine, helps the Palsey.

(4)
Palsey Water

Take of Burrage flowers, Bugles flowers, the flowers
of Lilyes Convallu & Couselips of each one handfull,
of Sage flowers of Rosemary flowers of Bittany flowrs
of each halfe a handfull let all these be gathered in there
Severall Seasons for they are not to be had all at one
time, but take the first that cometh & let them be steep=
ed in very good Spiritt of wine distilled from all
phlegme in two glasses till all may be had, And let them
Stand tenn days after the last is in. but alwayes very close
stopped, Alsoe when Lavender cometh Stripp of the fairest
heads the quantity of 2 pounds & put them into a Large gallon
glass & pour on them as much Spirit of wine as before
Soe Cover them well Stopped & lett them Stand 14 dayes



5

In the Sunn or Some other warme place with the
other glasses, which done take ^the Lavender with the Spirit
& distill it with a Limbeck by it Selfe, then take the
water you extract & put it with all the former flowers
& Spiritt together in a Limbeck & put therewith these
things followeinge, of Balme, Motherworth, Bay==
leaves, Spickneard, the leaves & flowers of of Orange
trees if they may be had, of each one ounce Cutt
or Shredd Severally the yellow pills of Citron dryed or
else of Lemon peeles, of Piany seeds hulld of each six dramms
Of Cinament, Nutmeggs, Cardimum, Cubebees of yellow
saunders of each halfe an ounce, being all made in
powder and of Ligme Alloes one dramme in powder and of
Jubebees new & good the stones taken out & cut Small halfe
a pound, All which beinge well mingled together in the
Limbeck lett them be carefully distilled, with an indife=
rent fire, if you please you may make two sorts, ^a stronger
& weaker, which you may doe by preservinge the first that
comes off by it selfe, And soe use them as occasion
serves, Then after it is distilled put them into a wide
mouth glass & Soe Stopp it close, And take of .. prepared
pearle & Smaragdes of each each one Scruple of Amber
Grease, Musk, & Saffron of each halfe a Scruple, of Red
Roses dryed well, & red & yellow Saunders, small & thinn
sliced, of each one ounce, put all these into a Sarsnett
bagg & hang in the water Six weekes together and
cover it close with a double Bladder that none of the





6

Strength breath out and afterward pour it off, put it
in glasses and keep it for your vse.
This water is ^of exceeding vertue in all swounding weak-
ness of heart & decaying of the spirits, it is in great
vertue in all Appoplexies, Palsey Epitopsia alsoe in
all paines in the Ioynts comeing of Cold in all-
bruises outwardly bathed & dipped in it & laid to, the
vertues are more then man can conceive, this Comfort=
eth & Strengteneth all Animall vitalls & naturall
spirits, & cleareth the externall senses strengthneth the
Memory, restoreth the lost appetite, all weakness of
the stomach being both taken inwardly & bathed
outwardly, Take of it a quarter of a spoonfull and
fast an houre after it, It taketh away the giddiness
of the head, it helpeth lost hearing, bringeth a plea=
sant breath, And there can be noe better remedies
to prevent it you may take it morninge & eveninge
a quarter of a Spoonefull with Crumbs of bread &
shuggar, it helpeth the lost speech, all cold disposi=
tions of the Liver, & a beginninge dropsy, it
helpeth all cold diseases of the Mother:


7

The most Exelent Receipt of the
Wound water

(5)

Take Southorne wood, Wormwood, Bugles, Mugworth,
wood Bitteney, Sanacle, Plantin, Dandelyon, Ribworth
White bottles, or Campions of the garden, Bramble Budds,
Egrimony, wild Angelica, Cumfery Hawthorne budds,
Mints Scabious, Strawberries leaves, all kind of honey
Suckles, Annis, Violett leaves, Oak leaves Cyncefold, dasey
rootes, Adders tongue, of each one handfull add to these
a pottle of white wine, a gallon of runninge water, boyle
them all together untill halfe be consumed, then straine
the Liquor cleane from the hearbs, then put it to a quart of
honey & boyle it againe, then put it into a glasse & stopp
it very Close for the use, Lett the Patient drink 3 spoone-
fulls of it at a time, lukewarme every morninge fasting
and soe last at night vntill he hath drunk a quart
thereof, besides these if it be an old sore or vlcer apply
to the sore or ulcer a playster of honey and waxe.
This Cureth all wounds, womens breasts putrifyed bones
causeing them to scalle Ache in the Stomache, to
breake an impostume Stench the blood of veines
broken in the body and causeth bulletts to fall out of
the body wounded.
Probatum Est.





8

To make oyle of Swallowes
(6)

Take 10 or 12 younge Swallowes ready to fly stamp them
them in a stone Mortar with their gutts & ffeathers together
with Lavender, Cotton, Balme, Spearmint, redsage, Cammomile
wild Strawberries leaves & wild thyme of each a handfull, but
lett these hearbs lye one day unwashed after they be gathered
& then stamp them all together with the Swallows till noe ffeathers
be left whole, put therto a good quantity of May butter
or fresh butter & let all stand one whole night in the
Mortar, the next day boyle all these very softly three quarters
of an houre or a whole houre, then straine it through a
cleane Linen Clothe into a Cleane vessell & keepe it
for your vses.

To Make a Jelly of Heartshorne
vii

Take a pint & a halfe of faire running water & halfe a
pint of white wine, two ounces of hearthorne scraped let it
boyle softly in a pipkin close covered til it come to a pint, then whilst
it is hott straine it & put to it a little sliced ginger & Cinament Sticks
the next day take the topp of it & leave the bottome of it that you may
have the clearest & put it in a skillett & put to it shuggar a topp of
sweet Marjerum, halfe a Spoonfull of red rose water, a little juice of a
Lemon & of an Orange, & soe let it stew a little while upon the fire & put
through a jelly bagg with a litte rosemary spriggs in the bottome of the bagg
take it morning & evening & 2 or 3 times in the day in cold or
else melt it, & soe drink it blood warme.



9

For the dropsey, yellow Jaundice, Aches breakings
out & Mangies of the body to puriefye the blood from corruption
against the green sickness & all stoppings & very good for young
maids
VIII

Cf. Saturn P. 95.

Take the rootes of Monkes Rubarbe otherwise called patience
& redd Madder of each halfe a pound, 4 ounces, of Anniseeds and
Lickoris of each 2 ounces, Scabions & Egrimony of each one
handfull, slice the rootes of Rubard, bruise the Anniseeds and
Lickoris brake the hearbs with your hand & put them into a Stone
pott called a stand with 3 gallons of strong Ale to Steepe
the space of three dayes then drink this as your ordina=
ry liquor for the Space of 3 weekes at the least, the longer
you take it the better provided you haue one Stand
under another.

To cure any Fistulo thonge of 20 yeares old
IX

Take of rock Allomme & white Copperoes of each a like quan=
tity burn them in an earthen pot over a Soft fire, when it
is hard then breake it in an Iron mortar & sift it 4 or 5 times
through a Lawne, put as much of this powder as will lye on a
shillinge with this water twice a day, & lay an old holland cloath
wett in the Same water upon the wound & lay this poultesse as
as folloeth upon the cloathes that it may touch the sore
Take Sention, ground Ivy, Smallage dasey rootes & leaves
Mallowes of each a handfull Chop them very small & boyle them
in a quart of running water with a quarter of a pound of
Mutton Suett, when the herbs are tender thicken it with wheat
brann, lay a fresh poultess every morninge. &c.





10

A Powder
X

Take of Corrall Amber and Jett of each one ounce, then
take 3 ounces of Pearle & Six ounces of hartshorne burn't
with which, take the smoothest whites of the eggs & the little
black claw of the king Crabb of each halfe an ounce, the Crabs
if possible must be taken when the Signe is in Cancer, take
a quarter ^of an ounce of the stones which you shall find in the heads
of the Crawfish & take halfe an ounce of ye bones which
are in a Staggs heart which must be burnt, halfe an ounce
of Indian Snake wood, & as much of the rootes of Goats
Rhine which must be gathered in winter & well dryed
take all these ingredients & beat them into very fine
powder & grind them with redrose water upon a
painters Stone & let let it dry, then powder it very
fine, & Searce it through a very fine Lawne & that which
will not come through beat & grind againe because you
may not lose any of the Substance, they must be
beat & searced severally & when you haue made them
into fine powder, then weigh them againe, & take of
the Corrall Amber & Jett of equall quantities & of the
Pearle & heartshorn what they ^will yeild when they are equally
searced then take 2 ounces of rasped heartshorne, & put
it into a pipkin with 3 pints of runinge water & boyle
it till it come to a stiff Jelly & when you think it enough
take a Spoonefull & let it Coole & if it be Stiff Straine off
the rest, then take 4 penny worth of Saffron dry it into powder and
straine it into the Jelly whilst it is hott & soe let it coole
then put all the powders into an Allablaster Mortar & your
Jelly by little & little untill it come to a past, and if you



11

please you, make it up into balls or into the fashion of
an egge, or into long rowles, you must put in the Sneake
wood, Goates Rhine rootes & an ounce of bearstone, halfe
an ounce of Amber grease & 20 graines of Musk, your
Musk & Amber grease must be powdered & put into the
Jelly.

A Pill for the stone in the
kidneyes Collick
XI

Take Holland powder 2 drames Pulvis Sanctus one
dramm & a halfe Pulvis ad Calucum 4 scruples, powder
Mint, powder of Licoris, of each one dramme, Balsome
India one scruple venice Turpentine washed very well
as much as will bringe all into a Masse to pills.

Take morninge & eveninge 3 at a time when the ffitt
is about 10 times or more in a moneth, and when
the fitt is on you take 4 or 5 pills & presently drink
as much Ale you can possible, if you vomitt drink as
more Ale as you can & either walk or ride 2 or3 hours
after it and this will bring away the stone and
remove the Collick

Take some of these pills every moneth, it will
prevent the disease from comeinge againe





12
A Receipt for the cure of an Ague
XII

Take Elder Stickes of one yeares Shoot newly out from the Tree
Scrape of the vpper bark first which is naught & then scrape of
the green Inward barke & of that take a good handfull & bruise
in a Stone Mortar or wooden bowle then put it into a pint of Stronge
Ale and let it infuse all night before the fire, the pott be covered,
Soe that it may be warme and noe more and a little before the
partye expects the ffit straine the Ale from the barke, the last
beinge squeesed is the Strongest and best, & put into it better then
halfe a Spoonefull of pepper grossly beaten, and soe Soone as they
find any grudgeing of the fitt drink it and stirr up and
downe, and in twice takeng it will Cure
It hath been very often proved

To make Pills for the head & Stomach
XIII

Take an ounce of Alloes, a quarter of an ounce of Ruberbe, halfe
a quarter of an ounce of Aramaticum Rosatum, beate these into
fine powder & make these into pills mingled with the
Compound of Syrrup of wormwood, and take three of them
half an houre before Supper, and soe Continue every third
night till the whole Masse be taken

probatum

After the pills haue wrought drinke some possett drinke
about two hours after.



13

A Drink Good for the Palsey
XIV

Take of the shaveings of the Stalks of old Rosemary halfe a pound
waight Orange peeles, wheat brann of each one handfull, red
Sage dryed by the fire a day or two V handfulls, put these with 2 or
3 Gadds of new Steele into a boltinge bagge & hang it in a vessell
of 4 or 5 gallons of Ale or beere of a middle Strengthe & drinke
noe other drinke for a whole yeare

Pils for the head
XV

Take of Alloes a dram the rootes of wild gourds of all sorts, of
Mirabilans, Diagredium, Masticke, Bayberries, Roses of each
halfe a dramme of Saffron a Scruple stamp them well together
with the Juice of Coleworths & take Seaven pills of the Same
Morninge and Eveninge.

A Medicine for the Stone
XVI

Take the Seeds of Saxafridge rootes dryed to powder three
times in a weeke, every day as much of the powder as
will Lye uppon a Six pence in white wine, the next weeke
drink it twice in the weeke, the third weeke once,
doe this every Quarter of the yeare





14

A receipt to make black salve
XVII

Take one quart of Lindseed oyle halfe a pound of Bee
wax, halfe a pound of verry good white Lead otherwise
called Ceres; ffirst put the oyle into a Skillet and lett
the oyle be moderate hott, then add to it the wax lett
them seeth together untill the wax be quite melted
then put in the Ceres, as soone as you have put in the
Ceres stirr them alltogether & lett them boyle near about
two houres & lett it be Stirred all that time, it must be
boyled till it be black & stiffe and smell well, and that it
will rowle betweene your fingers

It must be a very moderate heat of wood Coales.

A receipt for ^the Tooth Ache
XVIII

Take a pint of whitewine vinegar, take the quantity of
3 beere glasses of the purest venice glass, put all your venice
glasse into the fire where you must burn it untill such
time as it be ready to dissolve to noethinge, then take it out
of the fire & put it into the white vinegar, where if it be well
burned it will melt & dissolve to nothing haveing prepared your
Liquor in this manner, you must when you are troubled with the
tooth Ache take some thereof & warme it in a dish or porringer
then take a mouthfull now & then, keep it in your mouth as long as as you
can without swallowing, for to swallow much o'nt would be as bad as ^a poyson



15

To make A healing Salve
XIX

Take halfe a pound of Sheepe Suett, halfe a pound of the
best Rossin, halfe a pound of Beeswax, and 3 penny
worth of Venice Turpentine, first melt the hard
& then put in the Turpentine, & lett it but just boyle
up, and soe rowle it up.

To make oyle of Charity
XX

Take Rosmary, red sage, wormewood, Lavender,
the lesser velerian, Cammomill of each one handfull put
these into a quart of the best Sallett oyle, sett it in
the Sunn Seaven dayes, then sett it on the fire and lett
it but boyle, then straine it from the hearbs, & putt in
fresh herbs, & soe doe 3 times & poure of the cleare from
the thick & keep it for your use.

This is good for all bruises to be taken inward or outward
if inward give 2 spoonefulls of the cleare in a little
balme posset drink, & annoynt it outward with the
thicke, this will help the Toothache & all Cold Rhumes if you
but dipp a cloath & lay it on; A little of this oyle with
Senious oyle will cleanse a wound.





16

A Seare Cloath for an Ache
XXI

Take halfe a pint of the best Sallett oyle, one ounce
and a halfe of white Ceres, a quarter of a pound of white
Lead, beat them severally, put your oyle into a broad
pan & set it on the coales till it begin to boyle,
then put in your Ceres Stirringe it with a long
Stick till it looke like faire water, then put in your
leade & Stirr it till it looke blackish and dropp of it
till you can rowle of it in your hand, you shall see it
enough boyled by droppinge it in fair water &
when it will rowle you may make your searcloath
presently.

A Diett drink for the Dropsey Short
windedness or the Tissicke
XXII

Take one pound of Liquorish, Carroway seeds Sweet
Corriander seeds, Annis Seeds, of each 2 ounces parsley
one ounce vnless the patient can make noe stoole &
then halfe an ounce will Serve, Allicompaine rootes
Pollipodium of each 2 ounces Bay berries 3 ounces,



17

Rosemary, sage, Thyme, Burrage, Hyssop Winter
savory, Pennyroyall, Woodbinde, Weath wine, some
call it weatherwine, others call it Seath wine of each
one handfull, Take 3 gallons of Spring water & boyle
all these together, till they come to halfe the quantity
when that is cold, Straine it througe a clean
cloath put it into earthen bottles & drinke it halfe
an hour before you eat or drinke any thing else
in a morninge, one quarter of a pint at a draught.

A receipt for a redd face
XXIII

Take the Juice of Southernewood one large
Spoonefull put it into a pint of strong Ale
or halfe a pint of Sacke drinke this by Six
of the Clock in the morninge fastinge, abstaine
from eatinge or drinkinge vntill Tenn of the
then take Southernwood & put a little vinegar
to it & eat it with bread & butter as sage, & att
Twelve you may goe to dinner, this is to be observ=
ed for Tenn dayes together





18

A good preservative against the plague
or pestillence
XXIV

Take Sage of vertue Rue otherwise called herbe
grace, Elder leaves & redd bramble leaves of each
of them a good handfull stamp them together
& then straine them through a fine Linen cloth
and put to the juice a quart of ^perfect good white wine
and a good quantity of white wine vinegar
mingle them together & put hereto a quarter
of an ounce of white Ginger beaten to Small
powder use to drink this medecine every morne=
inge fastinge for the space of Nyne dayes
together the quantity of a Spoonefull at a time
and this will (by Gods help preserve them for the
Space of a whole yeare

A drink for the Ricketts
XXV

Take of Bettany Egrimony, Hartstongue, Liver-
worth, Colts foot Scavious shuggar of each halfe a
handfull, the middle chine of Ash, fferne rootes
of each a quarter of an ounce, Water crsses



19

Brooke wine of each one handfull, ffiggs sliced 10, Raisins
of the Sunn stoned 3 ounces, boyle all these in a pottle of
faire water unto a quart & when it is almost boyled
put in a quarter of an ounce of Liquorish straine it &
lett her drink of it 3 or 4 times a day & alsoe in the
night if she useth then to drinke you must put in
hartshorne rasped halfe an ounce

A Medicine for ffreckles
XXVI

Take a quart of white wine & a pottle of the flowers
of Rosemary put them in a good glass bottle, then fill a
great skillet with water Lapp the glass in hay & sett
it in the skillett before you sett it on the fire & soe lett
it grow very warm but not boyle at all, then take a pint
of white wine vinegar put a new laid egge in it and lett
it remaine in the vinegar till the egge be consumed
or disolued, then straine the vinegar & white wine ...
And put the Liquor in a clean glasse, then give it
a warme over the fire & soe keep it for your vse.
Take a pint of Plantin water & a pint of ffemittory
water, drinke a quarter of a pint every morninge
and fast an houre after it.

1686





20

A Salve for sundry vses called
the Leaden plaister
XXVII

Take one pound of oyle olive of the best 1 pound of white
Lead very well calcinated into dust, 12 ounces of
Spanish sope incorporate all these well together in
an earthen pott well glazed & when they be well incor=
porated that the sope comes upermost & put it upon
a small fire of coales, continueinge the said fire an
houre & a halfe still stirring it with a bolt of Iron
fastned to a Stick of wood, then make your fire some
what bigger, till the redness be turned into a grey
collour but you must not leave stirringe till the
matter be turned into the colour of oyle somewhat
darker, then drop it on a wooden trenchar & if it
neither cleave to your fingers nor the trenchar t'is boyled
enough, then dipp your cloathes in that, the Searclothes
therein dipped will last 20 yeares, & the older the better
this plaister laid to the stomach provokes appetite and
takes away the paine of the Stomach layd to the
belly, t'is a remedy for the Collicke laid to the
reines of the back it stops the bloudy flux



21

Runinge of the reines heat of the kidney & weakness
of the back, it heales all swellings, Aches & bruises, it
breakes the ffellons, Impostumes, pushes & h^eales them
being applyed to the fundaments it heales all diseases
therein laid to the head, it is good for the vnnilla.

A Good Cordiall For A woman in Childbed
XXVIII

Take a quarter of a pint of Cowslip water & 2 ounces of
Syrrup of Clovegillyflowers & 2 pennyworth of Cinamon
water & 2 Spoonefulls of Clarett wine & Alcemus one
dramme mingle all these together and it is a soverai=
gne cordiall for any especially for one that lyes
in Childbed

Pills for the head
XXIX

Take one handfull of Alloes one dramme

ffor A Tetter

Take one handfull of Sallandine & as much bay
salt as can take up betweene your finger & Thumbe &
the juice of halfe a Lemon stamp them together in a
Mortar & straine the juice out & wash the place and
then put some of the hearbs upon it, vse this 3 or 4
dayes together dressinge it 3 or 4 times in a day
together &c





22

To Pickle Walnuts

Take your Walnuts at the biggness that you may run a pinn
through & put them in a pott & cover them with a pickle
made of salt & water, boyle the pickle up with vine
leaves, lett them Lye a weeke or a forthnight in the
pickle if you like it, if they mould put a peece of
rock'd Allome in & cover them close, then take to a
pint of white wine a quart of white wine vinegar
& boyle them with salt & lett the pickle be cold, then
take the nutts out of the pickle & cross them with
a knife and scrape the innards out with a Skivre
and fill them with mustard, pepper, Ginger, and
garlick mixt all together, Lay them close together
in the pott & powre the pickle to them, Cover them
with a Slate or Tile

ffor the riseinge of the Lytes
xxx

Take red rose water a quarter of a pint or else a
penny worth of Saffron tyed up in a Lawne bagg or
Tiffany steep it in ^the water a while then crush it between
two spoons till you make the water an Amber Collour



23

Then give two spoonfulls of it ^to the partie when the ffitts
cometh, if it doth not Lay it give two spoonfulls more
immediately for three or four sundry ffitts

A Receipt for the Worms
or a very good Purge
xxxi

Take 4 penny worth of Alloes & 2 penny worth of worme
seed & 2 penny worth of hartshorne it must be powder
of hartshorne & one penny worth of Curralline, bruise
the Alloes & pownd the worme seed very small & pownd
the Curralline to powder then mingle them together &
give it 3 mornings together as much as will lye on a
Six pence in a spoonfull of Beere & then wash your
mouth with an other spoonfull of beere & fast 2 houres
after it, & then take a little thinn broth & keep your selfe
warme, be sure you doe not gett cold.

A very good medicine for any heate in the face
or other where, although it be Saint Anthonys fire
xxxii

Take a pottle of Smiths water a handfull of sage, 2 hand
fulls of Elder leaves or the greene barkes of it & 2d of Allome seeth
all these from a pottle to a pint, put it in an earthen or gally pott
& lett the patient anoynt his face with it when he goeth to bed, in the
next morninge he shall find ease, but in 5 or 6 dayes (by
Gods grace) help.





24

To take away red rubies that grows in the
face by reason of the heat of the Liver
XXXIII

Take hoggs Sewit well purifyed & brimstone as much
of the one as of the other with the water distilled of a
peach tree & fferne & incorporate all together with a
slow fire make thereof an oyntment in the meane time
abstaine from wine & all hott things.

for him that hath naturaly A red face.
XXXIV
Take 4 ounces of kernells of Peaches 2 ounces Gourd
Seed and make thereof an Oyle wherewith you may
annoynt his face Morning & Evening, and this will
destroy the redness.

A thing found true by Experience.

To dissolve knotts in the Neck.
XXXV

Take clarify'd Wax iij ounces, Clear Turpentine one
ounce, Rosin 2 ounces, Pitch one ounce, Mirtharmoniake
Mastick, Olibanan, 2 penny worth of each, Galbanum
Fennegreeke, and Cummin, in powder of each one peny
worth dissolve the Gums in Wine Vinegar all night
then put them to your other things and melt them



25

with a gentle fire stirring them often, then strain them
and in the Cooling put in the Turpentine, and work it
into rowls, & when you vse it Spread it on Sheep's
Leather, Apply it to the place and every Morning
wipe it and lay it on again.

A Medicine for the Plague
XXXVI.

Take a handfull of Sage a handfull of herb of grace
a handfull of Elder Leaves, a handfull of red bramble's leavs
and Stamp them together, Strayne them in a Clooath with a
Quart of White Wine, take a quantity of Ginger and Mingle
them together, drink thereof Ev'ning and Morning a full
Spoonfull, every day ix dayes together, after the first Spoon=
full they Shall be Safe for xxiiij dayes and after the ixth
they Shall be Safe for the whole year. by the Grace of
God.

And if it fortune, one to be Stricken with the Plague, or he
have drunken of the medicine afforesaid, then take water
of Scabyon a Spoonfull, and so much water of Brittayne a
quantity of fine Treacle, put all together and it will put
out the venome; And if it fortune the Boyle to appear
then take Bramble's leaves & Elder leaves, & Mustard Seeds Stamp
them all together, then take of it and make thereof a plaister
& lay it to the Sore, it will draw out the venome, and the
Patient shall be whole by the Grace of God.





26

A Most Soveraigne and approv'd preservation
above all others for the Purgeing away from the
Heart all evill humors which causeth the infec==
tion of the Plague by one Mr Hintent
Doctor in Physick.
XXXVII.

Take the Root of double Crowfoot that beareath a double
yellow flower glistering like Gold, or instead thereof A
Claw of Garlick Stamp it in a Wooden dish, and fill
half a Hasel nutt shell full of the same, and tye the same
in the inn part near to the lower side of the left Arme
A handfull from the Wrest, and let it remain there about
xij houres, then, open the same, and you Shall find a
little Bladder in the Same place, if it be not risen wrought
in the Said 12 houres, let it remain vntill the time that
the Said Bladder be risen, and Cut of the Skin thereof
if the Said Bladder be fallen, if it be not fall'n prick it
with a pinn, then Cut it of, and then take a peice of the
branch of an Elder tree of the greenest as bigg as apense
pare of the bark, and tye the end thereof to the place
aforesaid, and three Ivy leaves vppon the same, first
prick'd full of holes, and let it remain there so long
vntill it have made a hole that will receive a pease, then
put therein a pease and lay thereon iij Ivie leaves
prick'd, and So S^hift the same with a pease and three Ivie
leaves morning and evening and keep the same Cleer
and every ij dayes, as you Shall so need, wash your



27

Arm with French Wines blood warme, and do continue
with the same vntill the danger of the Pestilence
be past

The Order to heale the Same
xxxviii

Fourteen dayes before you will heal the Same, you must
beware of Surfetting, and vse no penson nor Beanes, and
take half a pint of French wine and half a pint of Sallet
Oyle, and mingle them together, and bath the Sore therewith
twice or trice a day, and tye a Cloth wet therewith to the
Same, and So it will be well Healed.

To make the Botch appear
xxxix

Take a handfull of Sorrill otherwise cal'd green sawce
Stamp and Strain it with a draught of Beer or Ale,
take a little Treacle and the powder of one Nutmegg,
Mix 'em all together, give it the Sick to drink and the
Botch will appear within five dayes houres after
probatum est

To break a Botch or Boyle
xl.

Take Vnlirinum Egrimonium and Snailes, Stamp 'em
together and Lay it to the Sore.

Another for the Same. xli.

Take Raw honny, the Oyle of an Egg & Wheat flower &
make a plaister thereof, Lay it to the Same.





28

for the Tooth Ache.
xlij.

Take a Spoonfull of English Hony, a Spoonfull of
Ginger and Pepper beaten small, a Spoonfull of Rose
water, a Spoonfull of Aquâvitæ a Spoonfull of Red or
white vinegar & ij Sage leaves Shred Small and as
much as a Nut of Roch Allome, and so boyle them on
a Chafing dish of Coales vntill they come to a Treacle
then make a Cloath like a Peascod, and lay it beetween
your Cheek and your Gumme.

For the yellow Jaundice
xliij.

Take Stale Ale half a pint, Dasy Roots a handfull
wash, & Stamp 'em together, then Take Angletouches A
handfull & Strip the earth out of them, then Strain
them, and put to it the Inner part or Rinde of a
Barbary tree, and drink them next your Heart at
Morning and Evening.

For the Dropsy in the Womb, or in the
feet, or for the Imposthume in the Stomach or
Gout in the Stomach, or for any evill.
xliiij

Take Scamony iiijd weight, Of Rubarb xijd weight, of
Spicknard iijd weight, flower of Cammomill jd weight, of
white Shuggar Candy one ounce, put them all together in
a Mortar and beat them into fine powder. Vse this 3 dayes
following fasting a Spoonfull at a time.



29

A Drink to the same which is made after
this Sort following.
xlv.

Take Hyssop, Rosemary, Violletts, Varvain, Bittany, John
Moseares, Plantine, Avemes, Sage, Featherfew, of each
one handfull, wash them Clean and Stamp yet a little and
do it in a new Eearthen pott, and put thereto a Gallon of
White Wine, and let it Stand all night, and in the Morning
boyl it to a pottle, then Strayn it through a Strayner, and
drink thereof in a morning Cold, and in the Ev'ning hott.
You may use this 8 or 9 dayes following, and but a little
of the powder before he doth Drink it.

A water to Dissolve the Swelling in the Bowells
or Superfluity of Fatt.
xlvi.

Take two Gallons of Running water, Set it on the fire, put
into it 2 pounds of Red Fennell and 2 ounces of Angelikoe, and
a quantity of Comynne, boyl these from 2 gallons to one or less
of water, and this every day fasting in the Space of xx
dayes. the greatness of the Superfluities of Humors, and
also of the Grosness will wast.

For Biteing of a Mad Dogg.
xlvij

Take a little portion of the hearbs following, Scabies Matfolm
Night-shade with the blewflower Wild Sage, Lilly root and Leafe
Stamp & Strain them, or if you have them Distill'd, take the water of them
put it to alitle Treacle, with such Liquor as is meet to be ministerd
whether ^it be man or Beast that must drink it, and that must be given
within ix dayes after it, fortune.





30

A water to wash the breasts, if they be
healed or not
xlviij

Take a handfull of Rhue, as much of Sage
two Spoonfulls of Hony, a little Roch Allomme lik
a Walnut, Seeth all these in a quantity of White
wine, vntill they be half consum'd, then straine it
and keep it in a Glass, wash the holes with it ....
and dress them with Salve following.

A Salve for any Sore.
xlix

Take five ounces of fine wax iij ounces of Rosin a Spoon=
full of hony iij Spoonfulls of Neats Oyle, boyle all these
together, well Stir'd, keep it. It is good for any Sore.

For Bloodshott Eyes
l.

Take Plantin water, Rose water and the white of
an Egg, Mix them all together, and wash your Eyes
therewith, or else lay it upon your Eyes and it help
with God's Assistance.

A wonder^full Plaister for a Sore Breast.
li

Take leaves of Mallow's & Wormwood of each a handfull
Seeth them in Water vntil they be as tender as Butter
of an Apple, then lay them on a board, and let the water
run from them Clean, then Cut them Small, with a



31

knife, for they will not grind for fat, then Stamp them
with a pound of old Swines grease; and temper
them together till you know not the one from the
other, this plaister is most pretious for sore Paps, the
rott of all others, it Matureth and Mitigateth ^not only the
payn in the Paps, but also, in hard Botches or Boyles
vnder the Throat or Arm holes, or any other place in
the body where it lyeth hard in the flesh. This must be
laid to luke warm in a double Linen Cloath changed twice
in a day; Looke Substantially on this Plaister for it hath
no pore in such things.

For the Bynding in the Body
lij.

Take a handfull of Parsley, boyle it in fair water, and
lay it as warm as you can endure it to your Navill
and this to be us'd 3 nights together bound round
about you with a fair Cloath, then the 4th night take a
Slice of Raw beefe and lay it to your navill with a fine
Linen Cloath between one night and no more and that
shall make you moderate in your Body.

For the black Jaundice
liij

Take a pint of Malmsey, put thereto the Juice of ix branches
of Sallendine, and a Sheep's turd strayn'd into it when it is new
dung'd, long Pepper, English Saffron & Turmerick, put these
together & give it to the partye fasting.  probatum est





32

A water for the Liver & burning Feaver
liv

Take Hartstongue, Liverworth, Maydenhear, distill them
together, and vse to drink of this water which will purge and
purifye the Liver, and quench the burning of an Ague
or Feaver.

To make hard Lyggs soft and small, if it be
never so hard.
lv

Take Milldust, Barely flowre, Wheat flowre and
Seeth them in Milk, put thereto Sheep's Tallow, Hony, Barrow's
grease, and boyle them very thick and lay it
thereto.

An Oyntment for the Morphew, be it white or Black.
lvi.

Take a pound of good Verdigreese, & one ounce of
white Brimstone, make them into small powder, then
take out the brains of two Sheep's heads, put the heads into
a pott, Seeth them without Salt then take the grease
thereof and put into the powder ^thereto and temper them together
and it will be a good Oyntment for the purpose

To expell Poyson out of a Man.
lvij

Take the black Claws of a Crawfish, & beat them
to powder, then drink them and it Shall help
you that are poyson'd without doubt.



33

A Salve to draw a heale
lviij

Take a quarter of virgin wax, two ounces of Sheep's
suet, melted them together a little, then take them from
the fire, and thereto an ounce of Frankinsence and Stirr
it well together.

For the Tooth Ache.
lix

Take xx Ivye leaves, a little long pepper, boyle them with
a handfull of Salt in Old wine, then put the Liquor, when
it is well boyl'd, into your mouth, on that side that is
vex'd with Ache, and you you shall prove that the Ache
is destroy'd. probat. est.

A water to keep the Teeth from Stinking & also white
lx.

Take long Pepper, Purslowe, Astrologine, Rotundum
Salgeme, Seeth them in Wine, and vse to wash your
Teeth with this water, for it will keep them white and
Clean.

A Speciall Medicine for the Tetter or Canker.
lxi

Take a Quart of the Strongest Ale you can gett, put there=
to a handfull of Sage, and a handfull of Herb of grace, a handfull
of Rosemary, a handfull of Columbine leaves, seeth them togehter
till the one half of the Liquor be consumed; then put there=
to a Spoonfull of English hony, and as much Allome as
a Walnut, then let it seeth together, and let it be cover'd





34

And let the Herbs abide Still in it, and so wash the
soreness and it shall ease it, probatum est.

To make Teeth white.
lxij

Take the Root of Walnut Tree, & Seeth it in white wine
then take part of it and Chew it between your Teeth to
dissolve the hardness thereof & So rubb your Teeth, and it
will make them white and this is good for the Eye Sight
also

for a woman travelling with Child to make
her soon be deliver'd.
lxiij

Take Bittonye and date Stones in powder and drink
it, and she shall be delivered anon.

A Restoritie for a Ring
lxiv

Take Rosa Solis and Steep them all night in white wine
and Still them, if a man be weak let him drink the
water alone if he be metlye let him drink it with
vinegar, this will make a whole man a lepor.

For Shortness of Breath. lxv.

Take Hartstongue, Liverworth, Bittanye, Vervaine,
Sentorye, Mugworth, Pellipodine, Sallandine of ev'ry
one of those an oz. then take Rue, Fennell, Dandalyon,
Fetherfew, and Wormwood, of each of these half an oz.
then take 4 Nutmeggs, Saffrones, Graynes & Treacle of
every one of these parcells one half peny worth. Licoris, Annise
& Siny of every one of these parcells one peny worth, & 2d worth
of Shuggar Candy, boyle all those in white wine, and so
straine and drink it



35

Another for the same, and for the Ague Cure.
lxvi

Take Bean water, or else a quantity 2 or 3 Spoonfulls
and so much of running water, and drink Morning &
evening, and if thy Leggs do fortune to break or Swell
then take Smith's water & a good Quantity of Shugger
and boyle them well together, and so wash thy Leggs
therewith warm

For the Head Ache.
lxvij

Take Bean flower, & powder of Cumyne of each like
Quantity and Seeth it in Strong white vinegar till it be
thick, then lay it in a Linnen bagg to Noddack of thy
neck hehind, as hot as you may Suffer it.

A Coppy to make the Soveraign'st water that ever was
devis'd by man, which Dr. Stephens a Phisician of
great Cunning ^& of Long experience did use and therewith
did many great Cures, and all was kept in secrett
vntill a little before his death, then the Archbishopp
of Canturbury gat it from him as followeth
lxviij

Take a gallon of Gascoyn wine, then take Ginger, Gall=
ingall, Camell & Cinamint Tollianders, Nutmegs, Cloves
Annise seed, of every of them one dramme, then take sage
Mints Red Roses, Thyme of the Moore Pillotory of the wall
Rosemary wild Margerum or gamon as well called penny=
royall, Pennemountain, wild thyme, Camall, Lavender and
Avants, of every of them a handfull, then break & beat the
Spices Small & break the herbs, put all in the wine, let it
stand still & ij houres, Stirring it Sometimes, then Still it in
a Limbeck, & keep the first water by it selfe for it is best.





36

then will there come a Second water which will not be so good
as the first

The virtues of this water be these, it Comforteth the Spirits
vitall, & preserveth greatly the youth of man, and helpeth
the inward diseases coming of Cold, and against Shaking
of the Palsey, it cureth the contraction of Sinews, it
helpeth the conception of women that be barren, it killeth
worms in the body, & killeth the cold Gout, & helpeth the
Tooth ache, it comforth the Stomach verry much, it cureth
the cold Dropsy, it helpeth the the Stone that is in the
bladder, & in the reines of the back, it cureth the Canker
it helpeth shortly a Stinking breath, and whoso^ever
useth this water ever & anon, & not often, it preserveth
him ^long in good likeing, and shall make one seem very
young a long time.

for the Small Pox or any other grief that lyeth
in the stomach. lxix.

Take a ^quart of posset drinke, let it be strain'd clean, then take a
good handfull of Marigolds, three crops of Rosmary, iiij of
thyme, and 4 or 5 of Hyssop some organes; seeth these
altogether to a pint and give it the Patient to drink
and remember to strayn it after it is boyl'd

A Posset to take away any of the Stomach the
Small Pox, Malmsey or any other Grief.
lxx

Take a quart of posset drink made with Stale Ale and rawe
milk strayn it, & put therein a handfull of marygolds some



37

Organes iij or iiij crops of Hyssop of Rosmary wash
all these, break them, and seeth them in the posset drink till
half be consumed, then strain it & give your Patient so often as you may.

for the Small Pox
lxxj.

Give no medicine when they break, otherwise then to
wash the Eyes and Throat with Rosewater

The Receipt of the flowers of Rosemary
and its vertues
lxxij

Take Rosemary flowers & Stamp them, then put ^in a glass
with Strong Wine, & Stop it close, then sett it in the Sunn
5 or 6 days, and then Still it with a Soft fire and you shall
have both water & Oyle, the which you shall seperate and keep
close in a glass & its vertues are these
It helpeth against all payns in the head altho they have
continued 6 or 7 years, it comforteth the memory, and alsoe
preserveth the Eyes, if you drink thereof now and then a
drop or two & put another into the Eyes. It helpeth those
that are deafe if it be put into the Eares and also drunk
with good Wine, It op'neth all Stoppings of the Liver &
Milte, and helpeth against the Dropsey, Yellow Jaundice,
It breaketh wind & helpeth ^the Collick, & riseing of the Mother, It
is alsoe excellent for those that have drunk poyson, or that are
infected with pestilence, if you drink thereof a little and lay
you down to Sweat, it comforteth the heart & cleaneth the
blood, & makes a man merry, & causeth a good Colour, and this
Oyle is most excellent for those that are full of the Itche Scabbs.
& to be Short, it helpeth all diseases of the body that come of cold
& moyst humours, altho they were n'ere so evill, it helpeth the
Canker, Fistuloes and such like. &c.





38

A water for the Stomach, Poyson,
Smallpox, or any Surfeit.
lxxiij

Take of Sallendine, Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Mugworth,
Wormwood, Pimpenneld, Dragon, Scabies, Egrimony, Balmes
Centurie, Cardus, Bittony, Rosa-Solis, of each a good handfull
Angelica roots, white henband roots, Turmenvild, Hedow
Eccovith, of each half an ounce, Shave the roots and wash
them, the hearbs Shave, and Squeese the water out of them
in a Clooth, then Shred and Steep them 2 days & nights
in as much white wine as will cover them as will cover
them well, & let the vessel be close cover'd, take it out and
drink it, keep it close in a glass or bottle, and when you
vse it, give it lukewarm to the party with a little Shugger
infus'd, to a Child 2 or 3 Spoonfulls is Sufficient, and to
a Strong body 4,5, or 6 Spoonfulls it is an exprimented
Cordiall. You may use ^to this a little Methridate in it
these Simples are to be gather'd in May, and then
distill'd in the beginning of June.

Lucatellus Balsome
lxxiv

Take halfe a pound of yellow wax, Cut it in thin Slices
put it in a dish with a quart of Sack, and Set it on a Chafing
dish of coales, & when it is melted, put in a pound of Venice
Turpentine very well wash'd, in Redrose water, till it be white,
then take 3 pints of the best Sallet oyle, & put the Turpentine
and oyle into the wax and Sack, let them boyle gently
together almost an hour, then take it off the fire and



39

put to it ij oz. of the purest colour'd redd Sanders, Sifted
through a Tiffany & keep it Stirring till it be almost cold.
Soe pot it vp.

The vertue of this Balsome.
lxxv.

It cures any green wound, melted in a Sawcer & dropt
on the wound, & a linnen cloath dip'd in it and laid upon
the part affected ev'ry day. It cures any Scald, or burne,
anointing the part if the Skin be broken, warm it and
lay a dipp'd linen cloath on it. the like for a Scalded head
it is verry good for the head Ache rubbing the Temples
with it & the nape of the neck being warm'd, In like
manner for the Gout, & Plurisie after leting blood eating
the quantity of a Nut rolled up in Shugger and after=
wards annoynting the left side there with.

Dr. Right's receipt for the Scurvie
lxxvi.

Take a pound of Sea Scurvie-grass after it is pick'd & dryed
near a fire, half a pound of Raisins of the Sunn Ston'd, one hand=
full of Roman wormwood, one handfull of dry'd Orange
peeles, one handfull of wheat brann, 2 oz. of Shavings of
Ivory, of Gallingall roots prepar'd, Coriander Seeds, of
Caroway Seeds, of Nutmegg, of each 2 dramms mix all these
into one lump in a Stone Morter, and put ^it into a bolting bagg
with 3 or 4 gadds of new Steel to hang it in a vessell of
four Gallons of Ale of a middle Strenght, after 5 or 6 days
begin to drink it, and noe other Beer or Ale.





40

A Receipt for the Convulsion fitts
lxxvij

Take a quart of white wine, put into it a good handfull
of Cowslip's leaves, boyle away a third parte, then take it
of the fire and let it Stand till the next day, then
Strayne it, and Soe drink it till all be done.

To Stay the bleeding of the Nose
lxxviij

Take a Raisin of the Sunn, Slitt it, and turn the inside
outward, then put it up the Nostrill that bleeds and
if the blood fall down the Throat, take Some Raisins
of the Sunn, Chew them, and soe hold them in your
mouth

An Excellent drink for to Cure a Fistula.
the Lady Mildmay's way.
lxxix

Take Sanicle, wood Bittany, wild Daseys leaves and
root, red bramble leaves, Dandalyon with the redd ribbs
or Stalks in the leaves, Avenes Bugle, white Bodell or
Ox Eye, Egrimony, Mother-worth, field Charvill, of each
a good handfull. Mugworth, Ribbworth and wormwood
of each a few Sprigs: wash all clean, & Shake out the
water through a linnen cloath, then boyle'em together, in
a quart of good white wine, over a Soft fire, for the Space
of a quarter of an howr & over, then put it 2 or 3 Spoon=
fulls of English hony, and let it Seeth or Simper awhile
after, well Stirr'd about with a Spoone in the Seething
then Strayne it hott through a Clean Cloath into Some



41

Earthen vessell wringing the cloath well, and when it is
cool put it into glass bottells, Let the patient drink thereof
Morning and Evening lukewarm 3 Spoonfulls at a time or
thereabout, as his Stomache Serv's him. for Speedy cure you
may tent the wound or Sore, and lay thereon a Colworth
leafe. If the Patient be a woman with Child leave out
the Mugworth.

For an vlcer in the kidneys
lxxx.

Take yellow Dock-roots one oz. Slice it verry thin and
with a Nutmegg Slic'd boyl it in 3 pints of Ale, till
halfe be consumed, Skim it well, and drink it three
Mornings fasting, continue this 15 or 20 days together.

A drink to Strength the Liver and
keep one from the Dropsy.
lxxxi

Take Yellow and Redd Dock roots, white & yellow Sanders
and of the wood Goracum of each one oz. Agrimony
4 handfulls, of all these make a gross powder, put it in
a bolting bagg with a Stone to keep it down and Tunn up
4 Gallons of new Ale vpon it, let it Stand  Six or Seaven
days, and then drink it for your ord'nary drink and no
other, 6 or 7 days before one be Spent make another
proportion, till you be throughly well.





42

For the Scurvy & Dropsy.
lxxij.

Take Six pound of the leavs of Sea & Garden Scurvy Grass
a pound & a halfe of Brooklime, as much of water-Cresses;
Stamp & Straine the Iuice out, put to it 4 pound of the roots
of Briany, Horse radish 2 pound, Wintrne halfe a pound, twelve
Lemons Slic'd thinn meat & Rhine 4 oz. of Nutmeggs grossly
bruis'd let all these Stand infusing 3 days in Eight
pints of Rhenish wine, then distill it.

Take 3 Spoonfulls of it ev'ry morning & Ev'ning:
you must abstaine from all Salt meats, Swines flesh,
Butter and wine. It is very good to wash your Eyes.

A most Excellent receipt to keep the Face
from Pitting with the Small Pox.
lxxxiij

Take a pound of Butter out of the Churne unsalted
a pound of Shuggar double refin'd beaten & Searced
put these two together upon a Slow fire to melt,
then beat it till it is thick, and keep your Face
annointing with it, that it may not be dry,
this is not to be vs'd ^till the Pox begin to crush.

Judge Ellis's receipt for the Stone
lxxxiv.

Take Saxifrage, Parsly, Thyme, Winter Savory
Iermander, Cammomile, wormwood, Penny royall,
Hyssop, Lavender, Fennell, of ev'ry one of these a
two good handfulls, chop them Small, and infuse



43

Them 24 hours in 3 gallons of Small Ale, Slice
2 oz 3 Nutmeggs, & put to it Venice Turpentine
well wash'd in Red Rose water to the quantity of
a Walnut, and as much live hony, put all these into
a Limbeck or Still & distill them, keep a quart of the
first running by it Selfe, & a pottle of the Second,
and a pottle of the third, as as occasion serv's drink
the water, one Spoondull of the first, 2 of the Second
and 2 of the third, with 4 Spoonfulls of White wine and
nutmegg & Shuggar, 3 days before the full, and
three days before the Change of the Moone: it is
only to be made in the Moneth of May.

For the Ricketts
lxxxv.

Take three quarts of the Strongest Ale out of the Fatt,
put to it one oz of powder of Annise Seed, one oz of
powder of Lickoris, half a pound of Figgs Slic'd, half a pound
of Raysins of the Sunn Ston'd, a quarter of a pound of the
best blue Currans, one handfull of knottgrass, a handfull
of Cumfry, a handfull of parsley roots washed & Scraped
and Slic'd verry thin, boyle all these together till halfe
be consumed away, then Strayne it all out, and put to
it one Spoonfull of live hony, & halfe a pint of Muscadine
then Sett it over the fire again, & let it continue till it begins to
Symper, then put it into an Earthen pan, & when it is
cold bottle it, you must give the child 2 Spoonfulls in the morning
fasting, 2 after dinner when it goes to Sleep, & 2 at night going to
bed. this is to be continued till the quantity be all taken,





44

Every night all the Joynts, breat and Ribbs of the Child
must be annoynted with old Sack, and layd in a blankett
extroardinary, and be kept very warme.

For the _
lxxxvi.

Take Jallap finely powder'd one dramm, Cinamon finely
powder'd halfe a Scruple, mix them & take them in a
draught of Chicken broth, so having gently purged
take as followeth.

A pint of Plantin water, or water distill'd out of Oak
leaves, or a decoction made of Oak budds while tender,
blanch a Score of Almonds and pound them well as to
make milk, put it over the fire and give it a Scald
together, then take it of & put one dramm of powder'd
Mastick, and three drams of Shugger of red roses, Let
the Liquor be neer cold. then take five Spoonfuls or more
every morning first, and last at night twelve or 14
dayes together.

To make Hayre grow.
lxxxvij.

Take an Egge, rost it in the embers till it be hard
then take the Yolk, and halfe Soe much fresh butter,
and as much Pepper as will lye on a knifes point, Add
as much hony as will make it into an oyntment,
and Soe annoynt the head with it



45

An Excellent Cordiall water for
Dizziness & Swimming in the head.
lxxxviij.

Take four pownd of black Cherries, bruise the Stones of
them, then put them to th the cherries into a Glass bottle, and
into them a good handfull of Balm & a handfull of Rose=
mary tops, Cinamon, Nutmegs of each halfe an, then pour
vpon them all two quarts of Sack Stop it Close and
let it digest 24 hours, then distill it of, in Balneo,
distill so much of it, that it be weak, like ^weak aqua Mirabilis
Sweeten it with white Shugger-Candy to your tast, and
drink a little wine glass full of it in the morning
fasting and at night goeing to bedd.

Aqua Mirabilis. Sir Kellam Digby's way
lxxxix.

Take Cubbells, Gallingall, Cardimon seeds, Mellilott flowers,
Cinamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, of each two dramms
the Iuice of Sallendine a pint, of the juice of Spearmint
and Balm of each a pint, one pound of Shugger, the
flowers of Cowslips, Rosemary, Bourrage, Buglass
Marygolds and Clovegilly flowers, of each two oz. three
pints of the best Sack, and one pint of the Strongest
Angellica water, bruise your Spices & Steep them all together
with halfe a pint of red rose water, one night in the
Sack, Still it in an ordinary Still or glass, & lay Hartstongue
leafes in the bottome of the Still, and to this the weight
of 12d in Saffron, make four times the proportion





46

instead of Angellia water, put in a quart of French
Aqua vitæ and a quart of the juice of Angellica
and one oz: apeice of the Spices.

To make a Cake
xc.

Take a Gallon of flower, 6 pounds of Currans 3 pounds of Butter
halfe a pound of white Shugger, a pint of Ale yest
or barm, 20 Eggs verry well beaten tenn of the
whites left out halfe an oz. of Cloves, as much Mace,
two Nutmeggs, half a pint of Sack, a little Damask=
Rose water, a pint of Cream warm enough to melt
the butter, You may add what Sweet meats you
please. Bake it in a quick oven

A most Excellent water for the Stone
xci.

Take Six handfulls of Small Raddishes 6 handfulls of
Mother thyme, 4 handfulls of Pelletorie of the wall;
4 handfulls of Saxifrig hearb, one handfull of Phillipendula
3 oz. of Sarsafrie wood; Cut all these grossly together
and put them into a Gallon of new milk either of a Redd
or a Coal black Cow, & So let them Steep 24 houres
cover'd, the distill them in a Common Still; It will
yeild 3 quarts of water, It must be Still'd in Maij. when
the water is Still'd Stopp it close, and Set it in the Sunn
for a Moneth.



47

You must take it thus

When you are to take this water you must over night
take a porringer of fair ^spring water & put into it a quarter
of an oz. of the wood called Lignum nefretitum Sliced
very Small and Thin and Lett it Steep in the water 24
12 houres, then draine from the wood: & put to the
water 3 Spoonfulls of white or Rhenish wine; And
4 Spoonfulls of this distill'd water, with the Iuice
of a Lemon & Some 2 Spoonfulls of Loaf Shuggar.
Then take half a Nutmegg Slic'd very thin, put it into
a Spoon with a little of the water, Swallow it and
wash it down with the rest of the water; Take it fasting
and fast 2 houres after it; This is to be taken at the
new of the Moon three mornings together, but if
you feel no great pain, then one morning in a
Moneth will be enough; but you must use it Constantly
I do assure you those that have used this water never
had any great fitt after the taking of it.

The Duke of Monmouth's Receipt for the Stone
xcij

Take a Gallon of Haws ripe, Stamp them very well Stones
all, put them into a pott with 3 quarts of white wine to
cover them, put into them four Fennill roots, and the
leafs, take out the pith of all the roots, and put into
them an ounce of Fennell Seeds and almost an oz. of Annis
seeds, bruise the Seeds and Steep them together a day and





48

A Night, and if three Quarts of white wine will not
Cover them put in more, and soe put it in your Still
past it vp and you may draw out two quarts Mingle
it together, take Six Spoonfulls of this water and Six of
White wine and one Spoonfull of Syrrup of Elder and
drink it three days before the new Moone and three days
after, and Soe at the Full, or when it trobles you.

Sir Thomas Weatherlys Dyett drink for the Gout.
xciij

Take five oz. of the best Sarsaparilla Slic'd thinn, of
flinty China well bruis'd 3 oz. the Shavings of Sassa=
fras an oz. of Hartshorn, and Ivory of each Six dramms
infuse these twelve hours warm in Ten pints of
water, then boyle them close cover'd, with a very
gentle fire vntill four pints be boyl'd away, puting
to them toward the end Sage, Germander, and Ground
Pine, of each a large handfull, whole Raysins foure
oz. Red Sanders & Coriander Seeds of each Six drams,
take it from the fire and Straine it and let the Liquor
Stand to Settle, powr the clear from the bottome and to
every pint add an oz. of the Syrrup of Balsome of Tola.

Sir Thomas Weatherly's Ale for the Gout.
xciv.

Take Six or Seaven Gallons of Wort made of a Bushell
of Malt put to them an handfull of Hopps, boyle these
halfe an houre then infuse in them the the Shavings of
Sassafras and Guaiacum of each two ozs. Liquorice
Slic'd thinn an oz. Raysins Ston'd two ozs. Grond Ivy



49

Ground Pine, Sage, and Germander of each two large
handfulls boyle these with a very gentle fire close cover'd
vp, vntill a Gallon wast, when it is cold Strain it, and
work it vp with yest, and keep it in a ^fitt vessell, having in
the vessell in a bag a pound of Antimony in powder
after 4 or 5 days you may draw it into Bottles and
drink it for your common drink.

Mrs. Davis's Cordiall water
xcv.

Take two Bottles of Sack & two bottles of Brandy , 4 pounds
of red Cheryes the Stones crackt, a handfull of Rosemary
flowers, halfe a handfull of Marygold flowers, a handfull
of Archangell flowers, a handfull of the tender tops of
Balm, a handfull of the tender tops of Spear Mint, Six
penny weight of Saffron, Clovegilliflowers 500 clipt, one
oz. of Cinamint one of the Nutmegs, Cloves & Mace of each
halfe an oz. put all these together all night and then
Still them off, let it drop vpon white Shugger or Shugger
Candy.

A Most Excellent Pill for the Stone or ^an vlcer in the
kidneys or Bladder, or bloudy water. Approved by
Able Physicians. xcvi.

Gum Gua ℥ss that which is greenest & transparent is ^best
Amoniacum ℥ij the whitest & clearest
Aloes Succotrini ℥vi the reddest & most transparent
Tartor vitorall ℥iij the whitest & Tartest.
Prepared Pearle ℈ij
Amber Greece gr: 12
Balsom of Peru ʒss

directions





50

Directions to make the aforsaid Pills

First, Beat the Ambergreece, then beat the Pearle into
fine powder, mix them on a clean sheet of paper, beat
the Tartar Vitorall into fine powder, as alsoe the
Aloes & Gum-guaicum very carefully, & then mix the
Said Tartar Vitorall, the Aloes and Gumguaicum
vpon an other clean Sheet of paper; then with a clean
Mortar and pestill beat the Amoniacum till it begin
to Stick to the pestill, then with a course cloath make
your pestill clean, and heat the said pestill a little hotter
than you can well endure your hand on it, then put a
Quantity of 12 drops of white wine vinegar to the Amoni==
acum, then take your pestill it being not over hott,
make it clean with a cloath, then dissolve your
Amoniacum and vinegar very well, when you have soe
done put in some of the powders, Mix it well together
and when it begins to be Stiff put in some Balsome
then more powder, beat & mix them well, then put in
more Balsome, then more powder, doing as abovesaid
stirring be sure well from the bottome with a Spatula or
knife, and after all the powder is in beat it for a quarter
of an houre, then take it out & temper it between your
hands mixing the Pearle and Ambergreece in it; then
keep it for your vse in a Gally pott, & when you have
occasion to vse them, make them vp in the bigness of ordi==
nary Pills, take five or Seaven every night when you
goe to bedd Soe continue till you be well, and at any
time when you find your Selfe ill take them againe.



51

Sir Thomas Weatherly's drink for the Scurvey.
xcvij

Take 4 pints of Rhenish wine, infuse in that, Bryony
roots Slic'd thinn two oz. Elicampane roots one oz., Orris
root halfe an oz., the outward pills of an Orange, and
a Lemon, and two Nutmeggs Slic'd, after 12 houres
infusion Strayne them, and put the Strained liquor, the
Iuices of Garden Scurvigrass, Brooklime, Water Cresses,
and Oranges, of each 4 oz. and as much Shugger as
will make it gratefull,

Take of this a quarter of a pint first every morning
and at 5 or 6 in the Afternoone.

To make Gumms grow
xcviij

Take a Quarter of an oz. of Myrrhe as much Bolal=
manak and halfe as much Salt of Prunella, make
all these into a powder & sift it very fine, then make
it into a past (not very stiff) with hony, soe spread
it vpon fine raggs the breadth of your finger, soe
lay it to your Gumms every morning & after Supper, and
let it lye an houre or two, when you take it of wash your
mouth wine, or if you can with your owne water.

A Receipt to Strenghtthen the Sight.
xcix

Take Lignum, Aloes, Storax, Sassafras barke, Amber, of each a dramm
cut Betany halfe an oz., Rosmary flowers or Rosmary itselfe a quarter
of an oz., & as much Tobacco mixt with as you put of Rosmary.
It is to be taken in a Pipe like Tobacco.





52

Water for the Teeth
c.

Take Rosewater halfe a pint, Cynamon, Cloves,
burnt Allome, of each two dramms, put all into a violl
of a quart, fill the violl full of comon water, and boyle
it together vpon the hott ashes till the third part be
consumed, then keep it for your vse.

Barley Cream.
ci.

Take a handfull of French Barley, boyle it in 3 or 4
waters, till it be pretty tender, then sett a quart of Cream
vpon the fire with some Mace & Nutmegg and when it
begins to boyle put in your Barley and boyle it till it
begins to thicken, and Season it with Shugger and Salt
to your tast & soe serve it vp when it is almost Cold
you may add to your Creame a quarter of a pound
of Almonds blanched & finely beaten.

To make Angelletts
cij.

Take three quarts of new milk and one quart of
Cream or soe much Strokings and noe Cream, put a little
Runnett to it, when it is come enough take the Curds
up Softly with a Ladle, and fill the Fatt therewith, and
as it Sinks Still fill it vp againe but break the Curd
as



53

Little as you can, when it is full enough let it Stand
till next morning, then vnty the Fatt and Salt it on
both sides, then tye the Tatt vp againe; soe let it stand
3 or 4 dayes turning it every day, and wash the
Fatt and lay it vp againe. then take it out & set it on
a Trencher turning it evevery day till dry

To make Cream Cheese
ciij.

Take 4 quarts of new milk and two Quarts of
Cream put the Cream into a Skillet and boyle it vp, & take
it of the fire, then let it stand a little, & put it into
your milk & put in the Runnett, let it Stand till it be Come,
then with a skiming dish take vp the Curds whole
without breaking, soe put it into the cloath and turn
it often the first day in a wett Cloath strewing a little
salt on it, the next day turn it into dry cloaths and
within two dayes you may put it into Rushes or
Grass, nettles or Ash Leafes.

For the Sight
civ.

Take of Rue & Sage of each a good hand^full and about 400
Hogg Lice puting them when bruised into a bagg with
your hearbs into a vessell of Ale of about four Gallons.
after it hath done working not before then, drink this
after it hath been Stop'd up 24 houres close, vse it as
your ordinary drink.





54

For a Consumption
cv

Take a red Calfes Gather fresh and new kil'd: have
of Scabious, Jerusalem Sage, and Mayden hair of each
a good handfull, two ounces of Anis seeds, and eight
ounces of Dates; the Gather must be onely wiped out of the
blood, then take three quarts of red Cow's milk and put
all these things in and distill till they be dryed up, drink
a wine glass full of the water first in the morning and
last at Night till it be all Spent, add to every glassfull a Spoon
full of red Rose water, and sweeten it with Suggar candy

For a Cough
cvj

Take a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned,
a quarter of a pound of white Sugger Candy powdred,
a Quarter of a pound of Conserve of Roses, all well-mixed
togeather, then make a hole in the middle and drop in 12
drops of the Spirit of Sulphur, and mix it well togeather
take the Quantity of a Large Nutt at a time.



55

To Make Cream Cheese
cvij.

Take a Gallon of Milk, a Quart of Cream, three pints of
Boyling water, a Spoonefull of Runit, mix'd well together, when
'tis come whay it between two, breaking the Curd as little
as possible, put halfe a pound waight at the first, never
exceed two pownd waight, change it into a clean cloath
every quarter of an howre, at night take it out, and salt
one side, the next day turn it and salt the other, the next day
put into fresh grass, turn it, and wipe it, and put it
into fresh grass every day till it be ripe.

A Receipt to make Poppy water
cviij

Take 2 Bushells of black eyed Poppeys, Sift the Seeds
and drye them, so done, opon them & sift them againe,
then take 3 Gallons of Brandy, put the poppeys & Brandy
into a large glasse, & put into it these following Seeds,
viz: Carroway seeds, Sweet ffennell seeds, Gromball seeds, Colr
Corriander seeds, of each, 3 ounces, a quarter of a pound
of Lickorish,  Scrape & Slice it 1: 1/2 lb of browne Suggar Candy
of Cynamon 3 ounces, one 1:1/2 lb of Raisins Ston'd, & as many
blew Figgs cutt in peices, and as many Dates Ston'd, then
take 3 or 4 handfulls of Clove-Jelly flowers, clip'd & dry'd,
all these must be put into the Brandy & stopp'd up close, &
infused in the Sun 6 weeks or 2 moneths, afterwards
Strayne it & bottle it up for your use.





56

 For Heats in the face
cix.

Dock rootes one handfull Burdock rootes one hand=
full, Scabies one handfull, Femittery one handfull,
Dandalyons, & Sorrill one handfull of each, Boyle
them for halfe an houre in the Quantity of Eight
or Nyne Quarts of Claryfy'd Whey, then Straine
it and drink it at your Leisure; but you must
be sure not to drink any other Sort of drink while
you are taking this, and in 12 days time you will
be perfectly well

For the Teeth:
cx.

Ivie Berryes two Spoonfulls, Sage halfe a handfull
boyl'd together in a quart of water, when 'tis boyld
dissolve a peice of Allome the biggness of a small
Nutmegg, and Swetten it with Honey



57

A Receipt for Piels that
Never Faileth
cxi.

Take four ounces of white Lead the like quantity
of white francinsence, and sift them through a
Tiffany, and mix them with good honey till they be
as thick as to spread for a plaister, then spread it
on a linen cloath, and apply it to the place as warm
as you can endure it. You may singe you cloath
it is the best way.

Mrs. Bayley's Cordiall Ale.
cxij.

Take 4 handfulls of Firr, 3 ounces of Sarsapilla
one ounce of China slic'd, an ounce of Hartshorne,
as much Ivory; boyle these in 5 or 6 gallons of
midling wort, as it comes from the Malt till a gallon
be consumed; then work it with Ale barme; then
Tunn it up when it has done working, put in these
things, (either in a Bagg or loose,) of Scorzinero
roots 3 ounces; Swert Charvill & Eringo of each
2 ounces; Hartstongue dry'd 2 handfulls, Maidenhayr
Agrimony, Liverworth, of each a handfull; Winter=
bark halfe an ounce, the Rhinds of two Oranges,





58

halfe a pound of Raysins of the Sun Ston'd, Brook==
lime, Water Cresses, 2 handfulls of each, if you hang
these in a Bagg: put a Gad of Steele in it. The firr
must be broke in peices, & the roots Slitt when you put them
in to boyle; after 4 or 5 days drink it for your
constant drink.

To make Pomatum
cxiij

Take a Mutton kell, and put it hott as it com's out of the Sheep
into a paile of water for two howers, then piele of the out=
ward Skin, and put the Suit into water againe for ten dayes
Shifting it Morning and Evening into fresh water then
then put it into Milk for 3 dayes Shifting twice a day, then rubb it dry
take it out and rubb it in a Napkin dry and put it into an
earthen pipkin with two or three white Lily rootes, and one
March-Mallow roote Scraped, & cut into Small pieces, and a Shilling
worth of the 4 Cold Seeds husk'd with a Small bit of white Suggar
Candy; stirr all these together. then put the Pipkin that noe
ayre comes in; and Sett it into a kettle of water, which must
boyle Softly for 4 or 5 howers: then take it out and Straine
it into an Earthen Basin; and put into it whilst it is hott
one ounce of Sparma-Cæti, beating it continually for two
howers together with a hott hand; then drop it on paper
in little lumps and keep it as long as you will; Soe you
doe not put it too close together. &c



59

Docter Jacob of Canterbury medicene for the Stone
cxjv

15 granes of goats blood in powder dranke
euery morning in asses milke, or other milke

115 Doctor Jacob's receipt for giddiness
in the head

The single male piony root in powder=peacocks
dung in powder and nutmegg half an ounce
of each take evry night and morning asmuch
as will lye upon a six pence in four Spoon ==
 fulls of black Cherry-water.

116 Dr king's receipt for the griping
of the gutts

Take a penny loaf, and slitt it, and toast it,
and spread it over with venice treakle; and
dip it in sack boyled with cloves, cinnamon,
and nutmegg; tye it up in a cloath, and lay
it hot to the navel.





60

To Take away haire
117

Take twelf horse leeches wash them well &
dry them in a cloath, then put them in a
paper, pricke the paper full of holes and dry
them by the fire leisurely till they will powder
beate them & lift them very fine then mix
them with white starch as much as the leaches
mix them with brandy like a saulf and
anoint the place then with the blood of
a mole anoint the place three times.

To makes haire grow
118

Marsh flagg flowers take a good handfull
and Street dokes the tops as much beat them
in a morter; as much juice as you have
take as much Spirit of rosmary and spirit
of hony mix them together to anoynt the
place.



61

Dr. Syndenhams presciption for the P. for
the head
119

Take conserve of roman wormwood and orange
peel candid ^of each 1 oz. angelico and nutmeggs & venice
treakle of each 3 drachms with a sufficient quan-
tity of Sirup of candid citrons to make it into an
electuary of which take the quantity or bigness
of a nutmegg evry morning and night drinking
6 spoonfulls of the following infusion.

Take the roots of horse radish Elecampane
Angelico of each half an ounce garden Scurvy
grass, white horehound, the topps of Roman
wormwood century and broom of each 1 handful
chamomill flowers 1 pugill Iuniper berries
6 drachms the Rhinds of 2 organes cutt in
little pieces. These are to be infused cold
in five pints of sack so long as is convenient
and Straind when you use it





62

Mr. Cassys bitter drink for the head
120

Take of the tops of Century, flowers of
camomill of each a pugill, gentian root a
scruple Sena and cardus of each a drachm
Infuse them in a pint of spring water to
the evaporation of half of it then strain
it and drink it for severall days together
as you shall find convenient.

121
An infusion in Sherry

Take rosemary tops camomill flower Century
of each a small pugill, cardus and citron
seeds of each drachm bruised of gentian
root thin sliced 2 scruples infuse them
2 days in a quart of the best Sherry
Then strain them and drink 3 spoonfulls
in the morning and as much at 4 in the
afternoon fasting an hour after it.



Pills for the head, and for the
stomack.
121

Take half a dram of Pale rufey, and
three grains of pouder of Castor and
mixe it vp it is one dose, jt is to
be made in to four pills. Take all
att night when one goeth to bed.

123
To Pickle Wallnuts

Take green wallnuts, pick them from the Stalks & put them into
cold water sett them on a gentle fire till the outward skin
begins to peal off. then wipe it of with a coarse cloath and then
put them into a tub or pot, put Salt & water to them, change
them once a day till till the bitterness & discoulering of the water
be gone. then take a good quantity of mustard seeds & beat it with
vinegar till it becomes coarse mustard. then take some cloves of
garlick & shallots ginger & a little beaten cloves & mace
mingle it with the mustard. then make a slit in each nut
& put in as much as you can. then take vinegar & boyle it
before you take it off the fire put in some whole pepper ginger
cloves, mase, & some of the aforesaid mustard & garlick. put the nuts into
the licquor boyling hot , then cover them very close in an earthen
pot & keep them for your use





64

124

For Madness in Men
or Beasts

Take of Agrimony roots Primerose roots,
Dragon roots, single-Pyony roots of each one
handfull, the black of Crabbs-claws prepard
i ounce. Venice Treacle i ounce ; the leaves of
Box bruisd one handfull, starr of the earth 2
handfulls. Beat all these, and bruise um togeather
then boyle um in about a Gallon of Milk till
half be boyld away then putt it into bottles
unstraind and give of it 3 or 4 larg spoonfulls
at a time 3 mornings together, before new
and full moone. Observe that before you beginn
to give it, to take away a little blood. Some
of these herbs being difficult to be had in winter
may be gatherd in due season, and being dryed
and powderd may be given mixed with the
Crabbs claws and Treacle and sallet oyle and
it will do the same



65

125

To make Marchepaines

Take to i pound of Almonds i pound of double
refind sugar beaten and sersed first beate your
Almonds with as much rose water as will keep
them from oyling ; putting in not above half
a spoonfull att a time: when they are beaten
verry fine, then mixe um with your sugar: so
make um into Cakes uppon little square papers
then bake um on the...with a swift fire; and
when they are hard enough to turne, then bake
um on the other side uppon fresh papers ; and
when they are bakd on both sides, then Ice um
with a soft ice, and as you ice um : bake first
one side, then tother and so turne um off uppon
a pye-plate, and lett um be often turnd 'till they
are drye. your Almonds should be twelve
houres in ^cold water before they are blanched.





126

A May-Dish

Take a quart of Creame and tenn Eggs broke into
it: stirr it uppon the fire till it turne to curds
poure it into a Napkin, hang it up till all the whey
is out: a quarter of a pound of Almonds beaten verry
fine in rose Watter: 2 Nuttmeggs grated and one
pennyworth of Spinnage Coyld and hack'd verry small
mixe all these well to geather and Season it with
sugar and salt; one quarter of a pound of Butter
and putt puff past all on a Dish topp & bottom

To Pickle larg- Cucumbers.
127

Take Cucumbers about the bigness of a Mango
wipe um and cutt um in half: scrape out all the
seeds then putt in some cloves of garlick mustard
seed and ginger, and tye um close with fine
pack thread; lay um into a jarr: take as much
vinager as will cover your Cucumbers and
boyle it with three or four hand fulls of Salt
sliced ginger and a little Pepper then pour it
to um, boyleing hott: stopp the jarr verry close
with a cork and lett um stand a week before
you open um.



67

128
For the Scurvye
Take Bittony, Scabius, Plantine, Brooklime of each
a handfull: of water-cresses half a handfull: and
half a handhull of the topps of Rosemary, and of
scurvy-grass one Gallon: stamp um and straine
um in a gallon of your strongest Beere: then
take foure drachms of Long-pepper; half a drachm
of graines, one drachm of cloves and mace, and
one pennyworth of Saffron beat um all small
and mingle um togeather, than take your leave
and divide it into two parts, and putt one half
of your Spices into one pottle of your Beere, and
lett it lye in as long as you think fitting: then
take tother half of your Spices, and putt um into
the other pottle of your Beere, and straine it
out till the juice be throughly out: and so drink
of it six or seven times a day three or fourse
spoonfulls at a time for ten dayes togeather

Probat. est





129
To make Almond
Ginger-bread

Blanch a pound of the best Jordan Almonds
beate a few of um at a time, dropp in a little
Rose or Orange water to keep um from oyling
they must be beat to a perfect past one pound
and half of double-refind Sugar Sersed verry fine
and powder ginger to your tast: as much
Gum dragon as a nutt infusd in orange flower
water beatte all these in a morter till it is
well mixt. To make the browne add Cinamon
powder, and twelve drops of Spiritt of Cinamon
If you please make up the white with fine sugar
and the browne with Cinamon powder: role it
out and print it: then lay it before the fire to drye



69

130
For those that Cant hold
their water

Take the clawes of Hoggs don't wash um
drye um in an Oven, but besure they are not burn'd
beat um to powder sift um take as much of the
powder as will lye on a Sixpence morning and
night 'till you are cured

131
To pott Craw-ffish

Take the butter and Clarifye it with a
good quantity of Mace; then keep shaking it over a
chafingdish of Coles till the fish be all pick't and
put in an Anchovy while you shake them and when
you heat them againe put to them a slice or two of
Lemon as you pick them put them to the butter, and
pick them while hott.





70

To make Plague Water
132

Sage, Sallendin, Rosemary, wormewood Muggworth,
Dragons, Pimpernell, Scabious Egrimeny, Rosa-Solis,
Scordium, Sentery, Rew, Bittony Cardus Benedictus
Mary gold flowers, of Each one handfull: Roots of Gentian
Tormentill, Elicompane, Angellies, Ledeary English Licorish
of each an ounce: beat roots and herbs in a a stone Mortar
then steep um two dayes in a gallon of White-wine, and
one quart of Sack. Distill it in a rose-Still well pasted round
with rye-paist, and the Reciever well pa stopd close with browne
paper lett it runn on white sugar-candy two ounces to a
bottle: you may putt the first and Second running togeather
for that will make both good

To make haire growe where there is none
133

Take bees and burne um uppon a fire-shovell or some
such thing: then boyle the ashes of the Bees in sallet oyle
then annoynt the place therewith where you would have
Haire growe, and in a short time you shall obtaine
your desire



71

docter Lowers receipt for the Scurvy
133

Take a pound and a halfe of Dock rootes, three
handfulls of harts tongue, four handfulls of dandelion
rootes; then three handfulls of femetary put them into
a bagg to foure gallons of small Ale.

Expelling of wind
134

Take dry perserved Elicompany as much as will liy
on a shillings slisted in a sponndfull of bere or any other
lickour in the morning fasting and in the medle of your meal
or any other time the wind troubles you.

Lady Russells Black pudings
135

Take a pottell of Cuttlins pick itt well, Boyle a gallon
of milke and put them in, keep itt stiring that itt burne not
till itt is as thick as a puding, then put itt in an earthen
pan and Cover itt close all night; then take peniroyall, Sage
& fennell of each a good handfull a great oynion & 3 or 4
leeks heads, to this put 4 pounds of Beefe Sewit Shred, 4 or 5
eggs beaton Some Salte, a Spoonfull of beaton pepper and
a nuttmeg grated, to this add a boute a quart of sheeps
bloud, you make make them with hoggs bloud and fat
cute Smale if you please.





136
To dress a Calfes head

Washe ye Calfes head well, all the blood out, lay itt flatt
in a pan with the tongue and brains in, a good piece of
Bacon under each side cutt itt crosse as for broyling
and washe itt over with butter, and Strow Salt an Shred
Sage on itt, and then dredge itt with flower, put a
pinte of water and a little whole pepper and a bunch
of sweet harbs in the pan, and an onyon have ready a pint
or more of oysters stewed in their own liquor a blade
of mace and a little pepper and a littly white wine
and when the head is baked Take Some of the liquor itt
was baked with (without the fate, and break the brains
Small in, and put itt to the oysters and shake itt together
with a quarter of a pound of butter and power itt into
the dishe cutt the bacon in pieces, and lay upon your head
with Some lemon

137
To pickle cowcombers in Slices

Take 30 large cowcombers, slice them and fiue onyons
sliced, put them into a pan togeather, and strow tow
handfulls of salt on them, let them stand a day and
night in the liquour, then drain them uery well
then put them into the pott then keep them in, then
take viniger put in cloues mace and whit peper boyle
them togeather and put them to your cowcombers boyling
hott, couer them uery close and let them stand tow days
then pour out the liquor and boyle it ouer again then
put it on them as hott as before, and when cold tye them
down uery close



73

138
Elder Berry Water
take a Bushel of ripe Elder Burrys picked from
the stalkes bruse them and put to them as much
fair water as will cover them and quart of ale yeast
and a pound of powder Suger, Stire itt all togather and
cover them close and lett them worke nine days
stiring them once a day, then still them in a limbeck
you may draw off a Gallon of warter.
take first in the morning three spoonfulls for three weeks
weeks togather or longer if three be a occasion
this is excellent for the Collicke taken when the pain
comes, and for the dropsy

Sir Ed. Greaves ?
temp. K. Ch. 1st
1st med. Bart.

139
Dr Graves Receipt for Convulsion fitts

take of Pianie roots & dead mens scull of each a drame and
a halfe, of the hoofe of Ales and white Amber of each halfe a
dram, of East Bezor 6 grains, lett these be made into a powder
and devided into 10 papers, taking one morning and night
in a spoonfull of the Julipe.
the Julipe langishes warter 3 ounes, of p...n pionie warter and
sirupe of pionie of each an once





140

Take a old Red Cock, 2 ounce of China, 1 ounce of
Correander seeds, 2 drames of mace; boile all these in 6
Gallons of sweet Wortt till 2 gallons be wasted. then worke
itt up, with barme as you doe ale, and when you tun itt put
into the Barrel 2 ounce of cream of tarter in the lumpe,
and 2 ounce of melted steel tied up in a Canves bagg.



Index

Dropsy pp. 1. 9. 16. 28. 42

Snayle W. 2

Aq. Mirabilis 3. 45 (see Sir Kenelm Digby - cf. Salmom - p 446.

Palsey Water 4. 13.

'Probatum est.'
Wound  7 cf Sir Kenelm Digby

Oyle of Swallows 8

Jelly of Harshorn 8

Fistula 9. 40. The Lady Mildmays way

Renal Calc. 11. 13. 41. 42. 46. 47. 49. 59

Ague 12. 35

Head 13. 35. 45. 59. 61 Sydenham 62. 63

Tooth ache &c. 14. 28. 33. 34. 52. 56

Oyle of Charity 15

For a Redd Face 17. 24. 56

AgAgst.st Plague 18. 25.26.27. 70

Ricketts
18. 43 1st printed by Whistler 1645: Glisson 1650
cf. Princess Elizabeth

Freckles (Morphew) 19. 32. 26

Tetters (Herpes) 21. 33

Lytes 22

Wormes 23

Erysipelas 23

"Fatt" 29







Mad Dog 29. 64

Eyes bloodshot 30. 51. 53

Breast 30

Jaundices 28. 16 black. 31 (Prob. Est)

Constipation 31

Liver 32. 41

[Morphew 32. 19] freckles ?Ringworm

Poyson 32

E...tic 34

Short breath 34. 35

"Sovreignes water" 35 Philip Stephens held Open - 1655. "Catalogus
Anti mastiBritannia Oxon.

Small pox 36. 37. 38

Rosemary 37

Bals. Lucatelli 38

Scurvie "Rights" 39. 42. 51. 67. 71 Lower

Convulsions 40. 73

Epistaxis 40

Pitting in Sm. Pox 42
Stone (Judge Ellis) 42. 46. 7

Hair. To  make grow 44. 60. 70-Bees

Gout (Weatherley) 48

Consumption 54

Cough 54

Piles 57

Gripes 59. 71

Incontinence  69





Dreal 6/1/82





1686


