Guided Transcription Test
Manuscript: Jane Jackson, MS V.a.373, Wellcome Collection / Folger Shakespeare Library
Page: 20 (image shows two-page spread, pages 19v–20r)
Method: Claude vision with paleography guide loaded
Date: 2026-02-27
Guide: ingest/references/paleography-guide.md
---

[Left page — page 19v]

the harth and lay it to the navell as hot as you can indure it
This use shifting it once in xxiiij howers 3 or 4 dayes together

For the pilling of the face

Take Turpendine of venice and wash it with red rose water
till you haue taken away the smell of the turpentine then take
the marrow of a stagg or for want thereof deere suitt and melt
them altogether but lett them not seeth put into it vergins wax
more then the [qantity?] of the suett and so stirr it still till it be could

For freckles on the face

Take the leaues of white poppy and distill them and with the
water thereof wash your face

For a Timpany

Take flouer delice and seeth them in white wine from a quart to
a pinte and drinke that next your heart ix mornings together

A Fume for the same

Take a Pottle of white wine and a gallon of runing water and the
dung of a ston'd horse and lett it seeth a while then sitt ouer it
on a close stoole alwayes as hott as you can suffer it of[.....] times
in the day by the space of ix dayes half an hower at a time or an
hower if you can

For the same

Take a quantitie of vrine and a quantity of sheepes Tallow well
clarified and boyled together till half the vrine bee wasted Then
take as much black wooll of the sheeps flank as will couer all your
stomack down to your nauell from the one side of your ribbs to
the other, when you haue taken the vrine from the fyer put the
woole into it till it bee through wett, then wring the Liquor out
of the woole and lay it ouer all aforesaid and euer as the swelling
doth descend follow it with the medicine vntill it come into your
leggs Ankles and feete refresse the woole in the Liquor twice a day
at the least and when the swelling is come downe cleane out of
the body lett a Surgeon make an Issue in each of your insteps
and lett it so runne out till the swelling be cleane dissolued Then
lay a healing plaster to it and dry it vp, butt in any wise lay not
the woole vnto your legg after the issue made

[Right page — page 20r]

Another of the same

Take radish rootes slice them and seeth them in white wine from a
quarte to a pint and drinke euery two mornings a pint vsing it
thus it will breake your Tympany.

A restoratiue for a Consumption

Take the cleane yelks of xxx egge new layd lay them in cleane
water halfe an hower and take away the straynes of them and putt
to them a quart of cow milke as it cometh from the cow a pinte
of rosewater the crumes of a penny white loafe beate them all
together and put them into a stillitory distill it all together
with a soft fyer, It will bee neere hand a quarte of water drinke
of it oftentimes ix euery day.

For an euill sore in the head

Take neats foote oyle and doues dunge, beate them together till
they come to bee a salue then annoynt the head with it twice a day
morning and evening, when it is almost whole put a little hony to
the medicine and that will make the haire grow when it is Cleane
whole within on weeke or two peraduenture it will breake out
againe in little white pimples, But then annoint it againe with the
medicine and it will bee whole for euer

For the Migrim in the head

Take housleeke and garden wormes more of the housleek then of
wormes and stamp them together putt thereto fine flower make it
plasterwise spread it on a fine cloth and lay to the forehead
temples and all

For a stich or ach in the side or any other place and for the gout

Take Camomile flowers meliote flowers and wormwood leaues of
each mj well dryed and beaten to powder semgreke linseed of each
ʒij anyseed, Cumminseede of each ℥j mustick ℥jd breake all these
into smale powlder and medle them well together make of all them
one powlder then take a pottle of strong vinegar and a quarte of
runing water boyle them well together and put thereto a handfull
of your powlder and let it boyle a little while Then take it from the
fyer as fast as you can and make ready two cloaths of frize as broad
as your too hands a peece wett them [w[...]] that Liquor and lay on
the place where the greife is as [...] as you may suffer it And when {the}

---
Confidence Notes:
- [qantity?]: Unusual spelling — may be "qantity" or "quantity" with a missing u. Flagged as medium confidence.
- of[.....]: Text partially obscured, estimated 5 missing characters. Low confidence.
- [w[...]]: Partially legible, likely "with" but obscured. Low confidence.
- [...]: Single word obscured by damage, likely "hot" or "hott" based on recipe context. Medium confidence.
- {the}: Text appears to continue onto next page; this is the catchword at bottom of page.
- Apothecary symbols (ʒ, ℥) transcribed as Unicode characters.
- Roman numerals preserved as written (xxiiij, ix, xxx, mj, ij, jd).
- Original lineation approximated — the actual manuscript line breaks may differ slightly due to image resolution.